
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers IA/06260/2013;
IA/16951/2013
                                                IA/22380/2012; IA/22381/2012
                                                IA/22382/2012; IA/22829/2012
                                                IA/22832/2012; IA/22835/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 June 2015 & 14 December 2015   |On 5 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                             muhammad RAMEEZ ali
                               VAMISHI ADIYALA
                             SULTAN AHAMED KHAN
                            MAHMUDA TAHER SUBORNA
                                     SA
                                 NAZIA AMJAD
                               MUHAMMAD PARVEZ
                                     AP
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Vaughan (17/06/15 only) and Ms Jones (14/12/15)
                    only), instructed by Farid Javani Taylor, solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Presenting Officer (17/06/15 only)
     Ms E Savage, Presenting Officer (14/12/15 only)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These appeals have been linked and heard together  as  they  all  arise
    from similar facts and were determined in the  First-tier  Tribunal  by
    the same panel, Designated Judge Campbell and First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Bird. Four  of  the  appellants  (the  "Principal  Appellants")  appeal
    against decisions of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  their  appeals
    against the refusal of leave to remain  as  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
    Migrants under the points-based system and the decisions to remove them
    from the UK under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality
    Act 2006.  The remaining four Appellants are dependent relatives.

    Background to the appeals

 2. The Principal Appellants are just some of a cohort of  individuals  who
    applied to the respondent for a variation of leave to remain as Tier  1
    (Post-Study Work) Migrants. The  cohort  has  been  identified  by  the
    respondent  as  comprising  those  who   had   submitted   with   their
    applications a letter  from  Kensington  College  of  Business  ("KCB")
    stating that they had  been  awarded  a  Master's  degree  in  Business
    Administration by the University of Wales ("UOW"). After receipt of the
    applications the Respondent e-mailed KCB  to  verify  the  awards.  KCB
    informed her that the letters notifying the applicants of their  awards
    had not been issued by the college and  there  was  no  record  of  the
    applicants being  students  at  that  college.  The  applications  were
    refused under paragraph 245FD of the Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis
    that no MBA had been awarded and under paragraph 322 (1A) on the  basis
    that use of the award letters by the applicants constituted deception.

 3. Not all of those in the cohort were entitled to a right  of  appeal  or
    exercised that right. A decision was taken to list together the appeals
    of those who did appeal. Those appeals all came before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Designated Judge Campbell and First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bird
    sitting as a panel.

 4. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on the grounds  that
    the Respondent's decision was not in accordance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules or the law and was in breach of their rights pursuant to  article
    8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 5. It is the Appellants' case that they enrolled to study a top up MBA  at
    London Graduate School ("LGS"). They paid their fees to LGS and the MBA
    was to be awarded by the UOW. They would attend tutorials  at  LGS  and
    lectures at KCB which was authorised  by  the  UOW  to  teach  its  MBA
    course.  The course would require the completion of  three  assignments
    and a dissertation and would be completed within three months.

 6. The Appellants argued  that  it  had  not  been  established  that  the
    documents submitted were false and the Respondent had  failed  to  make
    adequate enquiries before reaching a decision about the genuineness  of
    the documents submitted. The Appellants had completed an MBA course and
    therefore met the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  had  a
    legitimate expectation  of  being  able  to  acquire  work  experience.
    Further, the refusal to vary leave and the  decisions  to  remove  them
    would breach the Appellants' rights under Article  8  of  the  European
    Court of Human Rights.

    Procedural History

 7. Some of the appeals to the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  allowed  on  an
    article 8 basis; the majority were dismissed. Not all  of  those  whose
    appeals were unsuccessful applied for permission to appeal and some  of
    those who were successful  have  withdrawn  their  appeals  at  various
    stages of the proceedings.

 8. The Upper Tribunal has, so far as is possible,  attempted  to  identify
    all those who have been granted permission  to  appeal  to  it  and  to
    ensure that the appeals were  heard  together.  We  have  been  greatly
    assisted by Farid Javani Taylor as they have represented almost all  of
    those who were granted permission.

 9. After a number of procedural  hearings  and  consequent  directions,  a
    decision was taken that determining whether the decisions of the First-
    tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an  error  of  law  would  be
    considered at two hearings.

10. It was agreed that the hearing on 17th June 2015 should consider first:

      1) Whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by concluding that the
         refusal under paragraph 322 (1A) had been made out in  the  appeals
         of Wasif Amjad (IA/22620/2012) (whose appeal is no longer  pursued)
         and Sultan Ahmad Khan (IA/22380/2012); and

      2) Whether in respect of  all  the  appellants  in  respect  of  which
         permission to appeal had been granted, the First-tier Tribunal  had
         erred  in  its  assessment  of  proportionality  in  rejecting  the
         proposition that the public interest  in  immigration  control  was
         lessened because the Secretary of State had,  when  exercising  her
         regulatory function with respect to the colleges, a  duty  of  care
         towards those in the appellants' situation and had failed  in  that
         duty, given that there were real concerns about how KCB  was  being
         administered.

11. It was also agreed that once we had  come  to  a  conclusion  on  these
    matters, we would issue a preliminary ruling, and invite submissions in
    respect of the individual appeals. Our ruling  was  handed  down  on  7
    August 2015 when we give the following directions:

      1) The appellants must within 14 days serve on the Upper Tribunal  and
         on the respondent detailed written submissions particular to  their
         individual circumstances, identifying why,  in  the  light  of  our
         preliminary  conclusions,  the   First-tier   Tribunal   erred   in
         dismissing their individual appeals on article 8 grounds.

      2) The appellants must also within 14 days inform the  Upper  Tribunal
         if they wish for a further oral hearing at which the matters raised
         in the submissions made at (1) above are to be further argued.

      3) In the absence of such submissions being made, or a request  for  a
         further hearing, it will be assumed that the Appellant in  question
         wishes to withdraw his/her appeal before the Upper Tribunal  and  a
         decision to that effect will be made without any further hearing or
         notice to the Appellant.

12. Subsequent to these directions, a number of the appeals were withdrawn.
    The hearing on 14 December 2015 was to hear further oral submissions on
    the issues identified at paragraph 10 above.

    Did the First-tier Tribunal err in its approach to Paragraph 322(1A)?

13. Mr Vaughan represented both  the  appellants  to  whom  this  issue  is
    relevant, although one of them, Wasif  Amjad,  no  longer  pursues  his
    appeal.

14. We are not persuaded by the submission  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    were not entitled to rely on the evidence of the Appellants  themselves
    in order for the Respondent to show that paragraph 322(1A) applied.

15. Mr Vaughan submitted that that since the  panel  had  found  that  they
    could not rely solely on the evidence of Mr Stagg then  the  evidential
    burden was not discharged by the Respondent. The Respondent  could  not
    rely on evidence from the Appellant.

16. We find that this submission is not supported by relevant case law  and
    is contrary to NA (Cambridge College of Learning) Pakistan [2009] UKAIT
    00031. The evidence before the panel was  of  sufficient  strength  and
    quality and was subjected  to  a  critical  and  anxious  scrutiny.  At
    paragraph [102] of NA the Tribunal held that this requirement  did  not
    impose any rigid formal rule on the Tribunal circumscribing  the  range
    and scope of the evidence. The Tribunal is entitled to have regard  not
    only to direct witness evidence but an array of  other  statements  and
    documents and was not confined to evidence tested by cross-examination

    Sultan Ahmad Khan IA/22380/2012

17.  In  the  case  of  Mr  Khan,  there  was  an  e-mail  from  Mr   Stagg
    (Administrator at KCB) and a letter from Ian Pirie (the principal of  a
    KCB) both stating that the document being relied on was not  a  genuine
    document. The Appellant was not  known  to  KCB  and  the  registration
    number was for another individual. The visa  letter  contained  notable
    differences in format and content from genuine documentation issued  by
    the college. There was also a letter from  the  UOW  stating  that  the
    Appellant was awarded his MBA in absentia.

18. Mr Khan, on his own evidence, accepted that he had been to two or three
    tutorials in four months and none of the lectures. He failed to produce
    evidence that he had enrolled on the MBA top-up course at  either  LGS,
    KCB or UOW; evidence that he had paid �4,500 for his course  of  study;
    or  any  documentary  evidence  of  his  assignments  or   dissertation
    submitted.

19. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Khan  was  unable  to
    give adequate answers as to what research he undertook or  to  describe
    basic concepts. The panel found that despite the  evidence  of  chaotic
    administration arrangements at LGS and KCB, it was likely that  the  Mr
    Khan did not attend any classes and did  not  produce  work  which  was
    genuinely his own.

20. Accordingly, we find that there was no error  of  law  in  the  panel's
    conclusion that Mr Khan was not  a  genuine  student  and  he  had  not
    obtained an MBA. The panel's finding that a false  document,  namely  a
    visa letter, was  submitted  by  Mr  Khan  in  the  knowledge  that  it
    purported to record submission of genuine work when that  was  not  the
    case, was open to them on the evidence. The  ground  of  refusal  under
    paragraph 322(1A) had been established by the Respondent.

21. In conclusion, we are not persuaded that  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal, that the respondent's assertion that paragraph 322  (1A)  was
    made out in this appeal, involved the making of an error of law.

    Was the Respondent in breach of a duty of care to the Appellants?

22. Mr Vaughan submitted that this was so. In Patel &  Ors  v  SSHD  [2013]
    UKSC 72 at [57] Lord Carnwath JSC held:

         "It is important to remember  that  article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the  Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right. The merits  of
         a decision not to depart from  the  rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call  in
         Pankina for "common sense" in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in the UK for some years (see para
         47 above).  However,  such  considerations  do  not  by  themselves
         provide grounds of appeal under article 8, which is concerned  with
         private or family life, not education as such. The opportunity  for
         a promising student to complete his course in this country, however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under article 8 [our emphasis]."

23. It cannot be forgotten that in all of these cases, the appellants were,
    in order to obtain further leave, required under the immigration  Rules
    to have obtained a particular qualification. They had not.

24. Even assuming that in the circumstances of these cases, the  First-tier
    Tribunal was correct to assume that article 8 was engaged,  we  do  not
    accept that the public interest in maintaining immigration control was,
    on the facts of these cases, in any way to be treated as being of  less
    weight.

25. Contrary to Mr Vaughan's submission and skeleton  argument,  the  panel
    did make a finding as to the degree of responsibility of the Respondent
    and concluded that there was no failure  on  her  part  which  had  any
    bearing on proportionality.

26. Mr Vaughan's argument is predicated  on  the  assumption  that  in  its
    exercise of its regulatory  function  with  respect  to  colleges,  the
    respondent has  a  duty  of  care  towards  those  in  the  appellants'
    situation. Absent such a duty (and we  find  no  proper  basis  is  put
    forward for such a duty to exist in the circumstances  of  this  case),
    and absent a finding that the respondent was aware of their  situation,
    it is difficult if not impossible to demonstrate that there is fault on
    the part of the respondent.  The situation at KCB cannot be compared to
    the scenario where the respondent knows a college is to be  closed  and
    thus its students will be left without a sponsor. Here, while there may
    have been concerns, and there was an investigation, the college was not
    suspended nor was its licence revoked.

27. We are not persuaded that there  was  sufficient  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal to enable them to conclude that the Respondent  was
    at fault in failing to regulate KCB.  It is clear from the agreed facts
    that all the Appellants registered with LGS and paid their fees to LGS.
    The evidence of Dr Bakht was  that  there  was  no  official  agreement
    between LGS and KCB. It was accepted that the Tribunal found that there
    was chaos at both of these colleges and administration was poor.

28. The Respondent in fact conducted an unannounced inspection at  KCB  and
    on 6 December 2012 had given a suspension recommendation.  However,  it
    would appear at this  point  that  LGS  ceased  operating  and  further
    investigations at KCB showed that no further action was required. It is
    hard to see how the Respondent could be at fault for failing to suspend
    KCB's licence when in fact much of the administrative  chaos  arose  at
    LGS.  The fact that there were some problems with registration  at  KCB
    was not sufficient to show that the Respondent should bear any  of  the
    blame for the Appellants' failure to be able to obtain an MBA from  the
    UOW.  Therefore, the panel had not erred in law in failing to attribute
    some fault to the Respondent in their assessment of proportionality.

29. Further, we fail to see how the Respondent's failure  to  regulate  KCB
    was relevant to the assessment of  proportionality.  If  the  college's
    licence had been suspended then the Appellants would not have been able
    to obtain an MBA and they would be in the same  position  as  they  are
    now. Action by the Respondent may have prevented  the  Appellants  from
    paying fees to LGS, but it did not affect their right to private  life.
    The Appellants were not in the same position as OA whose removal  would
    have prevented her from completing her course, and each  case  must  be
    decided on its facts in any event.

30. The panel could do no more than they  did  in  assessing  the  evidence
    before them and concluding that there was administrative chaos  at  LGS
    and KCB such that the Appellants through no fault of their own did  not
    obtain  an  MBA.   They   took   this   into   account   in   assessing
    proportionality.

    Proportionality

31. Mr Vaughan submitted that non-compliance with the Immigration Rules was
    not determinative because it was caused by  the  college  and  not  the
    Appellants. He submitted  that  the  panel  erred  in  law  in  wrongly
    categorising the submission as a 'near miss'  point  and  rejecting  it
    having regard to Patel.

32. On the contrary, the panel specifically found that there was  no  'near
    miss' in the Appellants' cases in the complete absence of  an  eligible
    qualification. The focus of the Article 8 assessment was on private and
    family life ties and not on  opportunities  for  students  to  complete
    courses, or indeed obtain post-study work leave for a limited period of
    time.

33. The  panel  quite  properly  followed  Patel  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellants had been denied an opportunity to  obtain  work  experience.
    Although they had been denied this  opportunity  through  no  fault  of
    their own, it nevertheless was  insufficient  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in the maintenance  of  immigration  control  given  that  the
    Appellants could not satisfy the Immigration  Rules  (paragraphs  245FD
    and 276ADE) and had only modest ties to the UK.

34. The Appellants came to the UK as students and completed their course of
    study. Their  visas  were  of  a  temporary  nature  and  they  had  no
    legitimate expectation they would be allowed to remain  in  the  UK  to
    work other than in accordance with the Immigration Rules. Even if  they
    were misled by LGS and were unable to obtain an MBA and remain  in  the
    UK as post-study work migrants.

35. Having reached these conclusions, we issued a written decision to  that
    effect.  Consideration of  the  remaining  appeals  recommenced  on  14
    December 2015.

    Submissions on 14 December 2015

36. Ms Jones, relied on her skeleton argument and submitted that there  was
    a failure to attach weight to the fact that, through no fault of  their
    own, the Principal Appellants  had  been  unable  to  obtain  the  work
    experience that they had  expected;  that  there  had  been  a  failure
    properly   to   consider   the   issue   of   fairness   in   assessing
    proportionality; and there was a failure in  assessing  proportionality
    taking into account that, (with the exception of Sultan Khan)) they had
    a genuine expectation they would have got the  qualification  they  had
    sought.

37. Ms Jones submitted that this was not  inconsistent  with  Patel  [2013]
    UKSC 72 as what is said there particularly at [54] is not  inconsistent
    with fairness being taken into account.

38. Turning to Rameez Ali, who came to the UK in 2010, there  had  been  no
    dishonesty and for the same reasons as Mr Adiyala, the consideration of
    Article 8 was incorrect. Further, it was submitted  that  there  was  a
    failure properly to engage with the rights of the child or to  identify
    the child's best interests.

39. Ms Jones submitted that there were  in  addition  to  these  points,  a
    significant number of other  points  in  respect  of  Nazia  Amjad  and
    dependants given that there had been no proper consideration as to  the
    best  interests  of  the  child  Appellant  who  had  significant   and
    continuing health  problems.  There  had  also  been,  contrary  to  EV
    (Philippines) a failure to identify what weight was to be  attached  to
    the best interests of the child, there being little evidence within the
    decision that this had been properly considered.  In  terms  of  Patel,
    what was in issue here was, rather than the loss of education  and  job
    opportunities, a substantial and serious impact on  family  life.   She
    submitted that in this case the decision was clearly perverse.

40. Ms Savage submitted that there was no merit in the  Appellants'  cases.
    She submitted that in all cases there had been a  proper  consideration
    of  all  the  relevant  matters  and  that  the   decisions   regarding
    proportionality were clearly open to  the  panel.  She  submitted  that
    little or no evidence had been adduced in respect of the best interests
    of the children and, given their ages, it could not be  said  that  the
    decisions were perverse or that any relevant information had  not  been
    taken into account. She submitted that proper account had been given of
    the evidence of the child's ill-health (S A Khan).

41. We asked Ms Jones to direct us towards any evidence which she said  had
    not properly been taken into account. With the exception of the medical
    evidence relating to the child there was nothing over  and  above  what
    was produced in the consolidated bundle which needed to be  taken  into
    account other than the statement of Mrs Amjad and Mr Khan.

    The Law

42. It is accepted that the decision  in  Patel  is  relevant  to  all  the
    appeals before us.  We note what was said at [54] to [55] (and at  [57]
    (note - insert).NB

43. Mrs Amjad and Mr Khan have dependent children.  To  that  end  we  have
    taken careful note of EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  874,  in
    particular at [34] to [36].

44. We note that in this case neither of the children had entered education
    and there was  no  submission  that  any  of  the  Appellants  met  the
    requirements of Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. Indeed Mr Vaughan conceded at the hearing on 17 June  2015  that
    none of the Appellants could meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules. To that end we note what was said in Singh & Khalid [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 74 at [3].

    Mr Adiyala

45. We accept in the case of Mr Adiyala that he genuinely believed that  he
    would obtain leave to remain as a Post-Study Worker.  As,  however,  he
    did not have the relevant qualification, he was not entitled  to  leave
    to remain.  At [35] the First-tier Tribunal panel said this:-

         "In relation to private life ties we find that he has provided very
         little evidence to show the strength and qualify of private life he
         has acquired in the United Kingdom.  His witness statement contains
         no  details  at  all  of  any  particular  friendships,   ties   or
         associations here.  Whilst we accept that he has been in the United
         Kingdom since 2007 and has acquired private life (the threshold  of
         establishing this being a low one) there is nothing  to  show  what
         the quality of his private life has been.  He came  to  the  United
         Kingdom as a student and can have  had  no  reasonable  expectation
         that  he  would  be  able  to  remain  here  without  meeting   the
         requirements of the Rules. He has failed  to  produce  evidence  to
         show what his private life ties here  are  and  in  the  particular
         circumstances we conclude that it would not be difficult for him to
         return to his country and indeed it would not  be  unreasonable  to
         expect him to do so and we find  that  he  would  be  able  to  re-
         establish both private and family life in India."

46.  Further,  at  paragraph  [36]  the  panel  found  that,  taking   this
    appellant's case at its highest, he had lost  an  opportunity  to  gain
    work experience for a limited period of time.  This  was  a  factor  of
    little substantial weight.

47. Again at [37], the Appellant has previously  acquired  a  qualification
    from the United Kingdom which will be of benefit to  him  in  acquiring
    suitable employment, following his return.  There  is  little  of  real
    substance to set against the Respondent's case.  Weighing the competing
    interests, we conclude  that  the  Appellant's  removal  amounts  to  a
    proportionate response.

48. We consider that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to attach  little
    weight to the lost opportunity. Whilst the loss of the opportunity  was
    not the Appellant's fault, he simply did not meet the Rules.   Further,
    in this case there was little evidence of private life.

49. In effect, what is being submitted is that  somebody,  who  through  no
    fault of their own, finds themselves unable to meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules should, notwithstanding that failure  nonetheless
    be entitled to leave to remain on an article 8 basis because he is  not
    responsible for the failure to comply with the rules.  That  is  simply
    untenable. There are numerous reasons why people cannot meet the rules,
    even when they expected to be able  to,  some  outwith  an  appellant's
    control and there is no coherent basis for doing so.  Attaching  weight
    to lost opportunity is precisely the free-wheeling approach to  Article
    8 in which a Tribunal  should  not  indulge  and  the  submission  that
    blameless failure  to  meet  the  Immigration  Rules  is  a  factor  of
    significant weight in an appellant's favour is, in effect,  an  attempt
    to induce a Tribunal to do so.

50. What the Appellant is in fact asking for is leave to remain despite the
    fact he does not meet the objective criteria of the Immigration  Rules.
    It is simply hopeless to submit that in the circumstances the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal was even arguably perverse.

    Mr Rameez Ali

51. At [45], the panel  observed  that  arguments  based  on  fairness  add
    nothing of any real substance to the assessment to be made  in  respect
    of Article 8.  They observe also at [46] that the focus of the  Article
    8  assessment  is  on  private  and  family  life  ties  and   not   on
    opportunities for students to complete courses or indeed  obtain  Post-
    Study Work leave for a limited period of time. They noted at [47]  that
    the Appellant had not established any family life in the United Kingdom
    and stated:  "There is very little evidence  that  we  have  before  us
    regarding private life ties. The Appellant speaks  of  loss  of  career
    opportunities.  On the evidence we have come to the conclusion that the
    Appellant has only modest ties here which had been established  in  the
    relatively short time he has been present in this country.  What he has
    lost, at the highest, is an opportunity to gain work experience  for  a
    limited period of time."

52. The panel concluded:-

         "48. There is nothing in the evidence to show  that  the  Appellant
             would have any difficulty in re-establishing himself on return
             to Pakistan. The Appellant has contacts and family there.  Any
             friendships he made may be maintained from abroad.  We do  not
             doubt that he has been disappointed by his failure  to  obtain
             the MBA.  The Secretary of State has the power to depart  from
             the laws in order to give him a short period of leave in which
             he might apply for a further course.  Whether she does  so  is
             not up to us it is up to her and the merits of such a decision
             are not reviewable...

          49. Overall taking into account the private  life  ties  that  the
             Appellant has established here, we conclude that Article 8  is
             engaged (the threshold of engagement  not  being  particularly
             high). The decision  to  refuse  to  vary  leave  is  made  in
             accordance with the law. There is a clear public  interest  in
             the maintenance of immigration control and the Appellant could
             have been in no doubt that he had  no  entitlement  to  remain
             here without meeting the requirements of the Rules. They  have
             not been met in his case.  In light of  the  evidence  showing
             only modest private life  ties  here,  we  conclude  that  the
             adverse decision is a proportionate response, as would be  the
             Appellant's removal to Pakistan."

53. We have not considered that this is in  any  way  materially  different
    from that of Mr Adiyala and we note that in  this  case  the  appellant
    arrived on 31 August  2010  as  a  student  and  had  leave  to  remain
    thereafter until 30 September 2012.  It was only  on  1  February  2012
    that he made an application for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study
    Work) Migrant.  He at first, at the  date  of  decision,  (5  September
    2014) had only four years residence in the United Kingdom.  It is clear
    from the decision at [46] that the panel directed  themselves  properly
    in law.  For the same reasons as given above, we find that the decision
    did not involve the making of an error of law.

    Nazia Amjad

54. On considering this appeal the panel noted at  [21]  that  no  detailed
    Article 8 case was argued before them. They also noted "We do  not,  in
    the circumstances, intend to consider any rights that the Appellant may
    have acquired under Article  8  apart  from  the  questions  raised  in
    relation to fairness.  At [29] the panel held:-

         "Although the Appellant and her husband have family  life  together
         in the United Kingdom they will be removed as  a  family  and  will
         continue to enjoy family life upon their return to their country of
         nationality.  Any private life  ties  that  they  have  established
         again have been whilst they both have limited leave to  be  in  the
         United Kingdom, and in any case we have very  limited  evidence  of
         any such ties. What the Appellant has lost at  the  highest  is  an
         opportunity to gain work experience for a limited  period  of  time
         ... There is nothing in the evidence to  show  that  the  Appellant
         would have any difficulty in re-establishing herself on  return  to
         Pakistan.  The Appellant and her husband have contacts  and  family
         there.  Any friendships  and  other  associations  that  have  been
         formed while they have been in the United Kingdom can be maintained
         from abroad."

55. There is, however, we note no reference to the youngest Appellant,  Mrs
    Amjad's child.  It is clear that there is no mention of  the  child  in
    the decision despite her being an  Appellant.   While  the  grounds  of
    appeal do raise Article 8 at paragraph [3] and  challenge  the  finding
    that no detailed case on Article 8 was put, there  is  nothing  in  the
    grounds in relation to the child Appellant nor any submissions made  in
    respect of Section 55 or the best interests of the child.  Further this
    issue was not addressed in the written skeleton argument provided by Mr
    Vaughn dated 26 May 2015.

56. It is instructive that despite the directions given on 5 May 2015 for a
    skeleton argument identifying separate points arising in  some  of  the
    appeals there appears to have been no attempt to raise the issue of the
    failure to deal with AP.  The directions given in respect  of  some  of
    these appeals on 18 December 2014 do not relate to the appeal of  Nazia
    Amjad and her family, as they  had  not  been  joined  at  that  point.
    Indeed those appeals have now fallen away.  There has been  no  request
    to amend the grounds of appeal, indeed the point  does  not  appear  to
    have been raised until the submissions of Ms Jones in September 2015.

57. We do not consider that it is remotely  arguable  that  the  directions
    given in this case could  rationally  be  construed  as  extending  the
    grounds of appeal.  It is abundantly clear from the  context  where  it
    was agreed that the generic points would be dealt with  first  and  the
    issues particular to individual Appellants, raised in their grounds  of
    appeal, would be dealt with thereafter.  It is sufficiently clear  from
    the directions given in this case and in the decision we  gave  on  the
    preliminary issue that this is what was to happen.  We do not  consider
    that there has been any extension of the  grounds  of  appeal  in  this
    case.  Further, we find no merit in Ms Jones' submission that this is a
    "Robinson obvious point".

58. Further, even had it been a ground of appeal, Ms Jones  was  unable  to
    take us to any material  in  the  bundle  provided  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which relates to the child.  It is remarkable that given  what
    is now said to be a serious issue did not warrant a single  mention  in
    Mrs Amjad's witness statement. Whilst Ms Jones'  skeleton  argument  at
    [32] and [33] relates to AP being  at  Hillbrook  Primary  School,  and
    there is material of  this  before  us,  it  is  unclear  whether  this
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal given  that  the  documents  at
    pages 185 to 194 are dated 2014 and none  appear  dated  prior  to  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. We are  thus  not  satisfied  that
    these documents were before the First-tier Tribunal.  The supplementary
    witness statement is unsigned and undated, and thus, it cannot be  said
    that weight should be attached to it,  nor  are  we  satisfied  it  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

59. In the circumstances, and given the absence of any apparent submissions
    made on this issue  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  let  alone  relevant
    material being provided, we do not consider that it could be said, even
    were this a grounds of appeal, that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    its approach to the Appellant, AP.  There is no material error  of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the  appeals  on
    Article 8 grounds.

    Sultan Khan

60. We consider that the case now  put  forward  by  Ms  Jones  is  without
    foundation.  First, as we observed during the hearing, it is clear from
    the grant of permission to the Upper Tribunal that Article  8  was  not
    raised as a grant of permission.  We do  not  consider  that  it  could
    possibly be construed on the basis of directions given that the grounds
    of appeal had been varied or could be seen to have  been  varied  given
    that there had been no application for such a variation, nor any proper
    indication that the Upper Tribunal had, of its own motion,  decided  so
    to do.

61. We do not consider that the skeleton argument put forward by Mr Vaughn,
    referred to above, could in any way be seen to be a request for Article
    8 to be dealt with and indeed it is evident from what is said that this
    is not so.  It is disingenuous to suggest to the contrary.  Further, it
    cannot be argued that  the  point  is  "Robinson  obvious"  and  it  is
    instructive to note that at no stage is  there  any  reference  to  the
    supposed variation of grounds in the submissions made.  Further, in any
    event, we consider that even had  this  been  raised  as  a  ground  of
    appeal, it is evident from the material provided that the child was  at
    the date of decision just over two years old.  It is accepted that  she
    was premature and it is accepted that she had continuing health  needs.
    The only evidence as to this was referred to us.  We note that this  is
    a short letter from the GP quoted in the decision supported by a letter
    from a consultant paediatrician.  There is  significant  merit  in  the
    observation of the First-tier Tribunal that insufficient  evidence  had
    been put before the panel to show that she could not  receive  adequate
    medical care in Bangladesh  and  indeed  it  is  unclear  what  further
    treatment is required.

62. It is difficult to see how a child of two could be  said  to  have  any
    meaningful private life.  While she undoubtedly has family  life,  that
    is entirely within the ambit of the nuclear  family.   This  is  not  a
    situation where the child has  started  school  nor  indeed  is  she  a
    British  citizen.  The  decision  in  EV   (Philippines)   is   clearly
    distinguished on its facts and it is notable that many of  the  factors
    there identified as relevant to assessing a child's private life  would
    in this case not be relevant. The only issue is that of her health  and
    there is simply no evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  she
    could not be cared for adequately or properly or that there  would  not
    be  appropriate  facilities  available  in  Bangladesh.    Accordingly,
    assuming for the sake of argument that Article 8 was  engaged  in  this
    case, we consider that in respect of the  child  and  her  parents  the
    decision was manifestly one open to the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is
    a proper and adequate consideration of all the relevant facts and while
    Section 55 is not addressed specifically it is clear from the  decision
    that Section 55 and the relevant principles  were  taken  into  account
    insofar as they apply to a child of this age who would be  returned  to
    her parents' country of origin with them.

63. Accordingly, we are not satisfied that the there is a material error of
    law in the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the  appeals
    on article 8 grounds.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of  any
error of law affecting the outcome of the appeals and we uphold them.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

