
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal   Appeal Number: IA/06268/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |              Decision and Reasons    |
|On 11 June 2015                     |Promulgated                           |
|                                    |On 16 June 2015                       |
|                                    |                                      |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                        MR MOHAMED FAHEEMUDDIN GHORI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY Of STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the appellant: Mr A Otchie, Counsel
For the respondent: Mr D Clerk, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is the Secretary of State  for  the  home  Department.  The
   respondent is a citizen of India born on 14 March 1983. However  for  the
   sake of convenience, I shall refer to Mr Mohamed as the appellant and the
   Secretary of State as the respondent which are the designations they  had
   before the First-tier Tribunal.


2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  against  the  decision
   of the respondent dated 15 January 2014 to refuse to vary  his  leave  to
   remain in the United Kingdom outside the Immigration  Rules.  First  Tier
   Tribunal Judge Aido allowed the appellant's  appeal  in  a  determination
   dated 30 September 2014.


3. Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Martin
   dated 12 November 2014 stating that it was arguable that the Judge  erred
   in her approach to Article  8  in  finding  compelling  circumstances  to
   justify consideration outside the Immigration Rules on the basis that the
   appellant has been in this country lawfully for seven years when that  is
   specifically excluded from paragraph  276  ADE  and  is  insufficient  to
   amount  to  private  life  worthy  of  protection.  There  was  also   no
   consideration in the determination of which  parts  of  Appendix  FM  the
   appellant does and does not meet which is relevant  to  an  assessment  a
   proportionality as  recognised  by  paragraph  117  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


    First-tier Tribunal's findings


4. The Judge made the following  findings  in  his  determination  which  in
   summary are the following.


I. [Paragraph 3] "At the outset of the hearing both  representatives  agreed
   that the  live  issue  before  me  is  that  of  Article  8  outside  the
   Immigration Rules".


II. [Paragraph 12] "Firstly I find that it is agreed by both parties  and  I
   make a finding that the appellant cannot succeed  under  the  Immigration
   Rules. He does not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  appendix  FM  of  the
   Immigration Rules in paragraph 276 ADE.  Applying  the  case  of  Gulshan
   (Article 8-new rules [2013] UKUT 00640, I have considered  whether  there
   are compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised  by  the  Rules.
   Firstly I find that the appellant has been lawfully in the United Kingdom
   over a period of more than seven years. I also note that he  was  granted
   discretionary leave to remain for a period of three years  based  on  his
   relationship and marriage to someone  present  and  settled  in  the  UK,
   however that relationship has now ended due to the other party's fault. I
   therefore find that it is a compelling circumstances that  the  Secretary
   of State has recognised that the  appellant  previously  had  family  and
   private life in the UK".


III. [Paragraph 13]  "With  regard  to  the  credibility  I  find  that  the
   appellant and sponsor have  a  relationship  together.  They  are  living
   together and there  have  provided  documents  to  show  that  they  live
   together".


IV. [Paragraph 14] "I now deal with the issue under Article  8  outside  the
   Rules applying Razgar [2004] UK HL 27 sequential test. I find that  there
   is family life between the appellant and the sponsor according to Article
   8 of the Immigration Rules there is also private life between them.  They
   live together. They also intend  to  get  married  which  I  accept.  The
   respondent's  decision  would  amount  to  an  interference   with   that
   relationship and it potentially engages Article 8  of  the  Human  Rights
   Convention. As the appellant is  from  India  and  the  sponsor  is  from
   Pakistan there are difficulties for  them  living  under  the  same  roof
   outside the UK due to difficulties of getting a visa  from  each  other's
   Embassy. The decision is in accordance with  the  law.  Applying  section
   117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum act 2002, I find that the
   maintenance of effective immigration control is in  the  public  interest
   however section 117B (2) notes that it is in the public interest  and  in
   particular in the interests of the  economic  well-being  of  the  United
   Kingdom that persons who seek to enter or remain in the UK  are  able  to
   speak English because they will be less of a burden on the  taxpayer  and
   they are able to integrate into society. The appellant has  a  very  good
   academic history had obtained a first-class engineering  degree.  He  can
   speak English very well and gave evidence in English before me.  He  came
   to the United Kingdom as a student, he has passed his life in the UK test
   and has been working at Morrison's since  2007  he  is  therefore  not  a
   burden on the taxpayer. He is able  to  integrate  into  society  and  is
   financially independent".


V. [Paragraph 15] "His private life and his relationship with  this  partner
   was established at the time when he was lawfully in the  United  Kingdom.
   Taking all the factors of this case into account and the submissions made
   by Mr Ell and the fact the appellant's relationship  unfortunately  ended
   and so did the relationship of his partner. This is a case in  which  the
   appellant's right to private and  family  life  should  be  respected.  I
   therefore find that the respondent's decision  amounts  to  a  breach  of
   Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


VI. [Paragraph 16] "The appeal is dismissed in respect  of  the  Immigration
   Rules".


VII. [Paragraph 17] "The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds  (Article
   8 only)"




    Grounds of appeal


5. The respondent in her grounds of appeal  states  the  following  which  I
   summarise. The Judge made a material misdirection of law  in  respect  of
   Article 8. The Judge stated that the appellant cannot succeed  under  the
   Immigration Rules as he does not satisfy the requirements of appendix  FM
   or paragraph 276 ADE. However the Judge goes on to consider it compelling
   that the appellant has been lawfully present in the  United  Kingdom  for
   more than seven years and that his previous relationship ended due to the
   other party's fault and that the appellant now has a new relationship.


6. The Judge finds that there would be difficulties for  the  appellant  and
   his sponsor in continuing their family life outside of the United Kingdom
   due to "difficulties of getting a visa from  each  other's  Embassy"  and
   that this is a case with the appellant's private and family life  "should
   be respected".


7. The respondent submits that  the  instant  appeal  does  not  disclose  a
   disproportionate breach of Article 8 as  there  is  no  evidence  of  the
   difficulties that the first-tier Tribunal Judge refers to a paragraph  14
   and nor the efforts made by the appellant and her  sponsor  to  secure  a
   visa from their respective Embassies.


8. There is  a  clear  public  interest  in  affirming  coherent  system  of
   immigration control as set out by section 117B and this is firmly  within
   the ambit of that interest for those who wish to remain  here  do  so  in
   compliance with the  Immigration  Rules.  Article  8  is  not  a  general
   dispensing power and does not confer a choice upon the appellant  or  the
   sponsor as to where they wish to enjoy their family life.


    The hearing


9. I heard submissions from both parties as to whether there is an error  of
   law in the determination. The full notes of the hearing are in my  record
   of proceedings.




Decision on error of law

10. The Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal under the  Immigration  Rules
   but allowed the appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the  European
   Convention on Human  Rights  finding  that  the  appellant's  family  and
   private life that he has built in this country, in the seven  years  that
   he has been here, has to be respected.


11. The Judge found that the compelling  circumstances  in  the  appellant's
   case where he should succeed pursuant to Article 8 when he cannot succeed
   under the Immigration Rules was that he is a citizen of India  while  his
   partner is a citizen of Pakistan. The Judge concluded that  it  would  be
   difficult for them to obtain visas from their  respective  Embassies  and
   therefore they could not live together in any of these two countries. The
   other exceptional  circumstances  that  the  Judge  found  exist  in  the
   appellant's case  is  that  the  respondent  had  granted  the  appellant
   discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the bases  of  his
   relationship with a previous  partner  and  that  demonstrates  that  the
   respondent accepted that the appellant has family life in this country.


12. No background evidence has been referred to in  the  determination  upon
   which the Judge reached his conclusion that the appellant and his sponsor
   who are citizens of India  and  Pakistan  respectively,  cannot  continue
   their married life in either one of these countries. He  merely  accepted
   the word of the appellant that this is the  case.  The  Judge  materially
   erred in law because there was no background evidence before him that the
   appellant and his partner would not be able to live in Pakistan or  India
   together given his finding that they wish to marry and therefore would be
   a married couple.


13. The Judge also felt  materially  into  error  when  he  found  that  the
   appellant had been granted discretionary leave by the respondent  on  the
   bases of his family life with a previous girlfriend.  The  appellant  was
   given discretionary leave  for  his  relationship  with  this  particular
   partner. There was no suggestion that the respondent  accepted  that  the
   appellant has family and private life in the United Kingdom which  could,
   in effect be "transferred" to the appellant's current partner. The  judge
   did not  take  into  account  that  in  refusing  the  appellant  further
   discretionary leave, the respondent stated that the  grounds  upon  which
   appellant was previously granted discretionary leave  no  longer  persist
   and therefore his application is refused  pursuant  to  322  (1)  of  the
   Immigration Rules. This should not have been read  by  the  Judge  as  an
   entitlement granted to  the  appellant  that  his  family  life  will  be
   respected and recognised for ever more notwithstanding  who  his  partner
   is. As to whose  fault  it  was  that  the  relationship  broke  down  is
   irrelevant and the Judge placed undue weight on this.


14. The Judge failed to adequately consider section 117B  either  implicitly
   or explicitly. He  only  considered  the  appellant's  ability  to  speak
   English his and his economic viability but failed to consider  any  other
   public interest factors particularised within section 117B  most  notably
   117B (i), (3)& (4). His analysis was perfunctory and unreasoned.  In  the
   case of AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC), it was stated  in  the
   headnote "an appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant  of  leave
   to remain from either section 117B (2) or (3) whatever the degree of  his
   fluency in English or the strength of his financial resources".


15. In DM (Zambia) v SS HD (2009) EWCA Civ, Sedley LJ said that  "the  court
   has  said  many  times  that  you  cannot  dispose  of   an   Article   8
   proportionality issue in a perfunctory or formalistic way. It requires  a
   structured decision, however economically expressed".


16. In the case  of  PG  (USA)  v  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  home
   Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  118  at  paragraph  27,  it  is  stated  "in
   considering proportionality in this context, the case  for  remaining  in
   the United Kingdom on the basis of private and family life  needs  to  be
   considered against the relevant policy of the Secretary of State.


17. As Beaston LJ observed in In the case of Hummayun v Secretary  of  State
   for the home Department [2014] EWHC, 2901 (admin) (4 July 2014) that  the
   mere fact that the claimant may have explained exceptional  circumstances
   is merely one side of the proportionality equation. The  public  interest
   consideration on the other side of the equation need also  to  be  placed
   into the balance therewith.


18. The Judge by finding seven years residence in this  country  amounts  to
   an exceptional circumstance in favour of the appellant, failed to explain
   why he considered this to be an exceptional factor, when residence of  20
   years is required under the Immigration Rules for the appellant's  family
   and private life to be worthy of protection. The Judge placed no reliance
   on the appellant's failure to meet the requirements of Appendix FM in his
   proportionality assessment.


19. The Judge has given no consideration to  the  fact  that  the  appellant
   could make an application for entry clearance from his  home  country  to
   join his spouse if he is able to meet the requirements of the Immigration
   Rules.


20. The upshot is that the determination of the Judge is affected by a
   material error by his failure to conduct a proper assessment of the
   appellant's Article 8 rights.


21. I find that there is a material error of law  in  the  determination  of
   First-tier Tribunal and I set it aside in its entirety.


22. The appellant's representative made an application that  the  appeal  be
   sent back to the first-tier Tribunal for it to be reheard. I was  of  the
   view that given findings of fact have to be made, it is  appropriate  and
   lawful and in accordance with the Presidents Practice Directions for  the
   appeal to be sent back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


23. I directed the appeal be placed before any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
   other than Judge Aido to be heard on a date available.



DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed

Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana                                               Dated 13th day  of
    June 2015

