
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/06451/2014
     IA/06452/2014
     IA/06453/2014
     IA/06450/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 | Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th July 2015                             | On 4th September 2015         |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                                                    (E)
                                              First Appellant

                                                                    (M)
                                           Second Appellant

                                                                   (MZ)
                                             Third Appellant

                                                                     (H)
                                             Fourth Appellant

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms J Rothwell, Counsel instructed by Blavo & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the sake of consistency and to avoid confusion,  I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background and Error on a Point of Law

 2. At the first hearing of this appeal in the Upper Tribunal on  19th  May
    2015 I made an anonymity  direction  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 which I repeat at the end of this
    decision.  I also reached the conclusion that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal showed an error on a point of law for the reasons set out
    in a decision sent out on 21st May 2015 which I quote below  (corrected
    to take account of typographical errors):

         "Background

          4. On 19th January 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M Davies
             gave permission  to  the  respondent  to  appeal  against  the
             decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Petherbridge  in
             which he allowed the appeal on human  rights  grounds  against
             the decision of the  respondent  to  refuse  leave  to  remain
             applying the provisions of paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM of
             the Immigration Rules.  The first appellant is the  mother  of
             the  second,  third  and  fourth  appellants.   They  are  all
             citizens of Egypt although the third appellant was born in the
             United Kingdom.

         Errors on a Point of Law

          5. In the grounds of application the  respondent  contended  that
             the decision showed  an  error  because  the  judge  had  made
             speculative  findings  about  the  likelihood  of  the   third
             appellant being unable to  receive  treatment  for  autism  in
             Egypt and also about the cost of such treatment  if  available
             and the ability of the first appellant to meet the cost of it.

          6. The grounds also  submitted  that  the  judge  did  not  fully
             consider the third appellant's medical condition in the  light
             of N (FC) [2005] UKHL  31  particularly  the  principle  that,
             although the standard of medical treatment available in  Egypt
             might not be the equivalent to that  in  the  United  Kingdom,
             that did not give the appellants the right to remain  here  or
             that it would be unjustifiably harsh to expect them to  return
             to their home country.

          7. Judge Davies gave permission on the basis that the  judge  was
             arguably in error by speculating about the above matters.

          8. At the hearing Ms Johnstone expanded on  the  grounds  on  the
             basis that it was "Robinson" obvious that, although the  judge
             made reference to Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration
             and Asylum Act  2002  by  quoting  it  verbatim,  he  did  not
             consider that, as the second and fourth appellants had been in
             the United Kingdom for over seven years, Section 117B and  the
             requirements of paragraph  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  might  have
             applied for the benefit of  all  the  appellants.   There  was
             nothing to indicate that the judge had applied  the  test  set
             out in Section 117B(6)(b)  of  whether  or  not  it  would  be
             reasonable to expect the child in question to leave the United
             Kingdom.  That test mirrors the provisions of  paragraph  EX.1
             relating to the requirements for limited leave to remain as  a
             parent of such a child.

          9. Ms Rothwell drew my attention to the Rule  24  response  which
             she had  drafted  and  the  accompanying  copy  of  the  Upper
             Tribunal decision in GS and EO  (Article  3  -  health  cases)
             India [2012] UKUT 00397 (IAC) suggesting that there may  be  a
             lower threshold in Article 3 health cases involving  children.
             However, she conceded that, at the hearing before  the  First-
             tier Tribunal, she  had  agreed  that  the  appeal  could  not
             succeed on Article 3 health grounds.

         10. After some consideration Ms  Rothwell  also  agreed  that,  in
             reaching  conclusions  about  the   proportionality   of   the
             respondent's decision, the judge had made reference (paragraph
             48) to a report of the World Autism Awareness Day of 3rd April
             2013 which had not been put before him either at  the  hearing
             or in support of the appeal.  Nevertheless, she suggested that
             the favourable Article 8 decision could stand because the best
             interests of the children had been fully  considered  and  the
             judge  was   entitled   to   conclude   that   it   would   be
             disproportionate for the family to have to return to Egypt.

         11.  After  considering  the  submissions  for  a  few  moments  I
             indicated that I had reached the conclusion that the  decision
             showed errors on points of law such that it should be  re-made
             and now set out my reasons for that conclusion.

         12. Not only is it evident that the  judge  speculated  about  the
             medical  treatment  which  might  be   available   in   Egypt,
             particularly for the third appellant who suffers from  autism,
             but, in doing so, made reference to  a  report  on  autism  in
             Egypt (paragraph 48 of  the  decision)  that  was  information
             which was not produced by either party to the proceedings  and
             therefore available  to  the  analysis  and  comment  of  both
             representatives.  In any event it  is  not  obvious  that  the
             report referred to entitled the judge to  conclude  (paragraph
             53) that the third appellant would be unable to  receive  such
             treatment in Egypt or, if it were, that  the  first  appellant
             could not afford the cost.  More reasoning on those issues was
             required.

         13. Additionally, in conducting the Article 8 balancing  exercise,
             the judge made reference to Section 117B of the 2002  Act  but
             without any apparent consideration of the provisions  of  sub-
             paragraph (6)(b) which specifies that the public interest does
             not require  a  person's  removal  where  that  person  has  a
             parental relationship with a qualifying child and it would not
             be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.
              In this context the  judge  was  also  wrong  to  reject  the
             application of paragraph EX.1 of the Immigration Rules without
             the consideration of the same test.  The judge's reasoning  in
             paragraph 57 on these points is clearly inadequate when  there
             is no reference to the specific test.

         14. The decision therefore shows errors on points of law such that
             it should be re-made.  I suggested to representatives that the
             matter should proceed in the  Upper  Tribunal  by  submissions
             only.  However, Ms Rothwell indicated that, as the grounds had
             been  expanded  and  because  there  had   not   been   proper
             consideration of the relevant test, the  appellant  should  be
             given the opportunity to prepare fresh submissions.   In  this
             respect I suggested that the matter could still proceed by way
             of submissions only and neither representative  disagreed.   I
             was unable to specify a date for the resumed  hearing  of  the
             matter before me in the Upper Tribunal at Stoke because of the
             administrative difficulties but I am now able to do so in  the
             directions which I give."

 3. At the resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal  representatives  informed
    me that they had not received a copy of my decision  quoted  above.   I
    therefore gave them copies.  After representatives had  considered  the
    decision the matter then proceeded by way of submissions  covering  the
    application of the Immigration Rules and human  rights  issues  outside
    them.

Submissions

 4. Ms Rothwell relied upon her comprehensive skeleton argument  which  she
    had prepared in anticipation of my error of law decision.   In  it  she
    notes the background to the application by the first appellant and  her
    three children of whom M and H have been in the United Kingdom for just
    over seven years following their entry with the first appellant on 12th
    October 2006 and the third appellant, MZ, was born here on 17th October
    2009.  It was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the father
    of the children has returned to Egypt and rejected his family.

 5. The children all have medical conditions.  M suffers from sleep apnoea,
    nocturnal vomiting, abdominal pain and rectal bleeding.  H suffers from
    a urinary condition and MZ has autism.  Medical reports in  respect  of
    each of these children are  to  be  found  in  the  original  appellant
    bundle.  My attention was also  drawn  to  the  additional  information
    about the children which is contained in the latest appellants'  bundle
    received by the Tribunal on 10th July 2015.  This concerned  attendance
    of the children at school, further  medical  appointments  for  MZ  and
    school reports.  In particular there is a Medical Report by Dr Mohammed
    El-Rifai, a locum consultant community paediatrician in Nottingham, who
    was educated in and has strong  connections  with  Egypt.   His  letter
    describes the limited facilities available  for  autistic  children  in
    Egypt.

 6. In her submissions Ms Rothwell also argues  that  the  first  appellant
    does fall within the parent route under  Appendix  FM  as  she  is  the
    parent of a child under 18 who has lived  continuously  in  UK  for  at
    least seven years preceding the application.   She  is  also  a  single
    parent with sole responsibility for all three children.  She has always
    had leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  along  with  her  children,
    speaks fluent English, has the prospect of a teaching position  and  is
    able to earn an income.  Under the parent  route  the  first  appellant
    also falls  to  be  considered  under  paragraph  EX.1(a)(i)  and  (ii)
    requiring that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  second  and
    fourth appellants to leave the United Kingdom.  It is also argued  that
    the children can benefit from the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(iv) on
    the basis of their private life where the test of reasonableness is the
    same.

 7. As to the test of whether or not it would be reasonable to  expect  the
    first, second and fourth appellants to leave  the  United  Kingdom,  Ms
    Rothwell  draws  attention  to  the  respondent's  own  IDI  on  family
    migration at paragraph 11.2.4 which  points  out  that  strong  reasons
    would be required  in  order  to  refuse  a  case  with  continuous  UK
    residence of more than seven years.  The facts relating to  each  child
    must  be  considered  individually.   The  skeleton  then  details  the
    problems which all children have faced because of the third appellant's
    autism and the fact that each child has medical difficulties.  None  of
    the children have been educated in Egypt and, as  Ms  Rothwell  pointed
    out in oral submissions, the children have only some  understanding  of
    Arabic.  English is spoken at home with the children's mother.   It  is
    also pointed out that, in relation to  the  treatment  of  autism,  the
    family home in Egypt is four hours'  drive  from  Cairo  or  Alexandria
    which are  the  only  centres  where  treatment  for  autism  might  be
    available.

 8. The skeleton also draws my attention to the decision of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in EV (Philippines) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  as  to  the  desired
    approach to the issue of  the  best  interests  of  the  children  when
    considering whether or not the need for immigration  control  outweighs
    those interests.  The factors to be considered  include  not  only  the
    time the children have been in the United  Kingdom  and  the  stage  of
    their education but the extent to which they have become distanced from
    the country to which they are required to  return  and  the  extent  to
    which they have linguistic, medical or other difficulties  which  might
    effect them adapting to life in that country.

 9. Mr McVeety agreed that  the  first  appellant  and  her  children  were
    English language speakers and  that  the  children's  understanding  of
    Arabic was  limited.   In  this  respect  my  attention  was  drawn  to
    paragraph 4 of the first appellant's statement in the  original  bundle
    concerning the use of English at home and the ability of  the  children
    to understand Arabic.

10. Mr McVeety also agreed that the main issue was whether or  not  it  was
    reasonable to expect the child appellants to leave the United  Kingdom.
    He argued that the children were not entitled to the same treatment  as
    British citizens.  The family's stay in the  United  Kingdom  was  only
    temporary and he thought that there was no evidence to  show  that  the
    rights of the two older children would be significantly damaged if they
    were removed to Egypt.  He drew attention  to  the  public  expense  of
    keeping the children in the United Kingdom.  The  first  appellant  can
    obtain employment in  Egypt.   The  medical  condition  for  the  third
    appellant should not be a bar to his removal because reports on  autism
    in Egypt were contradictory and he questioned the value of  the  report
    by Dr El-Rifai whose information he thought was out of date.  Whilst Mr
    McVeety agreed that the system for treatment of autism in  Egypt  might
    not be as good as in the United Kingdom that  did  not  mean  that  the
    respondent's decision was disproportionate.  He also  argued  that  the
    circumstances for the youngest child were not exceptional.

11. In conclusion Ms Rothwell argued that the Rules themselves had given  a
    special status to children who were here for more than seven years  and
    the respondent's own IDIs pointed out  that  there  had  to  be  strong
    reasons before removal could take place.  She also contended  that  the
    first appellant might not be able to work in Egypt if she had  to  care
    for the third appellant for whom treatment  for  his  autism  would  be
    limited.  In this respect she drew my attention to the report from  the
    National Autistic Society in the original bundle which reported on  the
    temporary nature of treatment available in Cairo  and  the  requirement
    for autistic males to undergo national service.





Conclusions

12. There are no credibility issues relating to the  circumstances  of  the
    appellants in the United Kingdom with the main issue being  whether  or
    not it is reasonable to expect the two child appellants who  have  been
    in the United Kingdom for seven years to leave this country.  The  best
    interests of all the children are, in relation to human rights  issues,
    a primary consideration.

13.  The respondent's own IDIs on family  migration  provide  help  in  the
    interpretation of the phrase "reasonable to expect" which is  found  in
    EX.1. (a) (ii) of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE (iv). It  is  stated
    that strong reasons  will  be  required  in  order  to  refuse  a  case
    involving children with continuous UK  residence  of  more  than  seven
    years.  The  facts  relating  to  each  child  have  to  be  considered
    individually along with facts relating to the family  as  a  whole.   I
    identify, below, the  factors  which  suggest  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the second  and  third  appellants  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom before identifying the factors which favour  removal  in
    the public interest.

14. It is relevant to note that all appellants  have  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom with limited leave throughout.  It is the  abandonment  of  the
    family by the first appellant's husband and father of the children that
    led to the application to remain by the first appellant  as  a  parent.
    Thus, the family cannot expect to return to Egypt to live as  a  family
    with a male head.  All the children are well-established in the  United
    Kingdom although it is only the second and fourth appellants have  been
    here for over seven years.  They are all undergoing education  and  the
    second and fourth appellants are doing  well  at  school.   English  is
    their first language although they do speak  some  Arabic.   The  first
    appellant has ambitions for employment whilst  in  the  United  Kingdom
    although  at  present  is  reliant  upon  state  support.    The   most
    significant obstacle to removal is the treatment and  assistance  which
    MZ  receives  in  relation  to  his  autism.   The  second  and  fourth
    appellants  also  suffer  from  medical  conditions  which  have   been
    summarised in Ms Rothwell's skeleton argument and relate to  sleep  and
    eating disorders although  the  difficulties  suffered  by  the  fourth
    appellant are relatively minor and relate more to his brother's autism.

15. The report by Dr El-Rifai confirms, and I accept,  that  special  needs
    treatment for autism is not of the standard  available  in  the  United
    Kingdom and there are no centres of excellence generally, although care
    for autism might be better  available  in  cities  such  as  Cairo  and
    Alexandria.

16. The above factors have to be balanced against those which may  make  it
    reasonable to expect the second and fourth appellants to be removed and
    which are in the best interests of all  children.   Despite  the  seven
    year provisions for the second and fourth appellants the fact  is  that
    the immigration status  of  all  the  appellants  has  been  precarious
    because, certainly, the first appellant has always known that there was
    the risk that, even if her husband had remained with the family,  their
    stay in the United Kingdom was limited to the duration of her husband's
    studies here. The family will be removed together which, as  the  Upper
    Tribunal suggested in   Azimi-Moayed and  Others  (Decisions  affecting
    children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC), will be  in  the  best
    interests of the children. The two  youngest  children  are  not  at  a
    significant stage in their education or development  to  be  materially
    affected by a move and the ability of the children  to  communicate  in
    Arabic even if to a limited extent  will  assist  their  re-settlement.
    There is also the prospect of the children continuing the  relationship
    with their father even if he is separated from their mother.

17. The medical condition of the third appellant is not such that Article 3
    protection can be invoked.  None of the information before me about the
    treatment of autism and associated conditions  in  Egypt  leads  me  to
    conclude that treatment is not available even  if  it  is  not  at  the
    standard of excellence enjoyed in the United Kingdom at public expense.
    Additionally  the  minor  medical  conditions  suffered  by  the  other
    children do not show that their health will be  significantly  impaired
    by living in Egypt. The report of Dr Drew for the second appellant does
    not point to illness  or  a  condition  which  has  been  shown  to  be
    untreatable in Egypt and the report by Dr Kirkham suggests improvement.
    The social and emotional difficulties suffered by the fourth  appellant
    have likewise not been shown to be untreatable in  Egypt  or  otherwise
    debilitating.

18.    The fact that there are two children of the family who have been  in
    the United Kingdom for seven years and who are now undergoing education
    here does not automatically mean that it would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect them to return to Egypt  particularly  where  there  are  strong
    factors of the kind I have identified against  them  remaining.  As  to
    private life,  it  has  not  been  shown  that  the  two  oldest  child
    appellants can come within paragraph 276 ADE of the Rules applying  the
    same test and nether the youngest child or the first appellant can come
    within the rule.

19. I now turn to consider the appeal on human rights grounds  outside  the
    rules taking into consideration sections 117 A-D of  the  2002  Act  in
    relation to the public interest in immigration control.

20. In  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (Decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal made  it  clear  that
    the start point is that the best interests of children are to  be  with
    their parents although lengthy residence  (identified  as  above  seven
    years) can lead to development of cultural and educational ties that it
    would be inappropriate to disrupt.  However, as far as the latter point
    is concerned, no significant circumstances relating to social, cultural
    and educational ties have been put forward  in  this  case  save  those
    which can be expected as the norm for children educated in  the  United
    Kingdom but of foreign origin. I am  not  satisfied  that  any  of  the
    children or their mother have been shown to have  lost  their  cultural
    and family ties to Egypt. The children are being taught to speak Arabic
    and there is no evidence that  wider  family  ties  to  Egypt  are  not
    present.  As the Supreme Court made clear in Zoumbas  [2013]  UKSC  74,
    the best interests of children must be a primary consideration although
    not always the only primary consideration and do not have the status of
    a paramount consideration.

21. My consideration of human rights issues outside the  Rules  takes  into
    consideration the factors I have already identified  in  examining  the
    appellants' position under them.  This  includes  my  consideration  of
    family educational and medical issues.  Whilst it will  undoubtedly  be
    difficult for the first appellant and her children to settle into  life
    in Egypt it would not be unreasonable to expect them  to  do  so.   The
    children may have to improve their skills in the  Arabic  language  and
    their mother will have to seek employment there.  But  these  are  only
    difficulties to be expected for a family whose  immigration  status  in
    the United Kingdom has always been precarious because  of  the  limited
    leave available to them.  In Forman  (Sections  117A-C  considerations)
    [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC) the Upper  Tribunal  made  it  clear  that  the
    public interest in firm immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by  the
    consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 has at  no
    time been a financial burden on the state or is self-sufficient  or  is
    likely to remain so indefinitely.  The significance of these factors is
    that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.   The
    appellants are not financially independent in the  United  Kingdom  and
    are, currently, a burden on taxpayers particularly in relation  to  the
    medical and social services which they receive.  As  already  indicated
    any private life established by them was when their immigration  status
    was precarious.  Further, as already concluded, I am not satisfied that
    it would be unreasonable to expect the child appellants  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  Thus, in relation to the proportionality  issue  which
    is relevant in this case bearing in  mind  that  the  parties  have,  I
    accept, a private and family life in the United Kingdom, I am unable to
    conclude that the respondent's decision is disproportionate.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  I  re-make  the  decision  by  dismissing  the  appeals  on
immigration and human rights grounds.

Anonymity

As this  appeal  involves  the  interests  of  young  children  I  make  the
following direction:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As these appeals were fees exempt and because I have dismissed  the  appeals
I make no fees award.




Signed                              Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

