
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal Number:
IA/06896/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision Promulgated     |
|On 3rd November 2014                   |On 8th December 2014     |
|                                       |                         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                               Mr Basil Cudjoe
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Bahja, instructed by Jesuis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana and born on 12th December 1981  and
    he applied for a residence card as confirmation of a right to reside in
    the UK on the basis of his marriage  or  durable  relationship  with  a
    Portuguese,  (EEA)  national,  Ms  A  M  Ramos  Mendes  Pereira.   This
    application was refused on 21st January 2014 by the respondent.

 2. The respondent refused the appellant's application  with  reference  to
    Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations and noted that  the  appellant  had
    also failed to provide satisfactory  evidence  that  he  was  is  in  a
    durable relationship with an EEA national in accordance with Regulation
    8.

 3. The detailed refusal letter stated that the appellant had not  provided
    evidence to demonstrate he  had  registered  a  customary  marriage  in
    accordance with the Customary Marriage and Divorce  (Registration)  Law
    1985.  Accordingly it was not legally recognised as valid in Ghana  and
    thus could not be accepted as valid in the UK.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Dennis determined the  matter  on  2nd  April
    2014 and issued a determination on 3rd July 2014 dismissing the appeal.
     An application for permission to appeal by the respondent was  granted
    by First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant was  entitled  to  assume  that  all  the  relevant  material
    submitted  to  the  respondent  would  have  been   included   in   the
    respondent's bundle and which would have been provided  to  the  judge.
    The matter came before me.

 5. At the hearing however Mr Bahja did not contest the decision  of  Judge
    Dennis on procedural grounds or the point taken with respect to letters
    returned to the appellant, and in my  view  rightly  so.    However  Mr
    Bahja submitted that the judge should have considered adjourning for an
    oral hearing or the appellant  should  have  been  given  a  chance  to
    respond in view of the lack of the respondent's bundle.

 6. Nonetheless, I find the appellant had instructed solicitors, Ravi Sethi
    and it was confirmed that these solicitors were instructed until  after
    the refusal decision of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  was  sent  to  the
    appellant.  The solicitors were on file  with  the  Tribunal  and  were
    notified by the Tribunal on 7th March 2014, well before the decision by
    Judge Dennis, that the appellant had indicated that he wished  to  have
    the decision made on the papers and that any further evidence should be
    submitted by 1st April 2014. Although the judge made reference  to  the
    appellant seemingly not living  at  the  address  he  concentrated  his
    consideration of the durable relationship on the basis of the  lack  of
    documentation. The solicitors, and thus by default the  appellant,  are
    notified in the notice of hearing from the Tribunal that 'the  Tribunal
    may determine the appeal on the basis of the appeal documents  together
    with any further written evidence or submissions you may wish to make'.
     Solicitors were aware that the respondent may not necessarily submit a
    respondent's bundle and the burden of proof is on  the  appellant.   At
    the hearing Mr Bahja himself confirmed that he was not aware as to what
    documentation had indeed been sent  to  the  respondent  save  for  the
    application form. Indeed the application form EEA2 made  absolutely  no
    reference  to  any  further  documentation  at  all  in  the   document
    'checklist'.  There was no indication that any documentation  had  been
    forwarded to the respondent in relation to the 'durable  relationship'.
    Indeed the respondent in the reasons for  refusal  letter  stated  'you
    have provided no evidence that you resided together as a couple at  the
    same address prior to the date of your customary marriage'.  I  do  not
    accept in this instance that the  judge  could  have  expected  further
    information to have accompanied the respondent's bundle with respect to
    the durable relationship, that  it has been  shown  there  was  at  the
    relevant time there was any further documentation  and  thus  that  the
    judge made an error in proceeding.

 7. I turn to Mr Bahja's second complaint which  was  that  the  judge  had
    failed to apply Kareem (Proxy marriages EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT  24
    and thus the decision was flawed.

 8. Kareem, as confirmed in TA and Others (Kareem explained)  Ghana  [2014]
    UKUT  00316  (IAC)  identifies  that  whether  there   is   a   marital
    relationship, for the purposes of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006, must always be examined in accordance with the laws of the Member
    State from which the Union citizen obtains nationality.  This, however,
    does not negate the finding in Kareem that the  judge  is  entitled  to
    consider the documentation itself. In this  instance  the  judge  found
    that the documentation itself was deficient and recorded  this  at  [7]
    and [8] of his decision.  Even if  the  judge  had  got  the  order  of
    consideration wrong, if he had gone on to consider Kareem,  and  as  Mr
    Bahja accepted, no  information  was  provided  regarding  the  law  of
    Portugal and proxy marriages.  This was fatal to the appeal.

 9. I find that there is no error of law in the determination of the  First
    Tier  Tribunal  judge  for  the  reasons  explained   above   and   the
    determination shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 3rd November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
