
IAC-AH-pc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/06643/2014
                                                               IA/28429/2014
                                                               IA/28436/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 February 2015                  |On 10 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

              Mrs Zeunisa Abdul Razzak Sattar (first appellant)
        Mr Mohomed Irshad Abdul Razak Abdul Sattar (second appellant)
                   Mr Nasir Abdul Sattar (third appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A. Mahmood (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
The Appellant

1.   The three appellants are citizens of Malawi and their  dates  of  birth
    are respectively 14 October 1950, 13 December 1979 and 9 May 1991.  The
    first appellant is the mother of the second and third appellants.  In a
    decision dated 13th January 2014 the respondent refused an  application
    made on 15 November 2013 on the grounds that the removal would not be a
    breach in obligations under the Human Rights Act 1998 and further  gave
    directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2.   In a determination  promulgated  on  16  October  2014  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  (Judge  Gurung-Thapa)  dismissed  the   appeals   under   the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

3.   An application for permission to appeal was made  contending  that  the
    Tribunal erred in consideration of the claim under paragraph 276ADE  in
    relation to length of  residence  in  the  UK.   All  three  appellants
    asserted that they arrived in the UK  in  1995  and  have  remained  in
    residence to date.  The First-tier Tribunal found [57] that  there  was
    insufficient  documentary  evidence  to   establish   such   continuous
    residence.  The facts in respect of the third  appellant  were  not  in
    dispute.  He arrived in the UK aged 4 on 12 July 1995 [3] and there was
    evidence  from  Leicester  City   Council   and   various   educational
    establishments that he had attended schools and colleges over the years
    from 1999 to 2009.  At [60] the Tribunal sets  out  that  evidence  and
    then finds the third appellant has not submitted satisfactory  evidence
    that he has spent half his life in the  UK  as  required  by  paragraph
    276ADE(v).   The  main  ground  contended   that   such   finding   was
    unreasonable and contrary to the evidence.  The evidence indicated that
    the third appellant had been in the UK at least from 1995 - 2009,  some
    fourteen years and as such had spent half of his life in the UK and his
    appeal should have been allowed under paragraph 276ADE.

4.   Secondly, the grounds in support of the application  further  contended
    that the Tribunal unreasonably concluded that the evidence given by the
    two witnesses was vague and evasive, and found it  inconsistent  as  to
    places of residence.  Thirdly, the Tribunal failed to take into account
    the Respondent's evidence confirming that  the  appellant's  ex-husband
    had returned to Pakistan,  divorced  the  appellant  according  to  the
    Muslim tradition, married another woman, and had not returned to Malawi
    since.  The Tribunal failed to  take  account  of  this  evidence  when
    making findings relevant to the Tribunal's consideration of whether  or
    not there were close ties in Malawi. The Tribunal's consideration under
    Article 8 was flawed.

5.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  A  K  Simpson  who
    stated, "considered as a whole, it is arguable that the judge  has  not
    given sufficient credence to the evidence of independent  witnesses  as
    to the length of the  appellant's  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Moreover, it is arguable  that  the  judge  has  not  given  sufficient
    consideration to the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iv) and  (vi)  as
    to whether the first appellant has retained close ties with her country
    of origin".

6.   At the hearing before me, Ms Holmes accepted that at [60] the  Tribunal
    acknowledged that documentary evidence  reflected  the  fact  that  the
    third appellant had attended primary and secondary school between  1999
    and 2007 and thereafter at college until  June  2008.   The  Tribunal's
    finding that there was no satisfactory  documentary  evidence  to  show
    that the appellant had spent at least half his life living  in  the  UK
    was contrary to the evidence.  Ms Holmes indicated that it would appear
    that he did in fact meet the requirement under paragraph 276ADE(v).

7.   Mr Mahmood submitted that  this  error  had  effectively  infected  the
    whole of  the  determination.  A  decision  that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(v) were met by the third appellant would significantly
    impact on consideration of the appeals in relation  to  the  first  and
    second  appellants.   Given  that  the  third  appellant  was  a  minor
    throughout his residence in the UK and lived with his mother, a finding
    that his mother was residing in the UK at the same time was  likely  to
    be made.  The decision made therefore in respect of the third appellant
    is Wednesbury unreasonable in  light  of  the  independent  documentary
    evidence produced that shows he has been resident in the UK since  1995
    and therefore meets the requirement under paragraph 276ADE(v).

Discussion and decision

8.   I proceeded on the basis that it was common ground  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the decision  made  by  the  Tribunal.   I  am
    satisfied that the findings made as to the length of residence  of  the
    third appellant in the UK were contrary to the independent  documentary
    evidence before the Tribunal.

9.   Further I am satisfied that the Tribunal failed to  take  into  account
    relevant evidence (in particular at page 29 of the appellant's  bundle)
    which detailed the enquiries made by the British High  Commission  that
    established that the appellant's husband had divorced her and  returned
    to Pakistan in 1993/1994.  Further the judge erred in  stating  that  a
    letter found at  F4  of  the  respondent's  bundle  accepted  that  the
    appellant had family in Malawi, when it said nothing of the sort.   The
    evidence was relevant to the issue of the existence of  close  ties  in
    Malawi.

10.   In  considering  how  to   proceed   further   I   heard   from   both
    representatives.  Mr Mahmood submitted that it may be possible for this
    Tribunal  to  deal  with  the  matter  without  further  hearing.   The
    difficulty with that proposal was, as he rightly indicated,  the  error
    infected all of the findings made  in  the  determination  because  the
    length of residence impacted on the first and  second  appellants.   In
    addition to which I find errors in relation to evidence of  close  ties
    and the Tribunal's approach to evidence in support of that issue  which
    need to be resolved.

11.  I have decided to allow the appeal in respect of  the  third  appellant
    who has met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(v).

12.  I have decided that the appeals for the first and second appellant  are
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at  Nottingham  (not  before  Judge
    Gurung-Thapa) for rehearing.

Notice of Decision

1.   There is a material error of law in the determination  which  shall  be
    set aside.

2.   The appeal of Mr Nasir Abdul Sattar is allowed on immigration grounds.

3.   The appeals in respect of the first and second  appellants  are  to  be
    reheard at Nottingham on 21 April 2015.

No anonymity order made.



Signed        Date 10.3.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal in respect of the third appellant I make a  fee
award for repayment of that fee in total.



Signed        Date 10.3.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
