
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 06046 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 December 2013                            |On 24 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                kulwinder ram
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on  2  October  2013.
    He ruled that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and directed  the
    appeal  be  decided  again  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The   case   was
    subsequently transferred to me.  I respectfully  adopt  and  incorporate
    into my decision the decision of Judge Grubb dated 10 October 2013 which
    was sent to the parties on 24 October 2013. An  unsigned  copy  of  that
    decision is appended hereto.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born in 1964 and so  is  now
    49 years old.  It is his case that he  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2002.  On 5 July 2013 he applied for leave to remain on the basis of his
    relationship with his partner Ms Lolita Dulmuan Belible who is a British
    citizen.   The  application  was  refused  on  11  February  2013  under
    paragraph  295F  with  reference  to  paragraph  295D(i)  and  (iv)  and
    paragraph D-LTRP 1.3 with  reference  to  paragraph  R-LTRP  1.1(d)  and
    paragraph 276CE with reference to paragraph 276ADE(iii)-(vi) of HC 395.

 3. The rules have been amended so  many  times  that  identifying  them  is
    becoming increasingly tedious. The above is a rather  elaborate  way  of
    saying that the respondent found that the appellant did not satisfy  the
    rules relevant to his application to remain as the partner of  a  person
    present and settled in the United  Kingdom  because  the  appellant  was
    present in the United Kingdom in breach of Immigration Rules  and  could
    not show that paragraph "EX 1" applies.  This means that  the  appellant
    could not show that there were "insurmountable obstacles to family life"
    with a partner continuing outside the United Kingdom.  It is clear  from
    the fact the appellant did not have leave to be in  the  United  Kingdom
    that there was no possibility of his satisfying the requirements of  the
    Rules. The appellant does not claim to have been in the  United  Kingdom
    for twenty years and so he is unable to show that he should be permitted
    to stay under the rules by reason of long residence.

 4. The appellant and his partner gave evidence before me.  I do  not  think
    it necessary to go through the evidence in great detail.  Certain things
    are quite clear.  The appellant and his partner have lived  together  in
    the United Kingdom for at least two and a half years before applying for
    leave to remain.  Their relationship has every sign  of  commitment  and
    permanence.  Some time ago, when he was in India, the appellant  married
    a woman who is not his present partner but that marriage is dead.  There
    is documentary evidence before me confirming this.

 5. The appellant's partner is in regular work  as  a  staff  nurse  in  the
    National Health Service.  She has an income in excess of �30,000 a  year
    and is able to accommodate the appellant.

 6. Although the appellant chose to give his evidence through an interpreter
    he has some competence in the English language and has passed an English
    language test administered by Trinity College  London  in  speaking  and
    listening at "Entry 1".

 7. Mr Tarlow cross-examined the appellant and the sponsor asking  questions
    intending to expose any deficiency in  their  evidence  that  they  live
    together.  The  answers  were  not  perfectly  complementary  but  I  am
    satisfied that the inconsistencies are much more likely to be the result
    of two honest people remembering a recent event of no great  consequence
    in their lives rather than two dishonest people trying to pretend to  be
    living together when that is  not  the  case.   The  evidence  of  their
    cohabitation includes, for example, council tax bills showing  that  the
    sponsor stopped claiming the relief entitled to her as a  single  person
    and other documents indicating the  appellant  lived  at  the  sponsor's
    address.  I have no hesitation in concluding  that  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities the points indicated above have been established.

 8. Mr Jafar submitted that I should allow the appeal with reference to  the
    decision of the House of Lords in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  40  and
    the explanation of  that  and  subsequent  decisions  in  SSHD  v  Hayat
    (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 1054.

 9. The appellant does not want to return to his native India.  He  has  not
    been there since 2002 and would not be  welcome  there  because  of  ill
    feeling in his family and his former wife's family as a  result  of  the
    break up of his marriage.  This evidence was not tested before me but  I
    believe it.  It is not surprising that the appellant was a  married  man
    when he came to the United Kingdom or that the marriage  has  broken  up
    and that there is still tension in the family as a consequence.   I  can
    see no reason whatsoever why he need tell his family he has returned  to
    India and the chances of his being discovered in India by  accident  are
    extremely remote.

10. The sponsor does not wish to live in India.   She  feels  she  would  be
    estranged by the language and culture and religion.  She did not know if
    she could work in India.  Although I have no specific  evidence  on  the
    point I think it likely that a woman with the  qualifications  necessary
    to work as a staff nurse in the United Kingdom National  Health  Service
    would be employable in India.  She does not want to work there.  She  is
    a little older than the appellant and is not interested in  learning  to
    adapt to a new culture.  She is content in her employment in the  United
    Kingdom and does not want to give up that  job.   I  find  these  things
    inherently reasonable but they are not insurmountable obstacles  in  the
    path of her joining her husband in India.

11. It was not suggested before me that the sponsor would  not  be  entitled
    to enter India in the sense that she would  be  unable  to  satisfy  the
    requirements for entry into that country, assuming there are such.

12. I accept that the appellant's partner was widowed in September 2008  and
    was shocked and depressed as a result.  I accept that she received  some
    medical treatment to help her come to terms with  the  grieving  process
    and that the subsequent arrival of the appellant was a very happy  event
    in her life.  I am quite satisfied that his departure  for  India  would
    cause her considerable personal distress but not that it would be likely
    to so disrupt  her  health  so  that  she  became  seriously  ill  as  a
    consequence.  There is no evidence to support such  a  conclusion.   The
    sponsor is fearful of  his  departure  but  she  is  an  educated  woman
    experienced in life and could be expected to cope.

13. I am not here to decide an entry clearance application but the  evidence
    before me points very firmly in the direction  of  the  appellant  being
    able to satisfy the requirements for admission as  a  long-term  partner
    and any adverse consequences by reason of his poor  immigration  history
    in the event of his making an application would be  ameliorated  by  the
    need to promote his and  his  British  national  partner's  private  and
    family lives.

14. It is right to say that Mr Tarlow did not oppose  my  finding  that  the
    appellant  appeared  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  for
    admission.

15. Mr Jafar reminded me, rightly, that  the  decision  in  Chikwamba  is  a
    decision of the House of Lords and therefore highly  authoritative.   He
    reminded me too that Chikwamba did not deal solely with cases where  the
    Article 8 claim was particularly strong.  Indeed in considering the case
    in Hayat, Elias LJ at paragraph 17 confirmed that the need for a  proper
    Article 8 assessment was just as strong in a case where the claim  might
    appear to be weak.  His point was that Article 8 is  a  bulwark  against
    arbitrary decision making.

16. I am quite satisfied that removing the appellant  would  interfere  with
    his and his partner's private and family lives.  If the Rules are  meant
    to imply that Article 8 is only relevant where there are  insurmountable
    obstacles in the path of couples  living  together  outside  the  United
    Kingdom I firmly disagree.  The law here was, if I may respectfully  say
    so, clearly and helpfully summarised by Sedley LJ in VW (Uganda) v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 5 at paragraph 19 where he said:

         "Whilst it is of course possible that the facts  of  any  case  may
         disclose an insurmountable obstacle to removal,  the  inquiry  into
         proportionality is not a search for such an obstacle and  does  not
         end with its elimination.  It is a balanced judgment  of  what  can
         reasonably be expected in the light of all the material facts."

17. I consider the  sponsor's  disinclination  to  travel  to  India  to  be
    entirely reasonable for a person in her circumstances and that  removing
    the appellant would interfere with the private and family life  of  both
    him and his wife.

18. It does not necessarily follow that removal is disproportionate.

19. Although I have read the  explanation  of  the  jurisprudence  given  in
    Hayat the jurisprudence does not, and is not intended to, determine  the
    outcome of every case brought on human rights grounds.  What is clear is
    that each case needs to be thought about with  a  constant  eye  on  the
    proportionality of removal.  Removal becomes harder to  justify  when  a
    person has a good (or excusably bad) immigration history  or  where  the
    lives of children are being disrupted  or  where  return  would  involve
    someone returning to a country that was, for example, dangerous or  from
    where it would be very difficult to make an application  for  permission
    to return.

20. Removal is likely to be a  disproportionate  interference  with  private
    and family life unless the respondent can show that it is for a sensible
    reason.

21. This appellant has a bad  immigration  history.   He  has  come  to  the
    United Kingdom for the sole purpose of bettering himself.  That  is  not
    intrinsically  discreditable  but  this   appellant   did   so   without
    permission.  It is unfair to people who obey the Rules to see those  who
    do not prospering and it must encourage others to  flout  the  Rules  if
    people who flout the Rules are allowed to remain.

22. I do remind myself that it is right to give considerable weight  to  the
    private and family lives of the appellant and his sponsor.  Clearly  the
    appellant is the author of his own  misfortune,  in  the  sense  he  has
    chosen to live in the United Kingdom  unlawfully  but  he  entered  some
    years ago and has established significant private and family life  after
    his illegal entry.  Although  the  sponsor  admits  to  knowing  of  the
    appellant's unsatisfactory immigration status at a fairly early stage in
    their relationship she has not allowed the relationship  to  develop  in
    order to harbour an immigration offender but because  she  has  found  a
    companion.  These are things to respect.

23. However when I consider the impact of  removal  on  the  relationship  I
    remind myself that this is not a deportation  appeal.   The  appellant's
    exclusion will not subject him to a ten  year  blanket  ban  on  return.
    Rather everything suggests he would be able to satisfy the  requirements
    of the Rules and enter the United Kingdom lawfully to  enjoy  his  close
    relationship with his sponsor.

24. It is also relevant that he would be returning to a country of which  he
    has adult memories.  I appreciate he has not been  in  India  for  seven
    years and it will no doubt be a challenging experience for him to return
    to a country that must have changed in his absence.   It  is  still  the
    country of which  he  is  a  national  in  which  he  has  lived  for  a
    significant part of his life.  Many close couples wish to live  together
    but accept some periods of separation as part of their relationship.  It
    has not been shown that there is a particularly strong  dependency  here
    in the sense that the sponsor cannot  manage  without  him.   She  would
    prefer to be with him but that is an entirely different point.

25. No one has given evidence about the time it would  take  to  process  an
    entry clearance application but nothing has  been  done  to  suggest  it
    would inordinate.  The appellant may well be able to take some  work  in
    India or be maintained from his wife's resources.  Separating them  does
    not destroy their relationship and does not subject either  of  them  to
    high degrees of hardship.

26. Removing him would show that  the  Immigration  Rules  are  not  lightly
    waived and that people who disregard them cannot just  assume  that  the
    Human Rights Act will save them  from  the  consequences  of  their  own
    misconduct.  It is sensible to requiring  the  appellant  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and return to the country of which he is  a  national  to
    uphold the integrity of the rules.

27. In this  case,  separation  for  the  purposes  of  complying  with  the
    Immigration Rules would be in the nature of a  nuisance  rather  than  a
    calamity.  I find it wholly proportionate.

28. In the circumstances although the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    has been set aside I remake the decision and I dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 December 2013               |










                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06046/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 October 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                KULWINDER RAM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar instructed by Lee Valley Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on  24  August  1964.
      He claims to have entered the United Kingdom in 2002 when aged 38.  On
      5 July 2013, he applied for leave on the basis of a relationship  with
      his British  citizen  partner,  Ms  Lolita  Dulmuan  Belible.   On  11
      February  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the   appellant's
      application.

   2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      promulgated on 26 July 2013, Judge Glossop dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal in which he relied upon Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   The  Judge
      accepted that the appellant and his sponsor had a "relationship"  that
      engaged Article 8 but found that the appellant's removal  would  be  a
      proportionate interference  with  his  private  and  family  life,  in
      particular on the basis that he could return to India and  seek  entry
      clearance.

   3. In reaching that finding, Judge Glossop was not satisfied  as  to  the
      depth  or  length  of  the  relationship.   In  paragraph  12  of  his
      determination the Judge stated that:

           "12.   ...I am not satisfied that the relationship is subsisting
                 in the manner of a permanent relationship.  To be precise I
                 am  not  satisfied  as  to   [the   appellant's]   ultimate
                 intentions.  I am not satisfied as to the intentions of his
                 partner either who was claiming an undying love declined to
                 say that she would go to India albeit for a short period."

   4. On 16 August 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Hemingway)  granted
      the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  essentially
      on the following ground:

           "2.    ...It is arguable that the  Judge  has  given  inadequate
                 reasons as to why he apparently found the relationship  the
                 appellant has with his UK based partner not to be  of  real
                 substance.  The reasons given appear to  be  no  more  than
                 they are not married and that there is limited  documentary
                 evidence  of  co-habitation  which,  in  fact,   might   be
                 attributable at least in part to the appellant  not  having
                 lawful stay.  The matter is  potentially  material  as  the
                 relationship constitutes a major plank  of  the  Article  8
                 argument."

   5. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

   6. On behalf of the  appellant,  Mr  Jafar  submitted  that  the  Judge's
      decision could not stand for a number of reasons.  First, he submitted
      that the Judge had failed to take into account a number  of  documents
      contained within the respondent's  bundle  and  also  the  appellant's
      bundle which gave the appellant's  address  as  that  of  the  sponsor
      dating back to 2010.  This was  material  relevant  to  assessing  the
      depth and length of the relationship which  the  parties  claimed  had
      resulted in them living together since May 2010.  Secondly,  Mr  Jafar
      submitted that the Judge had been wrong to raise in  para  16  of  his
      determination the possibility that the appellant was not free to  form
      a permanent relationship with the sponsor on the basis that it had not
      been shown that his previous marriage in India  had  ended.  Mr  Jafar
      submitted that a divorce deed had been sent to the Home Office, a copy
      of which was contained within the appellant's bundle prepared for  the
      Upper Tribunal.  In any event, Mr Jafar submitted that  this  had  not
      been raised before and the appellant had not  had  an  opportunity  to
      deal with it.

   7. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Horsley submitted that the  Judge  had
      taken into account the vast majority of the  evidence.   She  accepted
      that he may not have taken into account some  council  tax  bills  but
      that  was  not  sufficient  to  require  his  careful   and   detailed
      determination to be overturned.  She  submitted  that  the  Judge  had
      looked at the evidence in the round and he was entitled  to  take  the
      view that the nature and strength of the parties' relationship had not
      been established.  In any event, the Judge had found, and was entitled
      to find, that it was not disproportionate to require the appellant  to
      return  to  India  in  order  to  obtain  entry  clearance  given  the
      circumstances of his immigration history and that the relationship had
      been formed in  the  full  knowledge  of  the  appellant's  precarious
      immigration status.

   8. In reply, Mr Jafar referred me to the Court of Appeal's decision in VW
      (Uganda) and AB (Somalia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 5.  He submitted that
      in finding that the appellant could return  to  India  to  seek  entry
      clearance, the Judge had failed to make any  findings  on  whether  it
      would be reasonable to  expect  the  appellant's  partner,  a  British
      citizen (which he submitted was important) who worked in the  NHS  and
      had no connection with India, to accompany  him.   He  submitted  that
      this issue could, in any event, only be determined in the light  of  a
      proper finding in relation to the strength and nature of the  parties'
      relationship.  If that  latter  finding  could  not  stand,  then  the
      assessment of proportionality was also flawed.

Discussion

   9. At the conclusion of the submissions, I indicated that I was satisfied
      that the First-tier Tribunal's decision  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and could not stand.  These are my reasons.

  10. First, I accept Mr Jafar's submission that the Judge  failed  to  take
      into account a number of documents relevant to the parties' claim that
      they had been living together as a couple since May 2010.

  11. At para 11 of his determination the Judge said this:

            "11.  ...The Respondent does not concede the depth or length of
                 the  relationship.    The   Appellant   has   put   forward
                 documentary evidence which shows that he has been using his
                 partner's address for banking purposes for about two  years
                 and that two years ago they  bought  a  double  duvet  with
                 other items.  There is no firmer evidence that the  parties
                 are and have been living together for a precise  period  of
                 time such as registering with  a  doctor,  dentist,  paying
                 council tax (the council tax bill for 2013/2014 is in  both
                 names), or any other agency which would  require  proof  of
                 where  a  person  was  living.   The   Presenting   Officer
                 specifically challenged the depth of the relationship."

  12. It is clear that the Judge  only  took  into  account  two  pieces  of
      documentary evidence, namely a receipt for a double duvet (at page  16
      of the appellant's bundle) in the appellant's name dated 2  June  2010
      and a council tax bill for the year 2013/2014  (at  page  109  of  the
      appellant's bundle) giving the appellant's address as that  at  which,
      it is not disputed, the sponsor lived,  namely  "8  Thackeray  Avenue,
      Tilbury, Essex".  There were, however, a  number  of  other  documents
      contained  both  within  the  appellant's  bundle  and  that  of   the
      respondent which between 2010 and 2013 gave the appellant's address as
      that of the sponsor.   There  were  a  number  of  other  council  tax
      documents.  First, there is a council tax demand notice for  2010/2011
      dated 14 December 2010, secondly for the year 2011-2012 dated 5  March
      2011 (at page 34 of the respondent's bundle); and finally one for  the
      year 2012/2013 dated 12 March 2012 (at page  33  of  the  respondent's
      bundle).  Each of these documents gives  the  appellant's  address  as
      that of the sponsor.  Perhaps quite significantly, the first of  these
      shows that the sponsor claimed a single occupancy  reduction  for  the
      period 1 April 2010 to 31 October 2010 and thereafter, with the demand
      showing the  appellant's  name  also,  no  longer  claimed  that:  the
      inference being that the appellant was now  living  with  her.   These
      documents were relevant to the Judge's assessment of the nature of the
      parties' relationship.

  13. Further, there are a number of Sky TV  bills  dated  between  December
      2010 and April 2012 (see page 37 of the respondent's bundle and  pages
      17-20 of the appellant's bundle) again giving the appellant's  address
      as that of the sponsor.  There are also  a  number  of  Barclays  Bank
      statements covering the  period  2011-2012  (at  pages  38-41  of  the
      respondent's bundle) giving the appellant's address  as  that  of  the
      sponsor.

  14. Although there are also documents giving the appellant's  address  (as
      he claimed) before he moved in with  the  sponsor,  in  assessing  the
      evidence at para 11 of his determination, the  Judge  failed  to  take
      into account all the relevant evidence.

  15. I also accept Mr Jafar's submission that the Judge failed to take into
      account the photographs which, it was claimed, supported the  parties'
      claim as to their relationship over time.

  16. In addition, I accept Mr Jafar's submission that in paragraph  16  the
      Judge was wrong, without raising the matter at the hearing,  to  doubt
      whether the appellant was able to form a "new permanent  relationship"
      on the basis that nothing was known about  his  previous  marriage  in
      India.  At para 16 the Judge said this:

           "16.   ...The question left hanging is whether the Appellant  is
                 in fact free to form a permanent relationship with  another
                 party, the threats to which he has been subjected have  not
                 been made explicit nor the reasons for them.   If  it  were
                 the case that the Appellant  is  already  married  and  has
                 children  this  question  should  be  resolved  before  the
                 Appellant is permitted to make a new permanent relationship
                 with another party in the UK."

  17. It is not clear whether the divorce deed was in fact  put  before  the
      Judge although, Mr Jafar told me on instructions that it had been sent
      to the Home Office.  In any event, the ability  of  the  appellant  to
      marry does not appear to  have  been  a  matter  relied  upon  by  the
      Presenting Officer or by the Judge at the hearing.  If it was a matter
      that troubled the Judge in reaching his findings on the nature of  the
      parties' relationship, it was something which should have been  raised
      by the Judge in order that the appellant, through his  representative,
      could seek to deal with the point.

  18. I do not accept Ms Horsley's submissions that the Judge's  failure  to
      consider what, on the face of it, looks highly relevant evidence as to
      the parties' relationship and to doubt its  permanency  on  the  basis
      that the appellant's previous marriage might not allow him to  form  a
      permanent relationship were not matters of sufficient seriousness that
      should lead to the Judge's decision being set aside.  In my judgement,
      these errors make the  Judge's  adverse  findings  unsustainable.   In
      reaching his findings, he failed to take into account the totality  of
      the evidence.

  19. Although Ms Horsley sought to support  the  Judge's  decision  on  the
      basis of his finding in para 14 that  it  was  proportionate  for  the
      appellant to return to India in order to obtain entry clearance,  that
      submission is not sustainable.  First,  Ms  Horsley  herself  accepted
      that the Judge's view as to the nature and degree of the  relationship
      was a significant matter in determining whether a breach of Article  8
      was  established.   That  issue  is  important  in   determining   the
      proportionality of any interference with the appellant's  private  and
      family life.  The degree of disruption to the appellant's family  life
      was material to the Judge's assessment of whether it was proportionate
      to require him to seek entry clearance (see SSHD v Treebhowan; Hayat v
      SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1054 at [30] per Elias LJ).  Further, in reaching
      an assessment of proportionality, it was relevant to determine whether
      it would be reasonable to expect the appellant's partner to  accompany
      him to India at least for the purpose of seeking entry clearance.  The
      dilemma faced by the appellant's partner, as a  British  citizen  with
      employment in the UK, whether or not to  accompany  the  appellant  or
      remain in the UK had, as Sedley LJ pointed out in VW (Uganda) at [42],
      itself to be taken into account in assessing proportionality:

           "It is the hardship of  the  dilemma  itself  which  has  to  be
                 recognised and evaluated."

  20. In my judgement, the Judge failed to  engage  with  these  matters  in
      assessing proportionality.

  21. It is of course correct, as Ms Horsley submitted,  that  in  assessing
      proportionality the appellant's poor immigration history was relevant.
       However, even though relevant, it did not dictate the outcome of  the
      proportionality assessment in the absence of proper  factual  findings
      as to the nature of the parties' relationship, the impact of removal -
      whether temporarily or long term -  on  the  parties  and  as  to  the
      reasonableness of the appellant's partner accompanying him  to  India.



  22. Consequently, for these reasons the Judge's decision did  involve  the
      making of an error of law and I set aside that decision.

Decision and Disposal

  23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
      appeal under Art 8 involved the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   The
      decision cannot stand and is set aside.

  24. Having indicated my decision  at  the  hearing,  Mr  Jafar  (at  least
      initially) invited me to remit the appeal for a rehearing in the First-
      tier Tribunal. Ms Horsley invited me to retain the appeal in the Upper
      Tribunal.  I indicated that this was an appropriate case for retention
      in the Upper Tribunal.

  25. Following some discussion, both representatives invited me to  adjourn
      the hearing for a resumed evidential  hearing.   Given  the  remaining
      court  time  available,  and  given  that  Mr  Jafar  wished  to  take
      instructions from the appellant  and  Ms  Horsley  requested  time  to
      consider the documents, it was apparent that the appeal could  not  be
      concluded in  the  time  available.   Consequently,  I  adjourned  the
      hearing to be relisted before me in order to remake  the  decision  on
      the first available date.










                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:















