
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06737/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 November 2013                            |On 19 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                            MUHAMMAD AZAM KAMRAM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  28  March  1979.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent  of  25  February  2013
    cancelling his leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

2.   The matter came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Clayton  on  3  July
    2013 and was dismissed.

3.   Grounds of appeal were lodged against that decision and  permission  to
    appeal granted.  Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance  of  that
    grant.

4.   The Appellant attends unrepresented.

5.   The background to the matter is that the Appellant  was  granted  leave
    to enter as a student in January  2011  to  study  for  a  postgraduate
    diploma  at  Brentford  College.  Seemingly  he  passed  that   course,
    obtaining a diploma on 30 May  2013.   That  college  had  its  licence
    withdrawn and the Appellant therefore sought to continue study  at  the
    British Institute of Technology and Commerce, the studies  to  commence
    in October 2012.

6.    Essentially  the  Appellant  did  not  turn  up  at  the  college  and
    sponsorship was withdrawn.  He went to Pakistan and was encountered  by
    the immigration services upon his return on 10 March 2013.  The sponsor
    was satisfied that the  Appellant  had  not  applied   himself  to  his
    studies this being the reason why he was  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    leave was therefore curtailed.

7.   It would seem that the reason  for  the  Appellant  not  attending  the
    college was that he had been involved in a  motor  cycle  accident  and
    injured his ankle. There was in the papers  before  the  judge  various
    medical documents and letters, in  particular  a  document  from  Kings
    College Hospital London Emergency Department  showing  the  Appellant's
    admission on 29 October 2012.  Thereafter  there  are  various  medical
    certificates indicating that the Appellant should stay at home and rest
    because of his ankle.  The Appellant indicated that it was  because  of
    the pain in  his ankle that he was unable to study and indeed  returned
    home to Pakistan in order to recover from his injury.

8.   It is his account that he is now reconciled with his college  who  have
    allowed him to continue to study three  days   a  week  since  February
    2013.  He has in effect missed a term of work.

9.   The Appellant did not attend the hearing before Judge Clayton  nor  was
    he represented.  Contact was made with  his  solicitors  who  indicated
    that they had received a fax  the  previous  day  indicating  that  the
    Appellant could not attend the hearing.  It was said that a  notice  of
    cancellation had been sent to the court but enquiries revealed no  such
    message from the papers or administration.

10.  The judge considered the excuse to be a flimsy one with  no  indication
    of any serious illness  or  anything  to  prevent  him  coming  to  the
    hearing.  She commented "there was nothing to say he had  attended  any
    hospital or  his GP."

11.  In the event the Appellant  gave  an  explanation  before  me  that  he
    suffers from diabetes as well as  his painful ankle.   The  day  before
    the hearing he had a very high blood sugar level, feeling ill and achy,
    with pain all over his body. He went to his GP who advised him  not  to
    go to court the following day.  This was what prompted the  contact  he
    made with his solicitors. He said that the medical certificate was sent
    to the court although, as I have indicated, there is no record that  it
    was received.  However there has been produced by Mr Nath on behalf  of
    the Respondent, a copy  of  a  statement  for  fitness  for  work   for
    statutory sick pay, which indicates that a Doctor Arshad  certified the
    appellant  not fit for work on 2 July 2013.  Thus there would  seem  to
    be some support for what the Appellant had to say.

12.  I indicated to Mr Nath that I had some concern as to  the  fairness  of
    the proceedings, bearing in mind that there was before  the  judge  the
    various documents concerning the Appellant's ill -health  arising  from
    his ankle.  Admittedly these documents were more in  terms  of  January
    2013 rather than the summer  of  that  year.   Such  may  have  served,
    however, to put the judge on enquiry that the  Appellant's  health  may
    not be very good.

13.  There was a second  matter  which  has  not  been  clarified  from  the
    various files, namely the evidential basis for the contention  made  in
    the reasons for refusal,  that during  the  period  September  2011  to
    October 2012 the Appellant had admitted that he was  not  studying  nor
    did he wish to study at any acceptable educational  institution.   This
    was a  matter  dealt  with  by  the  judge  at  paragraph   10  of  the
    determination.   The Appellant contends that that is not right  because
    he studied at the college in December 2011 through  to  May  2012.   He
    said that his certificate was  at  home.   He  said  that  he  incurred
    problems subsequent to that date  because  of  the  withdrawal  of  the
    licence of the college.

14.  Mr Nath consulted his file but could  find nothing  that  substantiated
    that particular contention being made.  Indeed there is  a  certificate
    of completion from Brentford  College  of  London  dated  30  May  2012
    indicating that the course started on 25 January 2011 and ended  on  30
    May 2012 and that the Appellant had passed that course.

15.  It is clearly an important matter  going  to  the  bona  fides  of  the
    Appellant and the nature of his  studies,  the  significance  being  of
    course that if that be correct it would have preceded his accident  and
    called into question therefore the reason he now gives for his  absence
    from studies.

16.  Mr Nath submits that there was no unfairness  in  the  sense  that  the
    Appellant could not have succeeded on his appeal had he  attended.   He
    had  not  notified  the  college  or  the  Respondent  of  his  medical
    difficulties and it is understandable in those circumstances  that  the
    college would decline  further  to  sponsor  him  and  thus  his  leave
    properly fell to be cancelled.

17.  The Appellant indicated, however, that he was a bone fide  student  and
    was studying.  It was  his  ill-health  that  had  prevented  him  from
    starting   promptly   and   that   it   was   both   unreasonable   and
    disproportionate to cause  him  to  return  to  Pakistan  to  make  any
    application to return to complete  his studies.

18.  I am concerned as to the  issue  of  fairness  and  consider  that  the
    Appellant ought to be given the opportunity of presenting his case  for
    fullest consideration.

19.  I make it entirely clear that it is understandable how the  judge  came
    to her conclusion about the adjournment and no doubt  it  may  be  said
    that from her perspective what she did was  entirely  reasonable.   The
    test is, however, not one of reasonableness but one of fairness.

20.  In the circumstances it seems to me  that  fairness  demands  that  the
    decision be set aside and that it be remade.  Given  the  fact  finding
    that will be required and the attention  to  detail  I  find  that  the
    appropriate forum, having considered the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Directions paragraph 7, is the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

21.  As the Appellant was unrepresented I stressed to him  that  the  burden
    rests upon him to show that the Respondent acted  unreasonably  in  all
    the circumstances in cancelling his leave.

22.  There was a lack of information in particular from the current  college
    confirming or otherwise what the Appellant had to say about  continuing
    studies at that college since February 2013.  The college will need  to
    confirm on what basis they have accepted the Appellant  for  the  study
    and the progress that he is making.  The Appellant should also  produce
    evidence that he did indeed study  until  May  2012  at  the  Brentford
    College.

23.  In addition I suggested that  the  Appellant  should  prepare  a  brief
    witness statement setting out why it was that it  was  disproportionate
    of the Respondent to expect  him to return to Pakistan to make a  fresh
    application.

24.  It seems to me that the fairest course is for  the  Appellant  to  give
    his evidence so as to allow  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  decide
    whether his return to Pakistan is in the circumstances of his  accident
    and illness proportionate or disproportionate.

Directions


    (1)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Clayton is set aside  to
         be remade.


    (2)  That decision will be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.


    (3)  A date for  hearing is 27 November 2013 at Taylor House.

    (4)   The Appellant shall produce the evidence which is required of him
         as set out above.


    (5)  If the Respondent seeks to  rely  upon  the  indication  that  the
         Appellant had not studied at all from December 2011 to October 2012
         the source of that information should be identified in  advance  of
         the hearing.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
