
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06958/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 December 2014                           |On 8 January 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                              MRS JESMIN AKTER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Rahman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, a Home Office Presenting Officer


 DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR/NO MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   This is an  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Morrison  (the  Immigration  Judge)  to  dismiss   the
    appellant's appeal against the refusal to vary leave and to remove  him
    to Bangladesh.

2.   The appellant arrived in the UK in July 2006 it seems  as  a  dependent
    spouse of her husband who has been living in the UK  since  13  October
    2003.  There is some confusion about the application which gave rise to
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal but it appears the appellant made
    an application on 9 September 2013 "outside the Rules" but subsequently
    submitted a second application on 28  October  2013  on  form  FLR  (M)
    Version 10/2013 in which she sought leave to extend her stay in the  UK
    and applied for a biometric immigration document on  the  grounds  that
    she was a spouse of a person present and settled here, i.e. Mr Mohammad
    Ali Babar.  She states that her  immigration  history  was  that  of  a
    student dependant, i.e. dependent on a points-based migrant.

3.   The application was considered by  the  respondent  as  an  application
    under Appendix FM on the grounds that the appellant was the partner  of
    a person in the UK in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  who  was
    able  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.    Alternatively,
    consideration was given to her rights under Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights including  her  right  to  respect  for  her
    private life incorporated into the  Rules  by  paragraph  276ADE.   The
    respondent decided that the appellant did not meet the requirements  of
    the Rules and refused further leave to  remain.   She  also  considered
    that her decision was consistent with the right to respect for  private
    and family life contained within Article 8, although  she  accepted  in
    some cases it is necessary to consider granting leave to remain outside
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

Appeal Proceedings

4.   The appeal against that refusal  is  supported  by  grounds  of  appeal
    which state that the sponsor had made  an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain (ILR) on the basis of ten years' long residence in  the
    UK which had not yet been decided.  The respondent should have  awaited
    the  outcome  of  that  application  before  deciding  the  appellant's
    application.  The appellant claims to  be  aggrieved  by  the  decision
    which is not consistent with the duty to act fairly.  No  human  rights
    arguments were raised in the grounds, and at the subsequent hearing  of
    the appeal Mr Haque did not maintain an appeal  under  Article  8  (see
    paragraph 23).

5.   The present grounds suggest that the Immigration  Judge  erred  in  his
    application of Appendix FM to the facts of this case.  The decision was
    "premature".  The decision was actually dated 12 January 2014 to refuse
    the application for an  extension  of  leave  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant's husband did not have ILR.  The grounds of appeal state  the
    Immigration Judge erred in failing to consider the requirements of  the
    old Rules that were in  force  prior  to  9  July  2012.   This  is  by
    reference to the "transitional provisions" whereby Part 8 continued  to
    be in force.

6.   The grounds of appeal were  considered  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Nicholson on 21 October 2014.  He granted permission to appeal  because
    he considered the transitional provisions  (A277  as  read  with  A280)
    state that with regard to  applications  made  after  9  July  2012  by
    persons who have been granted entry for limited leave under Part  8  of
    the Rules in existence at 9 July 2012 would continue to  be  considered
    by reference to Part 8 of Appendix FM.  Judge Nicholson considered that
    the appellant had previously been granted leave under paragraph 319C in
    Part 8 as a student dependant and it appeared that her  leave  in  that
    capacity was still extant as at  9  September  2013.   It  was  unclear
    whether  the  point  was   raised   before   the   Immigration   Judge,
    nevertheless, Judge Nicholson considered it right to  grant  permission
    so that this ground could  be  properly  argued.   He  did  not  refuse
    permission on the remaining grounds but in  fact  they  have  not  been
    effectively pursued save that the appellant did submit that  the  judge
    ought to have considered Article 8 despite its being abandoned  by  his
    representative.

7.   The respondent  submitted  a  Rule  24  response  indicating  that  the
    Immigration Judge was entitled to conclude  that  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM were not met and the  Immigration  Judge  directed  himself
    appropriately.

The Hearing

8.   Mr Rahman submitted on behalf of the appellant that paragraph 319C  set
    out the requirements for  successful  applications  by  a  points-based
    migrant.  The appellant's  husband  was  here  under  the  points-based
    scheme.  There had been various renewals of her leave, the most  recent
    being the application considered in this appeal made in June 2012, i.e.
    before the changes in the Immigration Rules introduced in July 2012.  I
    was reminded that the  transitional  provisions  state  that  where  an
    appellant has leave and  made  a  further  application  it  was  to  be
    determined under Part 8 of the old Rules.  Mr Rahman made reference  to
    the Immigration Directorate Instructions Family  Migration:  Chapter  8
    Transitional Provisions.  Paragraph 3.1.1 states:

         "A person who is in the UK and had been granted entry clearance  or
         limited leave to remain under Part 8 following the application  for
         initial entry clearance or leave to remain under Part  8  submitted
         before 9 July 2012, and this  leave  is  extant  where  this  is  a
         requirement of Part 8, and they apply for further leave on the same
         basis".


    Mr Rahman submitted that his client  had  extant  leave  and  therefore
    would  have  been  able  to  stay  in  the  UK  if  she  satisfied  the
    requirements of Part 8 of the old Rules.  I was also referred to  pages
    10 and 11 of the appellant's bundle to the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
    indicated that children can be included as dependants.


9.   The respondent's reply was that the issue as to  applicability  of  the
    2012 Rules was only raised late.  Indeed this issue has not been raised
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Whitwell set  out  the  immigration
    history for the Tribunal.  He said that:

         ".   On 6 June 2012 limited leave to  remain  was  given  until  13
             April 2014.


           . On 11 July 2013 the respondent  curtailed  the  leave  on  the
             grounds that the appellant's sponsor's educational institution
             had  its  licence  revoked.   Following  that  revocation  the
             appellant had 60  days  (until  September  2013)  to  make  an
             application for an extension of her leave.  Unfortunately, the
             application she made was made outside the Immigration Rules on
             9 September 2013.


           . On 28 October 2013 the  appellant's  representatives  (Hossain
             Associates) submitted the application form for a spouse  of  a
             person present and settled in the UK was used.   The  decision
             was made in response to that application on 21 January 2014.

10.  I was referred to the relevant Rules in Phelan's Immigration Law,  page
    262-264.  It was pointed out that  paragraph  319C  is  concerned  with
    applications  for  leave  to  remain  as  dependants  of  pointed-based
    migrants.  Had the appellant made an application on that basis  it  may
    have been successful.  Mr Whitwell also  accepted  that  there  was  an
    issue under Article 8 but that had only received limited  consideration
    by the Immigration Judge because  the  appellant's  representative  had
    "thrown in the towel" on that point.   Based  on  the  application  the
    appellant made none of the transitional provisions applied (Mr Whitwell
    referred me in detail to paragraphs  A277-A281  for  the  details).  In
    particular, paragraph 319C, dealing  with  applications  for  leave  to
    remain as dependants of points-based migrants, was not preserved by the
    transitional  provisions.   If  the  appellant  wished   to   make   an
    application as a dependent spouse of a person present  and  settled  in
    the UK, she would need to meet the requirements  of  Appendix  FM.   It
    seems that a number of the requirements of that Appendix were  not  met
    according to the refusal letter.  Even if the maintenance  requirements
    of that Rule were met, the appellant would not have been, at  the  date
    of her application, the  dependent  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
    settled here with indefinite leave to remain as was  required  by  that
    Appendix. The sponsor was granted ILR at a  later  date.  In  addition,
    English language skills need to be demonstrated.  All the evidence must
    be submitted with the application to comply with Section 85(3)  (b)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   Accordingly,  this
    appeal had to fail.

11.  Mr Rahman responded by pointing out that the appellant had  ticked  the
    box on her application stating that she had passed an English  language
    test provided by a test provider (see page 32 of 51).  At this point Mr
    Whitwell  conceded  that  this  point  had  not  been  raised  in   the
    respondent's refusal and therefore he was not pursuing the point  about
    the English language qualifications.  Mr  Rahman  then  said  that  the
    application in 2013 was not in fact  made  "outside  the  Rules".   The
    appellant had applied under FLR (M) for an extension of her leave under
    the Immigration Rules.  If her application was not in  accordance  with
    the Immigration Rules "exceptionally"  this  appeal  could  be  allowed
    outside those Rules.  At this point the appellant pointed out that  the
    appellant and the sponsor had a disabled son but I pointed out this had
    not featured in the evidence presented before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    nor had any evidence been filed to the Upper Tribunal dealing with this
    issue.  Mr Rahman pursued the point under Article 8 and did not abandon
    the argument that the transitional provisions applied.   The  appellant
    was a dependent spouse of a points-based migrant.

12.  Mr Whitwell said in response that even  if  the  application  had  been
    made under paragraphs 281-284 it would not satisfy the requirements  of
    paragraph 280(c).

13.  At the end of the hearing I  decided  to  reserve  my  decision  as  to
    whether an error of law had been shown and if so, what steps should  be
    taken to deal with it.

Discussion and conclusions

14.  The basis of the appeal before the  Immigration  Judge  (see  paragraph
    6(iv) of his  determination)  was  that  the  appellant's  husband  had
    completed ten years' lawful residence in the UK and the appellant ought
    therefore to be allowed to "remain outside the Immigration Rules  under
    FLR  (O)".   The  Immigration  Judge  records  that   the   appellant's
    solicitors submitted two applications, one for the  appellant  and  one
    for her husband.  The appellant's application on form FLR  (M)  was  on
    the basis that the appellant was the spouse of a person who  was  about
    to be granted settlement in the UK.  The application form  states  that
    the appellant's parents and siblings were in Bangladesh  but  that  her
    husband, son and other close relatives were in the UK.  The refusal, as
    the Immigration  Judge  also  recorded,  was  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant's husband did not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules at the date of the application  in  that  he  was  not  a  person
    "present and settled in the UK".  He was not granted ILR until a  later
    date.  The appellant could not benefit from EX1 as her child was not  a
    British Citizen and although private life  had  been  considered  under
    276ADE the appellant could not meet the requirements  of  subparagraphs
    (iii)-(iv) thereof).  The  respondent  considered  whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances justifying exercising her discretion to allow
    the appellant to stay outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8  of
    the ECHR but concluded that due  to  the  appellant's  family  ties  to
    Bangladesh these requirements could not be met.

15.  Mr Rahman argued strenuously that the transitional  provisions  applied
    to this case.  I had been taken through those in detail by Mr  Whitwell
    but it is clear that they do not.  This  was  not  an  application  for
    further leave to remain, on the same basis  as  previous  applications.
    In particular, the appellant had not previously applied for  indefinite
    leave to remain as the dependent spouse of a person present and settled
    in the UK.  She had previously applied as the dependant  of  a  points-
    based  migrant.   Had  she  made  that  application,  it  was  strongly
    arguable, it would have been considered under Part 8 of the Immigration
    Rules in force at  8  July  2012.   However,  this  was  not  so.   The
    transitional  Rules  (in  page  262-264  of  Phelan)  make  clear  that
    paragraph 319C (which  applies  to  dependent  relatives  of  a  person
    present and settled in the UK) was not one of the provisions preserved.
     Therefore, the appellant cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules as
    they existed at 8th July 2012.

16.  The appellant could not succeed under the ECHR because  Mr  Haque,  who
    represented her before the First-tier Tribunal, did  not  maintain  his
    appeal on that basis.  However,  I  note  that  the  Immigration  Judge
    looked at the facts which were relevant for Article 8 in  paragraph  23
    of his determination.  It was not, in my view, seriously arguable  that
    the appellant had a right to form a private or family life  in  the  UK
    when she could continue her family life with her husband in Bangladesh,
    where he was a citizen and where they have a large number of relatives.

17.  For these reasons I can find no error in the  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.  There is no error in the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal and the decision to refuse  to  vary  leave  and  to
make removal directions remains.

The appeal has been unsuccessful and I make no fee award.

I make no anonymity direction.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



