
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/06575/2015
     IA/06573/2015
     IA/06581/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 October 2016                         |On 31 October 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                  VERA [M]
                                    [D K]
                                    [S K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr. M. Al Rashid, Counsel, instructed by Carlton Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Coll, promulgated on 4 March 2016, in which he dismissed
    the Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's decision to refuse  to
    vary leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the  extent  of
         the available evidence having been considered by the  Judge.   This
         arguably has affected the analysis made by the Judge leading to his
         conclusions.  The date of hearing  endorsed  on  the  supplementary
         bundle is 26th January 2016.  Mr [O]'s statement appears at page  5
         and follows that of the Appellants."

 3. The first Appellant attended the appeal.  I heard submissions from both
    representatives following which I announced that I found  the  decision
    involved the making of a material error of law and I remitted it to the
    First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

 4. At the outset of the hearing, Mr. Al Rashid stated that he had not seen
    the grounds of appeal, as he had been instructed under  direct  access,
    and Mr. Kotas stated that he had not seen the grounds of appeal either.
     Both were provided with copies of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  and  the
    opportunity to consider them.


Submissions

 5. In his submissions Mr. Al  Rashid  referred  to  paragraph  30  of  the
    decision.  This states that the first Appellant was granted  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in May 2008, and that she withdrew  her
    appeal  on  17.07.2008.   The  appeal  was  against  the  decision   of
    Immigration Judge Handley.  He submitted that this was an error  as  in
    fact the Respondent had withdrawn the decision.  I was  referred  to  a
    decision by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley dated 25 July 2008.


 6. He therefore submitted that the judge was not entitled to rely  on  the
    decision of Immigration  Judge  Handley  under  Devaseelan  principles,
    given that the Respondent had  withdrawn  the  decision  on  which  the
    appeal had been based.  The decision of Immigration Judge  Handley  was
    in effect null and void.


 7. He submitted that the Appellant had come to the United  Kingdom  on  24
    August 2002.  She had therefore been lawfully resident for  ten  years,
    taking into account the fact that discretionary leave  was  granted  to
    the Appellants following the withdrawal of the decision  on  which  the
    previous appeal was based.  He accepted that  this  was  not  an  issue
    which was before me, but submitted that as the Respondent had withdrawn
    the decision and granted leave, the first Appellant had  been  lawfully
    resident for ten years.


 8.  In  relation  to  the  witness  statement  of  the  second  and  third
    Appellants' father, this had not been taken into account,  and  adverse
    credibility findings had been made  as  a  result.   In  addition,  two
    further witness statements had not been considered.  The first of these
    was from [VD] , the sister of the first Appellant (pages 10 and  11  of
    the  Appellants'  bundle).   The  second  was  from  [KT]  (page  128).
    Material evidence had not been considered and, as  a  consequence,  the
    assessment of the best interests of the second and third Appellants was
    flawed.  There was no formulation in the decision of the best interests
    of the children being a primary consideration, which in  turn  impacted
    on the question of reasonableness of return.


 9. In response, Mr.  Kotas  submitted  that  the  issue  of  the  previous
    decision and the Devaseelan point had not been raised in the grounds of
    appeal.  However, he accepted that there was an error  of  law  in  the
    decision in the way that the  second  and  third  Appellants'  father's
    evidence had been dealt with.


10. He submitted that normally in the case of a material mistake of fact an
    appeal would need to go back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full
    analysis.  However, he submitted that, in the Appellants' case, it  was
    not necessary as there was enough evidence  before  me  to  remake  the
    decision.  He referred me to paragraphs 67, 70 and 71 of the  decision,
    and submitted  that  this  contained  an  adequate  assessment  of  the
    children's best interests.  Taking the Appellants' case at its highest,
    the second and third Appellants' father was an overstayer and it was  a
    matter of choice whether he returned to Sierra Leone with the children.
     He submitted that on the facts before me the decision could be remade.




11. Mr. Al Rashid  acknowledged  the  acceptance  by  Mr.  Kotas  that  the
    decision involved the making of a material error of law.  However,  the
    second and third Appellants'  father  was  Nigerian,  not  from  Sierra
    Leone, so the judge needed to take into account how the children  would
    be affected either by their father remaining in the United  Kingdom  or
    by him being in Nigeria.  Additionally there were two  other  witnesses
    whose evidence needed to be considered.  He submitted that as this  was
    a child centred appeal with the best interests of the children being  a
    primary consideration, the fair way to proceed would be  to  remit  the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


Error of Law


12. The issue arising from the withdrawal of the previous decision  by  the
    Respondent, the subsequent grant of leave,  and  whether  or  not  this
    meant that the first Appellant  had  been  lawfully  resident  for  ten
    years, was not before me, as was acknowledged by Mr. Al Rashid.


13. In relation to the second and third Appellants' father's  evidence,  in
    paragraph 62 the judge finds that there is "no credible  core"  to  the
    first Appellant's evidence.  He goes on to state:

         "Secondly the  first  appellant  says  that  it  is  critical  that
         children remain  in  the  UK  in  order  to  continue  their  close
         relationship and regular contact with their father.   There  is  no
         documentary evidence before me to show that Mr. [O] plays this part
         in the children's life.  I find the explanation  for  why  Mr.  [O]
         neither produced a witness  statement  nor  attended  today  to  be
         implausible."

14. Paragraph 64 states:

         "With regard to Mr. [O], I find that he has not played  the  highly
         involved role  in  his  children's  life  suggested  by  the  first
         appellant in the light of lack  of  evidence,  his  total  lack  of
         involvement in these proceedings and my findings  about  the  first
         appellant's credibility.  I  find  that  therefore  the  children's
         relationship with  him  could  be  continued  by  modern  means  of
         communication (such as telephone calls, emails and  social  media),
         and by letter and by card writing if they were to return to  Sierra
         Leone."

15. The grounds of appeal state that there was a witness statement made  by
    Mr. [O] provided to the First-tier Tribunal  (paragraph  (i)).   I  was
    referred to this witness statement (pages 5-9 of the bundle before  the
    First-tier Tribunal).  I find that the decision contains a  mistake  of
    fact when it states that Mr. [O] had not produced a  witness  statement
    for the hearing.  It is therefore also a mistake to state that Mr.  [O]
    had a total lack of involvement in the proceedings (paragraph 64).


16. The decision also refers to an explanation that was given for  why  Mr.
    [O] had not produced a witness statement.  The  judge  states  that  he
    finds this explanation to be implausible.  However, given that Mr.  [O]
    had  produced  a  witness  statement,  it  is  difficult  to  see  what
    explanation could have been given, and indeed there is no detail  given
    as to the explanation that was found implausible.  This finding has  in
    turn impacted on the judge's credibility findings in  relation  to  the
    first Appellant.


17. As was accepted by Mr. Kotas, I find that this mistake of fact  amounts
    to a material error of law.


18. I find that, as a result of making a mistake of fact  relating  to  Mr.
    [O]'s evidence, the judge found the first Appellant, the mother of  the
    second and third Appellants, to be  lacking  in  credibility.   Witness
    evidence was provided from the second and third Appellants' father, and
    also from their aunt and another close friend.  There is  no  reference
    in the decision to any of this evidence.  Both of these  issues  impact
    on the assessment of the best interests of  the  children,  as  without
    consideration of  all  of  the  evidence,  a  full  assessment  of  the
    children's best interests cannot be carried out.  I therefore find that
    the best interests assessment carried out in the First-tier Tribunal is
    not sufficient, given that  it  follows  on  from  adverse  credibility
    findings having been made,  and  a  failure  to  consider  all  of  the
    evidence.


19. I accept that the second and third Appellant's father does  not  appear
    to have leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  However, it is  not  as
    simple as stating that he could choose to return to Sierra  Leone  with
    the children as he is Nigerian.  The assessment of the  best  interests
    of the children will need to consider the impact  of  their  return  to
    Sierra Leone with their father remaining in  the  United  Kingdom,  and
    also with him returning to Nigeria.


20. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, taking into  account  the
    fact that a full best interests assessment needs to  be  made  for  the
    second and third  Appellants,  and  having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective, I find that it is appropriate to  remit  this  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.   No  findings  are
    preserved.


22. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.


23. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 27 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


