
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06163/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |                 Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                             |
|On 23 November 2015                    |                 On 7 December 2015     |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               Muhammad Jamil
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms S Sreeraman of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:     No appearance by Addison & Khan, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent ("the Applicant") is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  on  4
    August 1989.  On 23 June 2012  he  entered  with  leave  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant expiring on 29 July 2013.  In time he applied
    for further leave in the same capacity  and  on  15  January  2014  the
    Appellant (the SSHD) refused his application and made a decision  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006  to
    remove him to Pakistan.

The SSHD's Decision

 2. The SSHD refused the application because the Applicant had not provided
    evidence that he held sufficient funds as  required  under  Appendix  C
    (Maintenance (Funds)) of the Immigration Rules.

 3. On 30 January 2014 the Applicant, through his solicitors, lodged notice
    of appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 as amended.  The grounds assert the decision under Section  47
    of the 2006 Act is not in accordance with the law; that  the  Applicant
    has sufficient funds as required under Appendix  C  and  the  SSHD  had
    failed to apply her "evidential flexibility policy" as outlined in  the
    determination in Rodriguez v SSHD [2013] UKUT 42 (IAC).   Reference  is
    made to the consideration of post-decision evidence and  relevant  case
    law.  A claim is also made that the removal of the Applicant will place
    the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations to respect his  private
    and family life protected by Article 8 of the European Convention.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 4. By a determination promulgated on 9 July 2014 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Troup allowed the appeal exclusively on human rights  grounds.
    Both parties were represented at the hearing  and  the  Applicant  gave
    evidence that his then present course of study would come to an end  in
    April 2015.

 5. On 2 September 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Foudy granted  the
    SSHD permission to appeal on the ground that the Judge had erred in his
    approach to the Article 8 claim and in his assessment whether it  would
    be unduly harsh to expect the Applicant to return to Pakistan.

 6. Further, the Judge had found the Applicant had failed  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  but  had  not  explained  what
    factors weighed in his mind which led him to allow the appeal on  human
    rights  grounds.   He  had  also  failed  to  take  into  account   the
    jurisprudence in the determination in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules  -
    correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. There was no appearance  by  the  Applicant  or  his  solicitors.   The
    Tribunal clerk telephoned the solicitors and told me she had spoken  to
    a Ms Tahsin who informed her that the firm was no  longer  representing
    the Applicant.  This was the first communication on the  Tribunal  file
    that they had ceased to represent the Applicant.

 8. I was satisfied the Applicant and his solicitors had been given  notice
    of the time, date and place set for the hearing in accordance with Rule
    36 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as amended and
    that having regard to the overriding objective including the  interests
    of justice and having considered the issues likely to be raised by  the
    appeal, I decided to proceed under Procedure Rule 38 with  the  hearing
    in the absence of the Applicant or any representative for him.

 9. Ms Sreeraman for the SSHD relied  on  the  grounds  for  permission  to
    appeal.  The Judge in his consideration of the claim under Article 8 of
    the  European  Convention  had  failed  to  take   into   account   the
    jurisprudence in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and R (Nagre)
    v SSHD [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin)  and  the  determination  in  Gulshan.
    Further, the Judge had failed to give adequate reasons to  explain  why
    the appeal had been allowed on human rights grounds.

10. The Judge had found at paragraph  14  of  his  determination  that  the
    Applicant did not satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules and
    in the next paragraph found he had sufficient financial  resources  but
    failed to indicate the evidence upon which he had based  that  finding.
    Further, his assessment of the proportionality of the decision  in  his
    consideration of the  human  rights  claim  was  fundamentally  flawed,
    because it was inadequately reasoned.

Findings and Consideration

11. The Judge dismissed the appeal under Part 6A of the Immigration  Rules.
    By the date of the SSHD's original decision the "evidential flexibility
    policy" had been incorporated into the Immigration Rules  as  paragraph
    245AA. The Applicant has not  produced  a  copy  of  his  statement  of
    account subsequent to 13 February 2013  so  even  if  the  judgment  in
    Mandalia v SSHD [2015]  UKSC  59  has  application  to  this  case  the
    Applicant cannot succeed for lack of the relevant evidence. Further and
    more pertinently, there was no cross-appeal by  the  Applicant  against
    the dismissal of the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

12. The law in relation to the treatment of claims under Article 8  of  the
    European Convention has moved  on  since  the  SSHD's  application  for
    permission to appeal and it is not  necessary  to  consider  the  cases
    expressly mentioned in the grounds and  already  cited.   However,  the
    Judge failed to adopt the structured analysis of claims under Article 8
    recommended in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

13. The Judge did not consider the relevant factors identified in s.117B of
    the 2002 Act. The Judge in his finding about the Applicant's  financial
    resources did not  make  reference  to  the  evidence  upon  which  his
    conclusion was reached and his assessment of the proportionality of the
    decision was inadequately reasoned.  These matters amount  to  material
    errors  of  law  such  that  the  determination  in  relation  to   the
    consideration of the claim under  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules should be set aside and that aspect of the appeal re-decided.

14. I first have regard to the factors referred to in  s.117  of  the  2002
    Act. There was no evidence  before  the  Tribunal  of  the  Applicant's
    ability to speak English although given the time he has been  here  and
    his claimed studies I am prepared for the time being to assume that  he
    is able to speak English. The Applicant has not adequately shown he  is
    financially independent. Other than his studies there was  no  evidence
    of any private and family life in the United Kingdom.

15. The Appellant has established a private life  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The evidence of this is limited to his studies.  His  proposed  removal
    would interfere with that  private  life.   However,  and  particularly
    bearing in mind that his course of  studies  finished  in  April  2015,
    there was no evidence that  such  interference  would  be  sufficiently
    serious to engage the state's obligations under Article  8.   For  this
    reason, the appeal under Article 8 human rights appeal must also fail.

16. If the Applicant can show that he left  the  United  Kingdom  within  a
    reasonable time of completing  his  studies  in  April  2015  then  the
    dismissal of this appeal should not be taken adversely when considering
    any future application he may make from overseas.

Anonymity

17. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the papers in the Tribunal file and heard the appeal, I  find  none  is
    warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error
    of law such that its consideration  of  the  Applicant's  human  rights
    claim must be set aside.  The decision on the human rights appeal is re-
    made and the Applicant's human rights claim is dismissed.

Signed/Official Crest                                                   Date
30. xi. 2015




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

The Applicant's appeal has been dismissed so no fee award may be made.

Signed/Official Crest      Date 30. xi. 2015


Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

