
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06928/2015
                                                               IA/06926/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th September 2016               |On 22nd September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE of the UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             MRS GANGA SHRESTHA
                                MR ASHISH RAI
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                       Claimants/Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Aslam (Counsel instructed by Mailk & Co
Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this matter is the Secretary  of  State  and  I  shall
    refer to the parties as  the  "the  Secretary  of  State"  and  to  the
    respondents Mrs Shrestha and Mr Rai as "the Claimants".  The  Claimants
    are a married couple and are citizens of Nepal. This is an error of law
     hearing which comes before me for consideration as to whether  or  not
    there is a material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Hendry) ("FtT") promulgated by on 18.3.2016 in which he
    allowed the appeals of the Claimants under Article  8  outside  of  the
    rules.

The FtT decision

2.   The FtT found that the Claimants could not meet the  Immigration  Rules
    for family or private life.  The  FtT  found  compelling  circumstances
    existed, namely that following the earthquake in Nepal  in  April  2015
    the homes and businesses of the Claimants families had  been  destroyed
    and that it would be a disproportionate interference with their private
    lives if required to return to Nepal in such circumstances [57 - 61].

Grounds of application for permission

3.   The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds that the FtT failed

    -    to explain how an earthquake could interfere with family life when
         the claimants would be returning as a couple and were adults.

    -    why the Claimants should be put in a better  position  that  other
         Nepalese who had endured the earthquake.

    -    to  acknowledge  that  Government  support  was  available  for  a
         temporary period and found that the Claimants would be homeless.

    -    failed to consider that the Claimants could  relocate  to  another
         area in Nepal where they could find accommodation and employment.

4.   There  had  been  no  express  consideration  of  the  public  interest
    factors, specifically that  the  private  lives  had  been  established
    during a time when their immigration status was precarious (AM (S 117B)
    Malawi 2015 UKUT 0260 (IAC)).

Permission

5.   Permission was granted by FtT Judge Ransley on all grounds.

Submisssions

6.   Both representatives made submissions.  Ms Ahmad relied on the  grounds
    of appeal and argued that the FtT  erred  by  failing  to  specifically
    address section 117 public interest factors  [59]  and   there  was  no
    evidence to show that the links with Nepal were  severed   or  why  the
    earthquake impacted on their private lives and why the Claimants should
    be in a better position than other Nepalese people.  She relied  on  AM
    (Malawi) (cited above), Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA  Civ  803  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal decisions dealing with private  life  for  students  (Nasim  &
    Others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) and Patel & Others [2013]  UKSC
    72).

7.   Mr  Aslam  submitted  that  the  FtT  had  produced  a    detailed  and
    considered decision and reasons in which the Rules are  considered  and
    the proper approach taken to Article 8 outside of the  Rules  following
    Razgar.  He accepted that family life was not a relevant issue  in  the
    appeal given the Claimants would be returning together.  The FtT  found
    that the earthquake was an exceptional factor in the light of the  fact
    that the Claimants families lived in an area effected by the quake  and
    they  were  homeless  and  had  no  means  of  survival.    There   was
    photographic evidence in support.

8.   The FtT was not required to recite section 117 but to  have  regard  to
    relevant factors [59].  The Claimants had made in time applications and
    were not over stayers as in  Rhuppiah.   The  fact  of  the  earthquake
    enabled the FtT to make  the  findings  that  the  Claimants  would  be
    homeless and without employment and were open to it to make.

Discussion and conclusion

9.   I find that there was a material error of law in the decision  made  by
    the FtT which I set aside.  Following the approach in the  cases  cited
    by the Secretary of State as to the limited scope of private lives  for
    students under Article 8 and the public interest factors  now  codified
    in section 117, I am satisfied that the FtT made a misdirection in  law
    and further in differentiating the  Claimants  appeals  from  those  in
    Nasim and Patel.  The FtT cited section 117 but did  not  consider  the
    relevant provision under  section  117B(5)  as  to  the  weight  to  be
    attached to private life established in precarious  circumstances.  The
    FtT placed too much weight on the  occurrence  of  the  earthquake  and
    failed to make specific findings as to how it impacted on or interfered
    with the private lives of the Claimants.  Reference  was  made  to  the
    likelihood of their being homelessness and jobless  but  there  was  no
    consideration of why they could not move to a  less  effected  area  in
    Nepal or why their supporters in the UK would not be able  to  continue
    to provide financial support in Nepal.

10.  The FtT  failed  to  consider  that  the  Claimants  were  student  and
    dependent spouse and  that  their  leave  in  that  capacity  would  be
    temporary and limited and not capable of engaging Article 8,  and  that
    there was no expectation of  staying  in  the  UK  beyond  that  period
    (Patel [57]).

Remaking the decision

11.   In   remaking   the   decision   I   heard   submissions   from   both
    representatives.  Mr Aslam indicated that upto date objective  evidence
    should be obtained on the situation in Nepal. I did not  consider  that
    such general evidence would be relevant. I determine this appeal on the
    evidence that was before the FtT.

12.  I find that the Claimants have established private lives in the  UK  by
    reasons of the length of residence (7 years)  during  which  they  have
    studied  and  worked.   They  have   friends   and   live   in   rented
    accommodation.  In the event of returning to Nepal they would cease  to
    have the standard of living and opportunities available to them in  the
    UK by reasons of  the  earthquake.   The  decision  is  lawful  as  the
    Claimants do not meet the Immigration Rules. The  question  is  whether
    the interference is proportionate having regard to the public  interest
    or whether the interests of the Claimants could  outweigh  that  public
    interest.  In considering the same I refer to section 117B Nationality,
    Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 as amended by the Immigration Act 2014.

13.  The Claimants were student and dependent husband  and  their  leave  in
    that capacity  ended  in  2014.   The  Claimant  has  obtained  various
    qualifications and her husband gained work  experience  and  earned  an
    income from employment. They both speak English and have been supported
    financially by friends since the student visa expired.  They have lived
    lawfully in the UK throughout.  However, their private lives have  been
    established when in a precarious situation with no expectation of being
    able to remain in the  UK  in  any  other  capacity.   Section  117B(5)
    provides that little weight is to be placed on private lives  developed
    when their immigration status is precarious.  It  is  not  unreasonable
    for persons who obtained leave as a student to leave at the end of  the
    period of study.  There was no evidence to show that the Claimants  had
    developed especially strong private lives in  the  UK  such  that  they
    should be accorded greater weight in the Article 8 balancing  exercise.



14.  I fully acknowledge that the  earthquake  could  have  some  impact  on
    their lives in Nepal as it has for Nepalese people  living  there,  but
    this is not a factor that can be relevant unless it can be  shown  that
    the Claimants meet Article 3 or that the Claimants themselves would  be
    effected by the earthquake amounting to   compelling  circumstances  to
    justify a departure from Section 117B.  Their families are living  with
    Government support and have temporary accommodation.  The Claimants are
    better placed to obtain employment and accommodation having  benefitted
    from studying and working in the UK.  There was no evidence to show why
    the Claimants should be in a better position than those already  living
    in Nepal.



Decision

There is a material error of law in the decision which shall be set aside.

I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.




                               Signed   Date 21.9.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






                               NO ANONYMITY ORDER
                               NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed   Date 21.9.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
