





UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06981/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Determination & Reasons           |
|                                  |Promulgated                       |
|On: 19 November 2014              |On: 15 December 2014              |
|                                  |                                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   Mrs Erandathie Jayasundara Muiyanselage
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Seelhof, A. Seelhof Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
 1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  "the
    secretary of state" and to the respondent as "the claimant."
 2. The claimant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 9 September 1960.  Her
    appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  refusing  her  further
    leave to remain as the spouse of a person present and settled in the UK
    was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin in a  determination
    promulgated on 4 September 2014. She dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules but allowed it on human rights grounds  (Article  8).
    She considered as a preliminary issue whether she had  jurisdiction  to
    hear the appeal, which is considered below.
 3. The evidence before her established that the claimant entered the UK as
    a Tier 5 Migrant, as the private servant  in  a  diplomatic  household,
    with the Singapore High Commission, valid until 26 November 2013.
 4. She claimed that they did not treat  her  well  and  so  she  left  her
    employment on 7 November 2012.
 5. The secretary of state  subsequently  received  notification  from  the
    Singapore High Commission that the claimant had ceased to be  employed.
    A decision was then taken to curtail her leave to enter so as to expire
    on 29 April 2013.
 6. The variation of leave notice dated 28 February 2013 was  addressed  to
    the appellant at the Singapore High Commission.
 7. The claimant married her husband, a British citizen, on  9  July  2014.
    She began living with him in January 2013 and  has  continued  to  live
    with him.
 8. They decided to get married so that they could stay together. They  had
    problems arranging the wedding. She ended  up  having  to  put  in  her
    application before the wedding. Eventually, the  Home  Office  provided
    copies of her passport so that they were able to marry on 9  July  2014
    [4].
 9. Her husband receives Disability Allowance and owns his  home.  She  has
    taken courses accredited by the British Council at the A2-B1  level  of
    the English language, above the level required in  Appendix  O  of  the
    Immigration Rules. She was unable to take any of the tests specified in
    that appendix without her passport, which was being held  by  the  Home
    Office [5].
10. Under cross-examination she said that she left her employment with  the
    diplomatic family on 7 November 2012 and went to live  with  a  friend.
    She did not inform the Home Office of her new address [6].
11. Her husband gave evidence.  He is 68 years old; he lost his partner  of
    39 years about eight months before he met the claimant. He was at a low
    point in his life. He invited the claimant to move in in  January  2013
    after she had problems with her employer.
12. Judge Colvin considered as a preliminary issue whether the secretary of
    state's  curtailment  notice  was  valid.  It  was  accepted  that  the
    curtailment notice was not communicated to the  claimant  and  had  not
    come to her attention. She found that  the  Singapore  High  Commission
    where the secretary of state sent the notice of  curtailment,  had  not
    been authorised to receive that notice on her behalf, so as to make  it
    effective. The commission had ceased acting as her sponsor at the  time
    that it was sent [18].
13. Judge Colvin thus found that the claimant's leave  to  remain  had  not
    been validly terminated with the result that she had leave to remain at
    the time that she made her application for further leave to remain as a
    spouse.
14. Two issues were raised by the secretary of state as to her claim  under
    Appendix FM. The first was whether their relationship was  genuine  and
    subsisting. The second issue related to the English language test.
15. The Judge found that their  relationship  was  genuine  and  subsisting
    [21].
16. The claimant spoke English at the hearing. This is the common  language
    between her and her husband. She also  completed  an  English  language
    course from December 2013 to June 2014, passing a pre-intermediate exam
    with a score of  132/200  at  the  Golders  Green  College.  The  Judge
    accepted that this was at  a  higher  level  than  the  CEFR  A1  level
    required under Appendix FM [22].
17. However, Judge Colvin found that she had not passed  the  test  with  a
    provider approved by the secretary of state even though  Golders  Green
    College was accredited by the British Council. She had not been able to
    do the test with such provider as she had been unable  to  produce  her
    passport, which was with the Home Office [22].
18. Judge Colvin was satisfied that the claimant had shown on  the  balance
    of probabilities that she  has  the  required  speaking  and  listening
    English language skills to the required level of A1. However, this  had
    not been undertaken with an approved provider. She found that  she  had
    no discretion. A "near miss" approach could not be applied.
19. She  accordingly  found  that  the  claimant  had  not  fulfilled  this
    requirement under Appendix FM. She dismissed the appeal under the rules
    - solely on the basis of her not  being  able  to  provide  an  English
    language test result with an approved provider in the  absence  of  her
    passport currently held by the Home Office and despite  the  fact  that
    she had already attained a successful  test  in  the  English  language
    higher than the level required under Appendix FM [24].
20. Judge Colvin then assessed her claim under Article 8 (Family Life). She
    referred to and directed herself in  accordance  with  recent  relevant
    decisions, including Shahzad (Art 8: Legitimate Aim) [2014] UKUT 00085,
    namely, that after applying the requirements  of  the  rules,  only  if
    there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside
    them is it necessary for Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider
    whether there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised
    under them [25].
21. She considered that the evidence in this case "....means that there are
    arguably good grounds to consider Article 8 more generally in terms  of
    compelling circumstances".
22. The principal ground is that she is married to a person who requires  a
    carer because of his medical condition. It  is  accepted  that  she  is
    undertaking this role. That is a  matter  not  sufficiently  recognised
    under the "new rules". There would be nothing gained in  terms  of  the
    wider public interest in requiring her to return to Sri Lanka in  order
    to make a spouse application,  after  taking  into  account  the  costs
    involved and the hardship that would be caused to her husband in  terms
    of his daily caring needs in her absence. [26]
23. That remained her view after taking into account  the  public  interest
    provisions under s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and asylum  Act
    2002.
24. She accordingly allowed the appeal under Article 8.
25. On 15 October 2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  T  R  P  Hollingworth
    granted the secretary of state permission to appeal.  It  was  arguable
    that the preliminary decision regarding the issue of the curtailment of
    the notice "is flawed." The onus 'was  clearly  on  the  appellant'  to
    inform the Home Office of any material change in her circumstances.
26. It was also arguable that "...an inadequate evaluation of Article 8 has
    been made attaching insufficient weight to  the  issue  of  exceptional
    circumstance  given  that  the  claimant  would  have   no   legitimate
    expectation of remaining in this  country  at  the  conclusion  of  her
    leave".
Hearing on 19 November 2014
27. Mr Nath contended that the secretary of state had properly  served  the
    curtailment notice at the claimant's last known address  she  held  for
    the claimant. The onus was not on the secretary of state to  trace  the
    claimant where she had shown a blatant attempt to evade the immigration
    authorities by failing to keep in contact with them.  Accordingly,  her
    leave did not continue.
28. Further, the Judge  failed  to  identify  why  her  circumstances  were
    compelling, and thus amounting to exceptional circumstances  warranting
    a grant of leave outside the rules. The Tribunal had failed to  provide
    adequate reasons. Her stay had always  been  temporary.  She  had  been
    fully aware that her stay was precarious. There were no  insurmountable
    obstacles to her partner relocating to Sri  Lanka  to  continue  family
    life there. If he remained here, they could communicate with each other
    using modern methods and visits. It would be proportionate for  her  to
    return to Sri Lanka to obtain the appropriate entry clearance.
29. Mr Seelhof submitted that the Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003
    did not apply to the claimant's situation. The  notice  of  curtailment
    had not been validly served upon the claimant. There is nothing in  the
    notice regulations about deemed service.
30. The secretary of state has to be able to prove that notice  of  such  a
    decision was communicated to  the  claimant  in  order  for  it  to  be
    effective. Such communication will be effective if  made  to  a  person
    authorised to receive it on that person's behalf. The Upper Tribunal in
    Syed (Curtailment of Leave - Notice) [2013] UKUT 00144 (IAC) held  that
    there was no  statutory  instrument  under  the  1971  Immigration  Act
    dealing with the means of giving notice for the purposes of s. 4(1)  of
    a decision under that Act, which is not an immigration decision.
31. The secretary of state accordingly has to be able to prove that  notice
    of such a decision was communicated to the person concerned.  In  order
    for it to be effective.  Communication will be effective if made  to  a
    person authorised to receive  it  on  that  person's  behalf  Hosier  v
    Goodall [1962] 1 All ER 30
32. In Hosier,  the  notice  was  sent  to  the  defendant's  residence  by
    registered post. This was notice of an intended prosecution. He was  in
    hospital to the knowledge of the police. The notice was received by his
    wife. It was not communicated to the defendant.
33. Lord Parker CJ found that the appellant who was in hospital  was  being
    brought letters by his wife and was reading them. His wife had accepted
    the registered letter containing the notice  of  intended  prosecution,
    opened it, but chose not to show it to him  as  he  would  be  worried.
    Accordingly, the notice was sent to his home address and was  taken  in
    by his wife. It was thus "an irresistible inference" that the wife  was
    fully authorised to take it in and deal with the registered letter, and
    that the receipt by her was in fact receipt by the  defendant  in  that
    case.
34. Mr Seelhof submitted that there was no such inference capable of  being
    drawn  in  this  case.  During  the  course   of   the   hearing,   the
    representatives at my request, considered whether there  had  been  any
    conditions that accompanied the grant of the claimant's visa  requiring
    her to inform the Home Office of a change of  circumstances,  including
    any change to her address.
35. It was accepted that no such conditions applied in her case. There  was
    nothing  specific  in  the  rules  relating  to   the   claimant.   The
    relationship in her case was between her employer, the High Commission,
    and the Home Office. The obligation regarding a change in circumstances
    rested with the High Commission. It was in fact the High Commission who
    notified the secretary of state that the claimant had left employment.
36. Mr Seelhof thus submitted accordingly that  the  First-tier  Judge  had
    been entitled to come to the conclusion she arrived at.
37. With regard to the Article 8 claim, the Judge had regard to that  claim
    on the basis of her having found with regard to Appendix FM,  that  all
    the requirements had been met apart from  the  failure  to  provide  an
    English test certificate. The Judge took into account that the claimant
    had been unable to do the test in accordance with the rules as she  had
    no passport available at the time, which the  appropriate  test  centre
    required before administering the test.  The circumstances relating  to
    the appellant included the interests of her husband.
38. The Judge accordingly found that it would be disproportionate to expect
    her to have to go through the process suggested  by  the  secretary  of
    state, particularly having regard to the fact that she spoke English to
    a higher level than that required.  In  that  respect,  the  Judge  had
    regard to the fact that she gave oral evidence without an  interpreter.
    [4]
39. Further, her husband's circumstances,  including  his  health  problems
    such  as  lumbar  spinal  stenosis,  coronary  artery   disease,   left
    ventricular heart disease and depression resulted in  his  need  for  a
    carer for most of the time [5].
40. Her husband confirmed that he received disability living allowance  and
    has severe disablement allowance  as  well.  He  confirmed  his  health
    problems described by the claimant. He also confirmed that the claimant
    is his carer.
41. The cross examination recorded at paragraph 8 did  not  challenge  that
    evidence.
42. Mr Seelhof also relied on the recent decision from  the  Administrative
    Court in Ganesabalan [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin).  Appendix  FM  and  Rule
    276ADE are not a "complete code" as far as Article 8  compatibility  is
    concerned.
43. He relied on MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and MM  (Lebanon)
    v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985, where the  Court  of  Appeal  endorsed  the
    approach in MF that the exceptional circumstances to be  considered  in
    the balancing exercise involve the  application  of  a  proportionality
    test as required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence. It was  necessary  to
    apply a proportionality test. In MM the Court of Appeal  described  the
    proportionality test guided by the Huang and UK and Strasbourg case law
    (paragraph 130).
44. Mr Seelhof produced the original of the English language course showing
    that the claimant passed the pre-intermediate exam and  scored  132-200
    (CEFR A2-B1). The course is accredited by the British Council as  noted
    and set out in the certificate itself.
Assessment
45. The secretary of state asserted that  the  claimant  had  no  right  of
    appeal following the refusal of her application, made  on  25  November
    2013 for leave to remain as the spouse of a person present and  settled
    in the UK.  It is contended that her leave to remain had expired on  29
    April 2013. She thus did not have any leave to remain at  the  date  of
    her application and accordingly had no  right  of  appeal  against  the
    refusal.
46. I have had regard to Judge Hollingworth's comments at  paragraph  2  of
    his decision granting the secretary of state permission to  appeal.  He
    stated that the onus was clearly on the claimant  to  inform  the  Home
    Office of any  material  changes  in  her  circumstances.  However,  as
    already indicated, the basis for such  broad  assertion  has  not  been
    shown to relate to the claimant.
47. I have had regard  to  the  decision  in  Syed,  supra.   Mr  Nath  has
    submitted that the High  Commission  in  this  case  was  the  "person"
    authorised to receive the decision on behalf of the claimant.  However,
    no evidence or any documentation has been produced seeking  to  justify
    that assertion. The claimant  had  already  left  her  employment.  The
    relationship with the High Commission had accordingly come to an end.
48. In order to justify the assertion that the communication was  effective
    it would have to be shown that  the  High  Commission  was  the  person
    authorised to receive it on the claimant's behalf.
49. I have had regard to the decision before the Queen's Bench Division  in
    Hosier, supra. I do not find that it was  "an  irresistible  inference"
    that the High Commission was fully authorised to receive and deal  with
    the curtailment notice.
50. I accordingly find that the claimant's leave has not been shown to have
    been lawfully curtailed. I find that the notice of curtailment  of  her
    leave had not been validly  served  upon  her.  Accordingly  her  leave
    continued until 26 November 2013. She  thus  made  her  application  in
    time.
51. The claimant's passport was at all material times  being  held  by  the
    Home Office and she had accordingly not been able to sit a test  listed
    by one of the providers in the appendix to the rules.
52. She did however attend courses accredited by the British Council of the
    Higher A2-B1 level and passed the associated examination. She also gave
    evidence in English and she communicates in English with her husband.
53. Insofar  as  the  Article  8  claim  is  concerned,  Judge  Colvin  has
    adequately directed herself [25]. She found on the evidence that  there
    were compelling circumstances justifying the consideration of  "Article
    8 more  generally."  There  were  matters  raised  that  had  not  been
    sufficiently recognised under the new rules. She also found that  there
    was not anything to be gained in  terms  of  a  wider  public  interest
    requiring her to return to Sri Lanka to make a spouse application;  she
    had regard to the cost involved and the hardship that would  be  caused
    to her husband who required daily care for his needs.
54. She properly took into account the provisions of  s.117B  of  the  2002
    Act, finding on the  available  evidence  that  there  were  no  public
    interest provisions applicable in her case.
55. The Judge found that her claim failed by reference  to  the  applicable
    immigration rules. In the reasons for refusal, the secretary  of  state
    simply stated that it had been decided that  her  application  did  not
    raise or contain any  exceptional  circumstances  consistent  with  the
    right to respect for family and private life  contained  in  Article  8
    warranting consideration by her of a grant of leave outside the  rules.
    The secretary of state did not provide any reasons for that assertion.
56. Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE are not a complete code insofar as  Article
    8 compatibility is concerned: Ganesabalan, supra, at paragraph  10.  In
    MM (Lebanon), supra, the Court of Appeal  held  that  if  the  relevant
    group  of  immigration  rules  is  not  a  complete   code   then   the
    proportionality test will be more at large, albeit guided by the  Huang
    tests and UK and Strasbourg case law.
57. The Immigration Directorate instructions  relating  to  family  members
    under  the  immigration  rules,  dated  December  2012,  provide   that
    "exceptional"  does  not  mean   "unusual"   or   unique.   They   mean
    circumstances in which the refusal would result in unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences  for  the  individual  such  that  the  refusal   of   the
    application would not be proportionate.
58. The secretary of state contends that the  Tribunal  failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons why the claimant's circumstances are either compelling
    or exceptional. There are in particular no insurmountable obstacles  to
    her partner relocating to Sri Lanka to continue family life there.
59. The Judge had earlier considered all  the  relevant  evidence  in  this
    respect at paragraphs 21 to 23.   She  set  out  the  medical  evidence
    produced in respect of Mr Kapadia, the claimant's husband and his  need
    for a carer being in attendance. Judge Colvin has summarised the  basis
    for her findings at paragraph 26 of the  determination.  She  also  had
    regard to the evidence that the financial requirements  under  Appendix
    FM have been met. In addition, the claimant had been in the UK lawfully
    since she met and married her husband.
60. She noted that the appellant had been  unable  to  provide  an  English
    language test result for the purposes of Appendix FM with  an  approved
    provider as her  passport  was  currently  held  by  the  Home  Office.
    However, she had obtained a  successful  test  result  in  the  English
    language which was at a higher level than that required under  Appendix
    FM.
61. Having regard to all those circumstances, the Judge found that  nothing
    would be gained in terms of the wider public interest in requiring  her
    to return to Sri Lanka to make an application for entry clearance.
62. She has provided adequate  reasons  for  her  conclusions.  These  were
    findings which were available to her on the evidence produced. There is
    nothing irrational or perverse in the findings.
    Decision
    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
    making of any     material error on a point of law.  The  determination
    shall accordingly stand.
    No anonymity direction made.




                               Signed   Date 12 December 2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

