
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA061602015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th June 2016                     |On 14th April 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mrs Ashna Abdulrahman Awla
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Trussler, Counsel, instructed by First Choice
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For ease of comprehension the parties are referred to by  their  status
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Howard  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of  State's  decision  dated  28th  January  2015
    notifying the Appellant of her liability to removal pursuant to Section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 and refusing  to
    vary leave to  remain  in  the  UK  pursuant  to  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  its  decision   allowing   the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision on 22nd July 2015.
      The  Respondent  appealed  against  that  decision  and  was  granted
    permission to appeal by Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Garratt.
    The grounds  upon  which  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  may  be
    summarised as follows.
      i) It is arguable that the judge  did  not  apply  the  provisions  of
         Section 117B of the 2002 Act correctly.  In  particular  the  judge
         was wrong to allow the appeal on the basis that the Appellant would
         be taking a course in the English language and failed to take  into
         account the public interest in a person seeking to enter or  remain
         in the UK who could already speak English.

Error of Law

 4. At the close of  submissions  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision.  I find that there is no  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  My reasons for so finding are as follows.

 5. Mr Mills submitted that it was  in  the  public  interest  that  people
    applying for leave to remain  needed  to  speak  English  according  to
    Section 117B(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    However, Mr Mills said that the considerations under 117B(2)  are  such
    that the judge simply needed to take into account and  have  regard  to
    those considerations, which he accepts the judge did do.

 6. Mr Trussler, advancing upon this position,  highlighted  quite  rightly
    that the judge at  paragraph  23  of  his  determination  set  out  the
    entirety of Section 117B that was relevant to the  appeal.   The  judge
    went on to consider the public interest in explicit terms finding  that
    in relation to 117B(2), which concerns  that  the  public  interest  is
    focussed upon persons being able to speak English because that  ability
    will make them less of a burden on taxpayers  and  be  better  able  to
    integrate into society.

 7. The judge considered these very factors in his determination given that
    he found that the husband was in employment and as such  the  Appellant
    would "not be a burden to the taxpayer" and  in  respect  of  paragraph
    117B(2)(b) that the Appellant was  "integrating  herself  into  society
    through the work she was doing at college".  Consequently it cannot  be
    said that the judge failed to consider or have  regard  to  the  public
    interest considerations specified under Section 117B of  the  2002  Act
    nor that he failed to consider the  public  interest  in  reaching  his
    decision.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  shall  stand  and  is  hereby
    affirmed.


Signed                                  Date 10 June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
