
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06035/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st June 2015                              |On 29th June 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                         Mrs Pearl Barbara De Silva
                          (NO aNONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, Counsel instructed by Indra Sebastian
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 19th October  1941  and
    she appeals the decision of  the  respondent  dated  9th  January  2014
    refusing to vary her leave to remain and deciding to remove her by  way
    of  directions  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum   and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  on  1st
    December 2012 and  on  29th  May  2013  she  made  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK outside the Immigration  Rules  on
    compassionate grounds.

 3. The respondent refused her application.  It was decided that there were
    no sufficiently  compelling  reasons  or  compassionate  factors  which
    justified allowing her to remain outside  Appendix  FM.   She  did  not
    fulfil the requirements under paragraph 276ADE.  There was no  evidence
    that  she  was  suffering  from  any  physical   or   other   condition
    notwithstanding her age of 72.  She did not appear to require care  and
    support and there was nothing to prevent  her  from  returning  to  Sri
    Lanka to live independently.  She was living independently in Sri Lanka
    as recently as November 2012 prior to her arrival in the UK  and  there
    was nothing to indicate that the financial support  from  her  daughter
    could not continue as it had prior to her  arrival.   Her  relationship
    with her daughter and her other daughter in the UK could be maintained.

 4. The appeal came before Judge Nightingale of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    She identified it was no longer permitted by the Immigration  Rules  to
    switch from visitor status to adult dependent  relative  "in  country".
    There was a clear requirement at E-ECDR for prior entry clearance.

 5. Judge Nightingale considered the matter outside the  Immigration  Rules
    and was urged, by  the  appellant's  representative,  to  consider  the
    matter in relation to the  Chikwamba  principle   (that  the  appellant
    fulfilled all but the formalities of the immigration  rules,  save  for
    failing to return to make an application from abroad, and  this  should
    reduce the weight of the Secretary of State's position).

 6. The judge identified that the appellant had arthritis and stated:

         "I have no doubts that her mobility is not as it was as  a  younger
         woman, but like Ms O'Sullivan I,  too,  found  that  the  appellant
         presented as a bright and articulate older woman  clearly  able  to
         engage with the questions put  to  her  and  with  no  difficulties
         understanding the proceedings.  I note that she has been  suffering
         from diabetes and hypertension, but this  has  been  for  over  ten
         years."

Application for Permission to Appeal

 7. An application was made to the First-tier Tribunal on  the  basis  that
    the judge overlooked key evidence and that the  judge  concentrated  on
    physical problems rather than her mental state which placed her at risk
    and  the  judge  also  erred  in  her  assessment  of  Ms  O'Sullivan's
    (Chartered Psychologist) report placing little  weight  on  it  on  the
    basis that Ms O'Sullivan did not have country evidence to  support  her
    opinion.  Ms O'Sullivan did assume that the care in Sri Lanka would  be
    provided by a competent carer rather than a family member.   There  was
    no reason not to accept the basis of Ms O'Sullivan's assessment and the
    judge had erred by failing to put considerable weight on it.

 8. In carrying out the  necessary  proportionality  exercise  the  judge's
    assessment would be undermined if the errors set out  above  were  made
    out.  The appellant's needs may not be on a par with the  appellant  in
    Akhalu (health claim: ECHR Article 8) [2013] UKUT 00400 (IAC) but  this
    did not mean that they could be ignored.

 9. The judge also erred by failing to consider the effect  of  removal  on
    all the people who shared family life following the principles in Beoku-
    Betts (FC) [2008] UKHL 39.

10. The application was  initially  refused  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Frankish but the application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal
    in the following terms.

11. Whilst it was correct to observe that there was no provision to make an
    in country application for  leave  to  remain  as  an  adult  dependent
    relative Chikwamba principles still  applied  and  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was in poor health and need of support provided good  reasons
    why they should not be required to leave the UK just to meet the formal
    requirements of having entry clearance.

12. It was again asserted that the judge had failed to take account of  all
    the evidence, in particular Ms O'Sullivan's report,  and  the  findings
    showed that the judge had misunderstood the report.  Ms O'Sullivan  had
    assumed that there was competent care in Sri Lanka and contrasted  that
    to the care provided by family members.  In those circumstances it  was
    immaterial that she did not  have  country  evidence.   The  assessment
    should have been given more weight.

13. In the event permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McWilliam on the basis that the judge  did  not  properly  engage
    with clinical opinion of psychologist.

14. In his submissions before me Mr Martin relied on the written grounds of
    appeal and in particular referred  to  the  table  in  Ms  O'Sullivan's
    report and referred to the issues whereby she had doubled the risk such
    as money management,  transportation,  shopping,  laundering  and  home
    maintenance.  Ms O'Sullivan explained why they carried  more  risk  and
    how her family was concerned that she would be at  risk  of  coping  in
    relation to the particular tasks.   The  judge  did  not  identify  the
    difference between the assistance  given  between  family  members  and
    someone not well-known.  The judge had not properly taken into  account
    the report on a misapprehension of the report.

15. Also, having accepted family life she had not  looked  at  the  adverse
    impact on those family members.

16. Ms Fijiwala submitted that following the case of R (on the  application
    of Chen) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Appendix  FM  -
    Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality) (IJR)  [2015]  UKUT
    00189 (IAC) Chikwamba clearly did not apply.  The Rules  could  not  be
    met.  Financial documents had not  been  submitted  and  there  was  no
    significant interference with family life through a temporary removal.

17. This was merely a disagreement with the findings.  The judge did  place
    weight on the report.  She found that  the  appellant  was  bright  and
    articulate.  At paragraph 35 the judge recorded that the expert assumed
    that care was not available and this was what the appellant and sponsor
    had told her.

18. The judge had looked at the overall mental state of the  appellant  and
    taken this into account and indeed at paragraph 46 referred to Akhalu.

19. Further she did go on to consider family life.  The judge  factored  in
    that the appellant had entered the UK as a visitor and used this  as  a
    vehicle to seek leave to remain whilst in the  country  and  circumvent
    the Immigration Rules.

20. Mr Martin submitted that the judge accepted the qualifications but what
    was central to the assessment is that the care was from a family member
    and the table should have been given greater weight.

Conclusions

21. I find no merit in the assertion that the judge  failed  to  apply  the
    Chikwamba principle appropriately.  As  Mr  Martin  stated,  the  judge
    correctly approached the appeal on the basis that the  appellant  could
    not meet the Rules because there is a clear requirement for prior entry
    clearance.  Nonetheless the judge took  into  consideration  E-ECDR.2.4
    and E-ECDR.2.5 when considering  the  appeal  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, which is what she must do, SS Congo v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 317.

22. As Ms  Fijiwala  pointed  out,  no  financial  documentation  had  been
    submitted in relation to the financial requirements and  the  documents
    in relation to long-term care were not part of  the  medical  evidence.
    It was not a mere formality that the appellant needed to return to make
    an application and indeed the judge found that  this  was  not  even  a
    'near miss' case at [41].

23. It was advanced that the judge had failed to take account  of  all  the
    evidence, and give  weight  to  Ms  O'Sullivan's  report  that  assumed
    competent care in Sri Lanka, and had misunderstood the  report,  as  it
    was immaterial that she did not have country evidence.  The  assessment
    should have been given more weight.

24. To that end the judge stated at paragraph 35:

         "In particular, I find nothing in  Ms  O'Sullivan's  qualifications
         that indicates she has any in-depth knowledge of, or experience in,
         the provision of social services to elderly people  in  Sri  Lanka.
         Indeed, there is nothing in the evidence before me  which  emanates
         from Sri Lanka, or  any  medical  organisation  in  Sri  Lanka,  or
         elsewhere, or any  person  in  Sri  Lanka  who  has  any  knowledge
         whatsoever of the social services  available there.  Her assumption
         is based on what she  has  been  told  by  the  appellant  and  the
         witness; that is to say that social services care of any  type  for
         the elderly is not available in Sri  Lanka.   I  am  therefore  un-
         persuaded on balance that this table is based  on  evidence  of  an
         objective nature.  Consequently, I find this of little weight."

25. BN (psychiatric evidence - discrepancies) Albania [2010] UKUT 279 (IAC)
    confirms that a judge  is  entitled  to  reject  a  clinical  diagnosis
    supported by expert evidence but she "must give clear reasons for doing
    so which engage adequately with  a  medical  opinion  representing  the
    judgment of a professional psychiatrist on what  he  has  seen  of  the
    appellant."

26. The judge did not dismiss the case on the  basis  of  the  lack  of  Ms
    O'Sullivan's knowledge  of  country  guidance  alone.   The  judge  had
    clearly stated  that  she  did  not  consider  the  information,  which
    contributed to the report, to be  factually  reliable  because  of  the
    desire of the witness and the appellant to remain in the UK.  The judge
    weighed  the  evidence  comprehensively.   She   rejected   the   table
    incorporated within the report for reasons which can be discerned  from
    an overall reading of the decision (and to which I return below).

27. It can be seen from paragraphs 34 and 35 of her decision that the judge
    did consider the physical and mental health of the appellant and  those
    elements of the care required and available to the  appellant  and  the
    judge from a comprehensive assessment of the  evidence,  which  she  is
    bound to undertake, stated:

         "I am satisfied that the appellant is 72 years of age and that  she
         suffers from arthritis.  I have no doubts that her mobility is  not
         as it was as a younger woman, but like Ms O'Sullivan I, too,  found
         that the appellant presented as a bright and articulate older woman
         clearly able to engage with the questions put to her  and  with  no
         difficulties understanding the proceedings.  I note  that  she  has
         been suffering from diabetes and hypertension, but  this  has  been
         for over ten years, according to the doctor's letter  at  page  26,
         and it appears that she has been treated for  those  conditions  in
         Sri Lanka satisfactorily.  She takes  some  painkilling  and  anti-
         inflammatory medication, ibuprofen and,  on  occasion,  diclofenic,
         for her arthritis.  There is no  indication  that  she  had  needed
         anything  stronger  than  this  by  way  of  medication   for   her
         arthritis."

28. From this it can be seen that the judge had made  a  finding  that  the
    appellant appeared to be a bright and articulate older woman  and  with
    the background of that finding went  on  to  consider  Ms  O'Sullivan's
    report.  Miao v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]  EWCA
    Civ 75 at paragraph 17 states:

         "A medical expert  witness's  function  is  precisely  to  give  an
         opinion on the basis of his clinical knowledge of the  patient  and
         of his field.  That is what Dr B... had done.  He could do no more,
         and in the absence of some good reason for doubting  his  expertise
         or  the  factual  or  logical  foundation  of  his   opinion,   the
         Immigration Judge was wrong to dismiss it  as  merely  an  opinion,
         much less to treat it as speculative or conjectural."

29. There can be no criticism that Judge Nightingale failed  to  take  into
    account  or  consider  the  Chartered  Psychologist's  report.   Having
    considered the CV  the  judge  recognised  [35]  that  the  expert  was
    suitably qualified and experienced to provide an expert opinion on the

         "basis of the information with which she has been provided'.

         She added

         'However, I note that that information is provided by the appellant
         and by the witness, both of  whom  wish  the  appellant  to  remain
         living in the UK."

30. Clearly the judge doubted the factual basis upon which the evidence was
    given and that said the judge proceeded

         "Ms O'Sullivan spent no more  than  a  couple  of  hours  with  the
         appellant and, indeed, not much more with the witness."

    It can be seen from the table with which the judge failed allegedly  to
    engage that there  were  tasks  such  as  telephoning,  transportation,
    shopping, laundering and home maintenance, with which the expert cannot
    have had within the space of  two  hours  the  opportunity  to  have  a
    comprehensive assessment.  The judge added at [35]:

         "Her opinions are based in the main on what she has  been  told  by
         the appellant and by the witness.  I had some difficulty  with  the
         table to which I was referred by Mr Martin.  In particular, I  find
         nothing in Ms O'Sullivan's qualifications that  indicates  she  has
         any in-depth knowledge of,  or  experience  in,  the  provision  of
         social services to elderly people in Sri Lanka."

31. At paragraph 36 the  judge  made  a  credibility  finding  against  the
    appellant and the witness and specifically found that:

         "I am urged to find that this has not been a  situation  whereby  a
         visit visa has been abused in order to  facilitate  entry  for  the
         purposes of settlement.  I am far from persuaded that this  is  so.
         It is said that the appellant signed over her home to her grandson,
         Joseph, at some time in 1990.  No evidence to this effect has  been
         produced, and I can find no reason as to why she would  do  such  a
         thing.  I can also find no reason as to why her  husband,  who  was
         alive at this time, would have consented to such an action.  It  is
         said that she also gave away all  her  land  and  property  to  her
         children  and  grandchildren  previously.   I  therefore  find   it
         entirely inconsistent  that  the  witness  should  have  said  that
         neither she nor her siblings had  any  land  or  interests  in  Sri
         Lanka.  I also note that the appellant says that her house had been
         signed over to her daughter-in-law by her  grandson  prior  to  her
         travelling.  This transaction had caused a  falling  out,  and  her
         daughter-in-law had started to stay at her father's house and  only
         'come and go' from the appellant's home.   Firstly,  the  appellant
         clearly managed to live alone in that  house,  being  visited  only
         occasionally by a sister-in-law,  for  some  months  prior  to  her
         arrival in the United Kingdom.  It certainly  seems  that  she  was
         capable of living independently for this  time.   Further,  if  the
         appellant is as close to the witness as claimed, then I can find no
         reason as to why the witness would have been unaware of this family
         altercation or why she would have not have taken  steps  to  ensure
         that her mother's situation in Sri Lanka was safeguarded."

32. The judge proceeded at paragraph 37 to find doubts as  to  whether  the
    appellant had indeed divested herself  of  property  as  there  was  no
    evidence provided to show this and added

         "I find it rather more likely than  not  that  the  matter  of  the
         appellant's house is  no  more  than  a  contrivance  in  order  to
         circumvent the requirements of the Immigration Rules for  entry  to
         the United Kingdom as a dependent relative."

33. The judge also found, taking into account Ms O'Sullivan's report, at 38
    that the appellant was during the assessment  "neat,  alert,  able  and
    engaged in the process of the assessment and  co-operative  and  polite
    throughout maintaining appropriate eye contact".  She was orientated in
    time and place.  The judge proceeded:

         "I find nothing in Ms O'Sullivan's report which leads me to find on
         balance that this appellant requires presently  long-term  personal
         care to perform everyday tasks."

34. Quite clearly the judge found on the evidence before her that she could
    not find that she required long-term personal care,  a  factor  in  the
    assessment of proportionality.

35. It was alleged that the judge had failed to understand the table as the
    expert did not need to have knowledge of the services available in  Sri
    Lanka to make such an assessment.  The fact is that the  judge  doubted
    the factual information which was clearly key and instrumental  in  the
    assessment of the report and  I  note  that  both  Mr  and  Mrs  Perera
    attended the  actual  assessment  and  gave  information  thereto.   At
    paragraph 6 the psychologist is clear that her assessment derives  from
    the views of Miss De Silva and Mr and Mrs Perera, together with her own
    observations.

36. Specifically at paragraph 6.8.2 of the report the expert stated:  "This
    assessment was assisted with the input of  Mr  and  Mr  [sic]  Perera."
    There can be no doubt that the level of risk may be  more  outside  the
    family but it is clear that the judge did take this  into  account  but
    without any knowledge of the standard of input in Sri Lanka  to  assess
    the increase in risk.  At [43] and [47] the judge accepted  that  there
    would be interference caused to the  family  or  private  life  of  the
    appellant and to her daughter and wider and extended family but made  a
    specific reference to the finding that this was  proportionate  to  the
    aim pursued.

37. There is no foundation to the assertion that the judge failed  to  take
    into account the mental health issues of the appellant and  indeed  the
    decision makes numerous references to the mental state of the appellant
    including, no less, extensive reference to the Clinical  Psychologist's
    report.  This expert's remit is in essence a report in relation to  the
    mental capacity of the appellant.  At [38]  the  judge  refers  to  her
    becoming  forgetful   and   saddened   but   that   she   "ceased   her
    antidepressants some time ago".

38. As in R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -   temporary   separation   -
    proportionality) (IJR) [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) it was open to the judge
    to take the  view  that  it  would  be  proportionate  to  require  the
    applicant to make an application for entry clearance from abroad but in
    this particular instance on the facts of the case the judge found  that
    the appellant was in the UK  on  a  temporary  basis  for  a  temporary
    purpose and that taking all the evidence in the round  she  found  that
    the  circumstances  did  not  compel  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules which reflected the  respondent's
    Article 8 obligations.

39. I do not accept that the judge failed to take into account the  medical
    conditions of the appellant and she addressed the question of the  care
    offered -or rather the evidence or lack of it relating to that - in her
    home country which was the correct approach. As stated in Akhalu at [2]
    of the headnote

         'The consequences of removal for the health of a claimant who would
         not be able to access equivalent health care in  their  country  of
         nationality as was available in this country are  plainly  relevant
         to the question of proportionality. But, when weighed  against  the
         public interest in ensuring that  the  limited  resources  of  this
         country's health service are  used  to  the  best  effect  for  the
         benefit of those for whom they are intended, those consequences  do
         not weigh heavily in the claimant's favour but  speak  cogently  in
         support of the public interests in removal'.

40.  The  arguments  raised  are  merely  disagreements  with  the   weight
    attributed to the evidence  by  the  judge,  who  adopted  the  correct
    approach to the proportionality exercise, and an overall reading of the
    decision discloses no error of law.

41. I find no error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    it shall stand.



Signed   Date 27th June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

