
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06683/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 September 2013                          |On 30 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                               muhammed israr

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell, Counsel instructed by Messrs Makka
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born on 2  October  1979  appeals,
    with permission, against a determination of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Widdup who in a  determination  promulgated  on  3  July  2013
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision by  the  respondent
    to refuse  to  grant  indefinite  leave  to  remain.   The  appellant's
    application had been made in March 2012 on the basis that he had  lived
    in Britain for more than fourteen  years.   The  refusal  is  dated  15
    February 2013.

2.   At the hearing the judge received evidence from the appellant and  from
    a number of witnesses.  It  was  the  appellant's  claim  that  he  had
    entered Britain illegally on 25 June 1997 going shortly  thereafter  to
    live in south London with a Mr Starr working at a restaurant,  Kababish
    King, until the end of 1999.  His wage slips had been in  the  name  of
    Israr Ahmed because his employer had made a mistake with his  name  and
    refused to put it right.

3.   In 2000 he had been employed by a removal company owned  by  Mr  Shahid
    Chaudhary.

4.   The appellant asserted that he had written the date of his  arrival  in
    his diary and that he had borrowed money to  pay  for  his  journey  to
    Europe.

5.   A Mr Mohammad Anwar, who lived  in  Manchester  gave  evidence  stating
    that in 1999 he had visited family in  Tooting  and  had  gone  to  the
    Kababish King  for  a  meal  and  saw  the  appellant  there.   He  had
    maintained contact with the appellant thereafter and he was  sure  that
    the meeting had been in 1999 because his son had just  been  born.   Mr
    Ahmed's wife also gave evidence regarding the meeting.

6.   A Paul Davies who lived in Manchester stated that he had first met  the
    appellant in 2001 when the appellant was working as a chef  in  London.
    He had later  met  the  appellant  when  he  was  working  for  KFC  in
    Manchester.

7.   A Mr Abduo  Krubally  also  gave  evidence  stating  that  he  met  the
    appellant in 2000.

8.   A Javed Iqbal gave evidence stating that he had first the appellant  in
    either 1999 or 2000.

9.   In paragraphs 27 onwards of the determination the  judge  set  out  his
    conclusions.  He found that the only  evidence  about  the  appellant's
    entry into Britain was the oral evidence of the appellant that  he  had
    entered on 25 June 1997.  He noted the appellant's claim  that  he  had
    moved to Tooting after one month with Abdul Starr but that Abdul  Starr
    was unable to give evidence because he was in Pakistan.  He  considered
    that the evidence of Mr Starr and indeed that of Mr Chaudhary  who  had
    employed the appellant  at the removal company  would have been of use.
     He stated that there were other possible witnesses  from  that  period
    who could have given important evidence  including  those  friends  the
    appellant had stated had given  him  money  to  come  to  Britain.   He
    pointed out that there were no witness statements or letters in support
    from any of those friends.

10.  He concluded that the documents produced by the  appellant  in  support
    of his case that he was living and working in Britain in 1998  to  2000
    were of little or no weight, pointing out that  the  payslips  produced
    which , the appellant claimed, showed that he had worked in Tooting for
    Kababish King were not in the appellant's name.

11.  He noted that the respondent had challenged the payslips  by  referring
    to incorrect tax codes but that there would be no evidence to show that
    the code was incorrect and that no P60s and no employer's name had been
    provided.  He said that as there was a different name on  the  payslips
    he could give them no weight.

12.  He then referred to the oral evidence including that of  Mr  Anwar  and
    his wife who stated that they had good reason to remember 1999  but  he
    said that it did not follow that  any  friendship  with  the  appellant
    began that year although their recollection of first  meeting  him  was
    indeed in 1999.

13.  He noted that Mr Davies had stated that he had first met the  appellant
    in 2001.

14.  In paragraphs 38 onwards he set out his conclusions:

         "38. I will now consider all this evidence in the round and I reach
             the following conclusions:


         (i)  There is no evidence of weight to show that the Appellant  did
             indeed arrive in the UK in June 1997.  The  sole  evidence  is
             that of the Appellant.


         (ii) The Appellant has not called witnesses who knew him in 1998 or
             in the early years of his claimed stay in the UK  even  though
             he is still in contact with him.  Even  if  Mr  Starr  and  Mr
             Chaudhary are in Pakistan he  has  not  obtained  any  written
             evidence from them.


         (iii)    The payslips from Kababish King are not ones  on  which  I
             can place weight for the reasons I have given.


         (iv) None of the Appellant's witnesses was from London; the  London
             witnesses who provided witness statements did not  attend  the
             hearing and I attach no weight to their witness statements.


         (v)  The common theme  of  all  the  Manchester  witnesses  was  of
             meeting the Appellant in either London or Manchester and being
             impressed with his manner or service and of then striking up a
             friendship which involved meetings from time to time in either
             London or Manchester and a friendship which  endures  to  this
             day.  Two of the witnesses described chance meetings with him.


         39.  I must consider the quality of the evidence in support of  the
             Appellant's case that he has lived in the  UK  for  14  years.
             Although witnesses tried to  identify  dates  of  meetings  by
             reference to events in their own lives, those  accounts  would
             have carried more weight  if  the  meeting  had  related  more
             directly to the event described.  Thus  while  I  accept,  for
             example, that Mr and Mrs Anwar's son was born in 1999 it  does
             not follow that they would remember that  year  as  being  the
             year in which they met the Appellant.


         40.  Having seen and heard all the witnesses  I  am  not  satisfied
             that they were giving me evidence which was reliable as to the
             dates when they met the Appellant and I am therefore unable to
             find that the evidence, taken as a whole, is of  such  quality
             and reliability to enable me to find that  the  Appellant  has
             discharged the burden of proof on him."

15.  In paragraph 41 onwards he considered the issue of the  rights  of  the
    appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR.  He found that  the  removal  of
    the appellant would be proportionate.

16.  The appellant appealed.  The grounds of appeal argued  first  that  the
    determination was not properly reasoned and that it was not  clear  how
    the judge reached his conclusion that the appellant should not  succeed
    under paragraph 276B of the Rules.  They asserted that  the  fact  that
    the judge had said that two of  the  witnesses  had  good  reasons  for
    remembering 1999 but that from  that  it  did  not  follow  that  their
    friendship with the appellant began that year or their recollection  of
    first meeting him in 1999 was correct, was a statement of fact,  not  a
    finding.  The grounds  claimed that on the balance  of  probability  if
    the witnesses had not contradicted themselves, internally or  in  their
    evidence with other witness, including the  appellant,  the  fact  that
    they were able to place their first meeting with  the  appellant  at  a
    particular  time ought to be something that  "goes  in  favour  of  the
    appellant, not against him."   They  stated  the  judge  had  given  no
    reasons for attaching little or no weight to their evidence.

17.  The grounds also criticise the judge for making no finding  on  whether
    or not he accepted the evidence of Mr Davies that he had first met  the
    appellant in 2001 stating that the judge should be required to  make  a
    finding whether or not he accepted that evidence.

18.  The second ground of  appeal  stated  that  the  judge  attached  undue
    weight to the evidence which was  not  before  him  -  criticising  the
    appellant not using witnesses from London and his inability to  provide
    the diary.  It was claimed that  the  judge  had  not  placed  adequate
    weight on the evidence before him.

19.  With regard to the appellant's rights under Article 8  it  was  claimed
    that the judge had not made any  attempt  to  quantify  the  nature  or
    quality of the private life with reference to the length  of  time  the
    appellant had been here.

20.  In response to the grounds of appeal the Secretary of  State  served  a
    notice under Rule 34 stating that the judge had given ample reasons for
    the conclusions which he had drawn.  It was  stated  that  the  grounds
    revealed no more than an argument with the judge's findings.
21.  At the hearing of the appeal before  me  Mr  Blundell  stated  that  he
    relied on the final sentence  of  paragraph  4  of  the  grounds  which
    stated:-

         "The fact is, that the FTTJ simply gives no, or inadequate  reasons
         for reaching the conclusion that the  witnesses  who  attended  the
         appeal  and  gave  evidence  could  not   be   relied   upon   and,
         consequently, that the appellant had not  been  in  the  UK  for  a
         period of 14 years."


22.  He went on to refer to the oral evidence given  by  the  appellant  and
    five supporting witnesses and particularly the evidence of Mr  Mohammad
    Anwar and his wife who had stated that they had met  the  appellant  in
    1999 - the year in which their first child had been  born.   He  argued
    that the judge had not made any clear finding on  the  evidence  of  Mr
    Anwar and his wife that they  had  met  the  appellant  in  1999:  that
    evidence had neither been accepted nor rejected.  What  the  judge  had
    stated in paragraph 35 that although he accepted that Mr Anwar and  his
    wife had good reasons for remembering 1999 it did not follow  that  any
    friendship  with  the  appellant  began  that  year   or   that   their
    recollection of first meeting him was in 1999 was a comment rather than
    a finding of fact.  Moreover in paragraph  39  the  judge,  by  stating
    "thus while I accept, for example, that Mr and Mrs Anwar's son was born
    in 1999 it does not follow that they would remember that year as  being
    the year in which they met the Appellant" was  also  a  comment  rather
    than a conclusion.  The judge had not  made  a  clear  finding  in  his
    determination.

23.  He referred to the evidence given by Mr Davies and Mr Javed  Iqbal  and
    stated that the judge had not stated whether  or  not  he  accepted  or
    rejected that evidence: the judge had not made  any  finding  regarding
    the absence of evidence.  He argued that the determination was vitiated
    because of a lack of clear reasoning.

24.  In reply Mr Tufan stated that the  judge  had  clearly  considered  the
    evidence in the round and in detail  and  reached  conclusions  on  the
    totality of the evidence.  He referred  to  the  determination  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Shizad (sufficiency of  reasons:  set  aside)  [2013]
    UKUT 00085 (IAC) which stated in the head note:-

          "(1)    Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation
             of the conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal  is
             determined,  those  reasons  need  not  be  extensive  if  the
             decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to the material
             accepted by the judge."

25.  He stated that the judge had  weighed  up  all  relevant  evidence  and
    reached a conclusion which was fully open to  him  and  that  therefore
    there was no error of law in the determination.

26.   In  reply  Mr  Blundell,  although  he  accepted  the  ratio  of   the
    determination in Shizad emphasised that clear findings were required on
    the evidence rather than findings by implication.

27.  I find there is no material error of law in the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Judge.  The reality is that he did set out  in  some  detail
    the evidence which he heard and at  considerable  length  set  out  his
    conclusions.  These were summarised in paragraph 38.  He  was  entitled
    to place weight on the  fact  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant had arrived in Britain in 1997, that the  appellant  had  not
    called witnesses who had known him in 1998 or in the early years of his
    claimed stay and there was no evidence from Mr Starr and Mr  Chaudhary.
    He rejected the payslips from Kababish King and clearly it was right to
    do so as these were not even in the appellant's name.

28.  Having commented on the evidence given by  "the  Manchester  witnesses"
    he considered  the  quality  of  all  the  evidence  in  the  following
    paragraph.  It is clear that in that paragraph he further evaluates the
    evidence given by Mohammad Anwar and his wife and found that it was not
    clear evidence that the appellant had been in  Britain  in  1999.   His
    conclusion in paragraph 40 that he was not satisfied that the witnesses
    were giving evidence which was reliable as to the dates when  they  met
    the appellant and was therefore unable to find that the evidence  taken
    as a whole was of such quality and reliability to enable  him  to  find
    that the appellant had discharged the burden of proof upon  him  was  a
    clear and unequivocal conclusion which reflected the care with which he
    had  considered  all  the  evidence  before  him.   In  particular  his
    conclusion was clear that the witnesses were not satisfied  as  to  the
    dates when they had met the  appellant.   That  in  effect  relates  in
    particular to the evidence of Mr Anwar and his wife as  they  were  the
    only witnesses whose evidence was such as to  support  the  appellant's
    contention that he had lived in Britain for fourteen years.

29.  The reality is that the judge did weigh up all the evidence before  him
    and reached conclusions which were fully open to him.   The  burden  of
    proof is, of course, on the appellant; it is clear that the judge found
    that that burden had not been discharged.

30.  Although it was not argued before me I note  that  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal it was argued that the judge had erred in his  consideration  of
    the rights of the appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR.   Mr  Blundell
    was correct not  to  pursue  that  ground  as  it  is  clear  from  the
    determination that the judge  did  properly  consider  the  appellant's
    rights to private life in the appropriate structured way and  that  his
    conclusion that removal of the appellant would not be  disproportionate
    was entirely open to him.

31.  I therefore find that there  was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Immigration Judge and that his decision dismissing
    this appeal on both immigration and human rights grounds shall stand.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
