
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06601/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th August 2013                              |On 19th August 2013        |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                             ELIZABETH YIRENKYI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L Appiah, Counsel, instructed by JF Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Grimshaw
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 4th June 2013.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 2nd December 1952.

 3. On 7th August 2012 she sought a residence card. On 11th February 2013 a
    decision was made to refuse to issue her with one as confirmation of  a
    right of residence under European Community Law as the spouse of an EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

 4. In the reasons for refusal letter  the  Respondent  said  that  it  was
    noticed that the Appellant had entered the UK  on  23rd  December  2009
    using a visit visa and had overstayed.  She had remained  here  without
    authority since 15th June 2010.  She married the Sponsor, a national of
    Italy exercising treaty rights in the UK as a worker, by proxy in Ghana
    on 10th December 2011.

 5. The Respondent recorded that in order to ensure that this was a genuine
    and subsisting marriage an unannounced home visit was conducted at  the
    claimed matrimonial home. The refusal letter states  that  the  Sponsor
    was present and he said that the Appellant was away visiting  a  friend
    named Grace Adai.  The friend lived outside Leeds but he was unable  to
    give the address or the town or the city. The Appellant was said to  be
    away for a few days and would be back at the weekend. The  Sponsor  was
    happy for officers to  have  a  brief  look  around  the  property  and
    accompanied officers into the hall. He showed them a pair  of  flowered
    pyjamas on a rack drying.  He then went with officers into the  bedroom
    and brought a carrier bag out of the bottom of the  wardrobe.   In  the
    carrier bag was a patterned African style woman's dress.  However there
    were no women's clothes hung in the wardrobe, no shoes, bags or  makeup
    on  view  in  the  property  and  the  bathroom  contained  no  women's
    toiletries.  In the view of the officers there was no evidence  that  a
    female resided there at all.

 6. On that basis the Respondent decided that the relationship was  not  as
    claimed. The application to issue a residence card was refused  on  the
    grounds that the marriage was one of convenience.

The Judge's Determination

 7. The judge recorded the standard  of  proof  in  the  appeal  to  be  as
    follows:

         "The Appellant must show on the balance of probabilities  that  she
         is the spouse of an EEA national who is a  qualified  person.   The
         effective date for my consideration is the date of the Respondent's
         decision although I may consider any relevant matters arises  after
         the date of decision.

         This is an  appeal  where  the  Respondent  argues  that  there  is
         reasonable ground for suspicion that the  Appellant's  marriage  is
         one of convenience.  There  is  no  burden  at  the  outset  of  an
         application for the applicant to show that a  marriage  to  an  EEA
         national is not one of  convenience.   However  where  evidence  is
         produced by the Respondent  which  justifies  reasonable  suspicion
         that the marriage is entered into for the  predominant  purpose  of
         securing residence rights  it  is  for  the  applicant  namely  the
         Appellant to address those suspicions."

 8. Later in the determination she said:

         "I turn now to my assessment of the evidence and my conclusions.

         As I  have  already  stated  where  evidence  is  produced  by  the
         Respondent which justifies a reasonable suspicion that the marriage
         is entered into for the predominant purpose of  securing  residence
         rights it is for the Appellant to address those suspicions.  I have
         seen the report prepared by the Immigration Officer that forms  the
         basis of the Respondent's decision.  The Immigration Officers found
         no female belongings at the address given by the Appellant  at  her
         home other than a pair of pyjamas and one  dress  which  was  in  a
         carrier bag at the bottom of the wardrobe. The report  goes  on  to
         state 'There were no women's  cloches  hung  in  the  wardrobe,  no
         shoes, bag or  makeup  on  view  in  the  property.   The  bathroom
         contained no women's toiletries.  There  was  no  evidence  that  a
         female resided there at all.'  In these circumstances there  is  no
         doubt in my mind that the Respondent's suspicions about the purpose
         of the Appellant's marriage to Mr Owusu were well-founded.

         It follows that I find that the Appellant's general duty  to  prove
         her case includes a duty to prove  that  she  is  not  party  to  a
         marriage of convenience."

 9. The judge then recorded  the  Appellant's  evidence  and  that  of  the
    Sponsor, made adverse findings and dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

10. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Respondent's allegation in the Immigration  Officer's  report  was  not
    supported by any written evidence in the form of interview  records  or
    witness statement. The judge had applied different and uneven standards
    without justification and did not make it clear as to whether  she  was
    relying upon the legality of the marriage or the  primary  reasons  for
    it.  It was not clear from the determination what  evidence  the  judge
    had accepted. The suggestion that bills could have been in joint  names
    even though they were paid by the Sponsor was  far  from  reality.  The
    duration of the marriage and the timing of the application was  not  an
    issue. The Appellant's husband was able to tell the Immigration Officer
    where the Appellant had gone and who she was visiting in London.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Keene on 2nd July 2013.   The
    judge said that arguably the judge had made a material misdirection  in
    law in recording that the burden rested on the Appellant to prove  that
    she was not a party to a marriage of convenience.

12. On  24th  July  20123  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  opposing  the
    application.

Submissions

13. Miss Appiah made a number of submissions. Firstly, since the Respondent
    was alleging that the Appellant was making a false claim, the  standard
    of proof which should be applied should be higher than the  balance  of
    probabilities, possibly as high as the criminal standard.

14. Secondly, the judge was not entitled to take the Immigration  Officer's
    report as a document capable of discharging that burden i.e it was  not
    open to her to find that the report created  the  reasonable  suspicion
    necessary for the burden of proof to pass to the Appellant.  The report
    was not signed and was not in the form of a witness statement  but  was
    preferred to the evidence of the  sponsor  whose  clear  statement  was
    properly made.  Each party should consider whether it  was  appropriate
    to call live witness evidence and if the Respondent decided not to call
    the Immigration Officer it was incumbent on the  Tribunal  to  consider
    what  weight  ought  to  be  attached  to  the   documentary   evidence
    particularly when it  is  not  in  the  proper  format.  The  remaining
    findings stem from the judge's mistreatment of the  report  which  then
    infected the  determination  as  a  whole,  for  example,  the  witness
    statement from  the  Appellant's  friend  was  given  short  shrift  in
    comparison with the treatment of the Immigration Officer's report.

15. Mrs Pettersen submitted that there was no error in  the  determination.
    The judge was clear in her own mind as to what the  proper  burden  and
    standard of proof was.  The Secretary of State had put the Appellant on
    notice of all of the issues in the refusal letter. The fact that report
    itself was served on the day should not have caused her any  difficulty
    but in any event she could have asked for an  adjournment  to  consider
    the report, or to ask for the Immigration Officer to be present but did
    not do so.  The judge made clear findings which were open to her on the
    evidence and had provided ample reasoning for her conclusions.

Findings and Conclusions

16. There is no error in this determination.

17. The judge's setting out of the burden  and  standard  of  proof  to  be
    applied at paragraphs 7 and 8 of the  determination  is  unimpeachable.
    As she said, there is no  burden  on  the  Appellant  to  show  that  a
    marriage to an EEA national is not one of  convenience  until  evidence
    produced by the Respondent  justifies  reasonable  suspicion  that  the
    marriage is one of convenience.

18. There is no basis for finding that anything other than the normal civil
    standard i.e. the balance of probabilities should be  applied  in  this
    case. There is no such thing as more than a  balance  of  probabilities
    but less than the criminal standard. The balance  of  probabilities  is
    what it says it is.

19. Secondly, it  is  unarguable  that  an  Immigration  Officer's  report,
    whether or not it is signed or in the format of  a  witness  statement,
    which concluded that there was no  evidence  of  female  occupation  is
    capable of discharging the burden on the Respondent to show that  there
    is a reasonable suspicion that the marriage was entered  into  for  the
    purpose of securing residence rights.  The weight which the  judge  put
    on the Immigration Officer's report was entirely a matter for her.

20. This is a full and careful determination of all of the relevant  issues
    in the appeal.  The judge noted the Appellant's immigration history and
    was entitled not to accept her explanation that she did not  know  what
    course of action to take after her visit visa expired. The treatment of
    the  witness  statement  from   the   Appellant's   friend   is   again
    unimpeachable.   The   judge   noted   that   the   witness   statement
    conspicuously omitted to make any mention of the  Appellant's  marriage
    and whilst it confirms that she was staying with her at the time of the
    Immigration Officer's visit, it cannot answer  the  Respondent's  point
    that the real issue was that the Sponsor did not know  where  she  was.
    The fact that no friends of the couple have come forward to  vouch  for
    the marriage was considered by her, reasonably, to be significant.  The
    absence of such  evidence  clearly  made  it  more  difficult  for  the
    Appellant to show that she was entitled to the residence card which she
    sought.

21. In summary the judge weighed up the oral evidence of the Appellant  and
    her husband but was entitled to find  it  not  credible  and  to  place
    weight on the evidence in the  Immigration  Officer's  report  for  the
    reasons which she gave.

22. The grounds disclose no errs in this determination which shall stand.

Decision

23. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor



