
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06137/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25th February 2016                  |On 24th March 2016                  |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr sunny imonikhe
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Ume-Ezeoke, instructed by The Legal Resource
Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Mr Imonikhe is a citizen of Nigeria whose date of birth is recorded  as
    19th November 1959.  He made application to the Secretary of  State  to
    regularise his status in the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  long
    residence.  On 29th January 2015 a decision  was  made  to  refuse  the
    application and he appealed.  His appeal was  heard  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Majid on 19th August 2015 sitting at Taylor  House.
    Judge Majid allowed the appeal.

 2. Not content with that decision, by Notice dated 10th September 2015 the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The grounds are lengthy but the  essential  point  was
    that the decision lacked adequate reasoning.  The grounds also went  on
    to make reference to a material misdirection  in  the  law  because  no
    regard  was  said  to  have  been  had  to  Section  117B(vi)  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, though of course  if  the
    decision could have been allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  such
    would not be a material consideration.

 3. On 7 January 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal granted  permission,
    thus the matter comes before me.

 4. The relevant Refusal Letter is dated 29th January 2015.  Credit  is  to
    be given to the author of the  letter  for  the  careful  consideration
    given to the application.  For  present  purposes  the  focus  is  upon
    paragraph 15 which reads as follows:

         "It is considered that you do not fulfil the requirements for leave
         to remain in the United Kingdom on this (sic) basis of your private
         life  under  paragraph  276ADE  because  in  order  to   meet   the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii), an  applicant  must  show
         that they have lived continuously in  the  United  Kingdom  for  at
         least 20 years (discounting  any  period  of  imprisonment).   When
         considering the requirements outlined in paragraph 276ADE(1), it is
         noted that you are a national of Nigeria and that you claim to have
         entered the United Kingdom on 7  August  1989.   You  have  however
         supplied no evidence of residency prior to 1998 other than  an  NHS
         card and no other verifiable evidence  until  2003.   The  evidence
         from 2003  is  taken  as  the  date  of  the  start  of  continuous
         residency.  It is not accepted that you have lived continuously  in
         the United Kingdom for at least 20 years.  The claim to  have  last
         entered the United Kingdom  in  1989  lacks  credibility  when  you
         appear to have waited 16 years before attempting to regularise your
         stay here."

 5. The issue therefore in my view which the judge had to  resolve  on  the
    basis of the refusal was clear.  Mr Clarke for the Secretary  of  State
    submitted that it was not entirely clear from the  decision  what  Rule
    the judge was considering.  I disagree.  There could only have been one
    Rule under which the long residency application could have been brought
    when it was common ground that the Respondent had not lawfully been  in
    the United Kingdom and that was 276ADE. The only realistic  alternative
    candidate would have been paragraph 276B, but as the Appellant had  not
    lawfully been continuously resident in the United Kingdom, even on  his
    own case, for ten years or more, paragraph 276B could not have  been  a
    relevant consideration. I also had my attention drawn by Mr  Ume-Ezeoke
    to  paragraph  10(d)  of  the  Judge's  Decision  in  which  the  judge
    recognised that he had to have regard to the "new Rules" introduced  on
    9th July 2012 and it was  in  that  context  that  the  issue  of  long
    residence was being considered: paragraph 276ADE came into  force  with
    those "new rules".

 6. Mr Clarke submitted that there was deficient reasoning.  What I have to
    consider on a challenge to a finding  of  fact  is  whether  there  was
    sufficient evidence available to the judge to justify the finding made.
     As I have said it is clear that the judge realised what the issue was.
     Mr Imonikhe argued before Judge Majid that he had in  fact  continuous
    residence for 25 years.  There is at paragraph 10(a) a  possible  error
    of fact recorded  by  the  judge  because  the  duration  of  25  years
    contended for by Mr Imonikhe was contested by the Secretary  of  State,
    even though the contrary appears to be  what  the  judge  has  recorded
    (though there is some lack of clarity), but if the judge was  wrong  it
    is clear from paragraph 12 that the Judge recognised that the Secretary
    of State had put the matter in issue and indeed if there had  been  the
    concession which the Secretary of State suggests the Judge had  wrongly
    recorded there would not have been anything to discuss in  the  appeal,
    given that in issue was whether Mr Imonikhe  could demonstrate 20 years
    continuous residence.

 7. I come to the view that there was sufficient reasoning in the decision.
     At paragraph 7  the  judge  noted  that  Mr  Imonikhe's  evidence  was
    consistent with what he had said in his application and it  is  equally
    clear that the judge had had regard to "other documents", he said so in
    terms at paragraph 7.  The judge then at paragraph 10 having had regard
    to Mr Imonikhe's statement of 14 August 2015 and other documents  noted
    that the "Appellant's story" (which could only be by reference  to  the
    period that he had been in the United Kingdom since that was the  point
    in issue) had been corroborated by friends who had written  letters  in
    support.  Indeed the matter went further because one of  those  friends
    came to the Tribunal to give  evidence  in  support  and  that  is  not
    challenged in the grounds.

 8. In the circumstances it is clear when one reads the decision as a whole
    that at paragraph 29 where the ultimate finding is made the judge found
    that Mr Imonikhe had made out his case to the requisite standard  being
    balance of probabilities. That was, I find, a finding that was open  to
    him.

 9. On any view the decision does contain material which is not  altogether
    relevant to the issues in contention but  in  this  case  they  do  not
    detract from the essential finding which was  that  the  Appellant  had
    proved his case in the First-tier Tribunal.  In those circumstances the
    Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.

Notice of Decision

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and the Decision of the First-
tier Tribunal is affirmed.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
