
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06974/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 July 2014                               |On 12 August 2014            |
|Prepared 24 July 2014                         |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY



                                   Between

                            NANA YAW DANKYI AWERE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M B Hussnain, of Messrs Adam Bernard Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Ghana born  on  22  January  1976  appeals,
    with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Boyd who in a determination dated 6 May 2014 dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to  issue
    a residence card as the spouse of an EEA national.

2.   The appellant had married, by proxy, a  Dutch  national,  Conilia  Afia
    Tetewah Andoh, in Ghana.  The Secretary of State gave reasons  for  the
    refusal of the application in the decision dated 22 December 2011.   It
    was not considered that the marriage was valid under the provisions  of
    Ghanaian law.  The reasons included the fact that it was  not  believed
    that the appellant's wife was of Ghanaian descent or that the  relevant
    procedures had been gone through to ensure the validity  of  the  proxy
    marriage in Ghana.

3.   The appeal had been  considered  on  the  papers  by  Judge  Boyd.   He
    pointed out in paragraph 8 of the determination that he had no reliable
    and independent evidence about the recognition of  the  marriage  under
    the laws of the country of the appellant's wife's Dutch nationality and
    in reaching that conclusion he referred to the decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Kareem (Proxy Marriages - EU Law) [2014] UKUT 00024  (IAC).
    He added that he did not consider that there was  before  him  evidence
    that the appellant and the sponsor were in a durable relationship.

4.   The appellant appealed.  The grounds of appeal, in  brief  stated  that
    the judge had misunderstood the determination in Kareem as there was no
    challenge to the marriage certificate which  had  been  produced.   The
    judge, it was asserted, should have  accepted  that  the  marriage  was
    genuine and it was claimed that the validity  of  the  marriage  was  a
    matter for the Ghanaian authorities and not for the judge.  It was also
    claimed that the judge had erred in his assessment of the rights of the
    appellants under Article 8 of the ECHR.

5.   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal V  A  Osborne  granted  permission  to
    appeal on the basis that she considered that it was arguable  that  the
    judge had misunderstood the determination in Kareem.

6.   At the hearing before me Miss Holmes referred to the  determination  of
    the Tribunal in TA and Others  (Kareem  Explained)  Ghana  [2014]  UKUT
    00316 (IAC).  That determination makes it clear that the  determination
    of whether there is a marital relationship  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  must  always  be   examined   in
    accordance with the laws of the  member  state  from  which  the  union
    citizen obtains nationality.

7.   As Mr Hussnain had not been aware of that decision  and  indeed  stated
    that he had only recently been instructed and  had  not  been  able  to
    obtain papers from the appellant's previous representatives  I  granted
    him a short  adjournment  so  that  he  was  able  to  go  through  the
    determination in TA with his clients.

8.   Miss Holmes stated that she was relying on the determination in TA.   I
    put it to Mr Hussnain that there was no evidence that the marriage  was
    accepted in Holland.  Mr Hussnain produced a letter  from  the  Spanish
    Consulate stating that the  Spanish  authorities  recognised  marriages
    that were valid in other countries.  He was unable to make any  further
    argument.

9.   I find that there is no material error of law in the  determination  of
    the judge.  There was nothing  before  him  to  show  that  this  proxy
    marriage was accepted as valid in Holland.  I therefore  consider  that
    he reached conclusions which were fully open to  him  on  the  evidence
    before him and that he is correct to dismiss this appeal.  I would  add
    that given the paucity of evidence before him and that this was a paper
    appeal where he did not hear evidence from the appellant let alone  his
    wife he was correct to dismiss this appeal also under Article 8 of  the
    ECHR.

10.  Accordingly there being no material error of law in  the  determination
    of the First-tier Judge his decision, dismissing this  appeal  on  both
    immigration and human rights grounds shall stand.


Signed                                  Date




Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


