
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06365/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2016                  |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     MN
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Najma, Kher Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cheales promulgated on 15  December  2014  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain and to remove  the  Appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:
         "The determination is brief and it  is  considered  that  there  is
         merit in the grounds asserted by the appellant, especially as  this
         appeal is also against the decision to remove under Section  47  of
         the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 and there has been
         no consideration of Article 8 in this determination."

 3. Ms Najma provided a skeleton argument.

 4. At the outset of the hearing Mr. Mills conceded that the Appellant  had
    an arguable Article 8 case and that the case should be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.  However, he submitted  that  there
    was no error in the decision in relation to the immigration rules.

 5. Ms Najma agreed that the case should be remitted for re-hearing of  the
    Article 8 case.  She accepted that the  Appellant's  appeal  could  not
    succeed under the immigration rules.

Error of law

 6. The decision deals with the immigration rules  in  paragraphs  [9]  and
    [10].  The judge found that the Appellant did not meet the requirements
    of the rules.  It was accepted by Ms Najma that this is the  case,  and
    these two paragraphs of the decision stand.

 7. In relation to Article 8, this is not dealt with at all.  The Appellant
    was unrepresented at the hearing.  He attended together with his  wife.
    Both the Appellant and his wife gave evidence,  as  can  be  seen  from
    paragraphs [4] and [7]  of  the  decision.   The  decision  records  at
    paragraph [11] "The Appellant has a serious mental illness and  appears
    now to be married."  However, there is no evidence in the decision that
    the judge took into account the Appellant's mental illness, or that  he
    took into account the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No  2  of  2010:
    Child, vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance.

 8. Even given that there appears to  have  been  very  little  documentary
    evidence before the judge, given that the Appellant was  unrepresented,
    that it was found by the judge that he had a  serious  mental  illness,
    and that he was married, the judge's  failure  to  address  Article  8,
    which was raised in the grounds of appeal, is an error of law.   It  is
    not enough for the judge to say in paragraph [11] "It is open to him to
    make a fresh application if he wishes".  It should have been  clear  to
    the judge that the Appellant had a case to make under Article 8, and he
    should have dealt with it.

Notice of decision

The decision involves the making of an error on a point of law.  I  set  the
decision aside, excepting those parts that deal with the  appeal  under  the
immigration rules, (paragraphs [9] and [10]).

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  re-hearing  of  the
Appellant's Article 8 claim.


Signed   Date 12 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
