
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/06563/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 September 2016                 |On 27 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                harish balaji
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F. Allen of Counsel, instructed by A & P
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Khawar, promulgated on 18 December  2015,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to issue him with a residence card as confirmation of his  right
    to reside in the United Kingdom.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "Although much of the evidence highlighted in the grounds does  not
         appear to be material to the issue of dependency, and largely  goes
         to the familial relationship, it is  at  least  arguable  that  the
         judge might have failed to consider some material  aspects  of  the
         evidence.   In  finding  that  the  appellant  failed  to   produce
         sufficient evidence of "adequate funds" to show that he was  "being
         maintained throughout his life by the sponsor" [26] it is  arguable
         that the judge might have applied the wrong legal test."


 3. The Appellant attended the hearing together his Sponsor, Mr. [BP].   We
    heard submissions from both representatives following which we reserved
    our decision.


Submissions


 4. It was agreed that there were three issues in the  appeal  as  follows;
    whether the Appellant had been dependent on the Sponsor  while  he  had
    been in India; whether he was dependent on the Sponsor  in  the  United
    Kingdom; and whether he was a member  of  the  same  household  of  the
    Sponsor in the United Kingdom.  In respect  of  all  three  issues,  Ms
    Allen submitted that material evidence had not been taken into account.




 5. In relation to the first issue, dependency in India, Ms Allen  referred
    us to paragraphs [24] and [25] of the decision.  We  were  referred  to
    the letter from the Federal Bank Limited regarding confirmation of  the
    fixed deposit (page 43 of the bundle).  In addition to this letter, the
    Appellant had provided the  statement  for  the  Sponsor's  account  in
    Jaffna, the original of which had been provided at  the  hearing  (page
    46).  This showed that on 17 October 2008 money had been transferred to
    another account.  In addition the Sponsor's witness statement  had  set
    out how he had taken out this bank loan (paragraph  [14]).   There  was
    also a receipt from the British Institute of  Technology  &  E-commerce
    dated 14 March 2011 addressed to the Sponsor (F1  of  the  Respondent's
    bundle).  It was submitted that there  had  been  evidence  before  the
    judge of how the Sponsor had financed the Appellant's studies.


 6. Additionally, there  had  been  evidence  before  the  judge  of  money
    transfer receipts.  The  decision  referred  to  seven  such  receipts,
    described as "a handful" [26], but it was submitted that  in  fact  the
    correct figure was nearer to 18.  These  were  dated  between  2008  to
    2014.  We were referred to copies of  money  transfers  sent  to  India
    (pages 83 to 92  of  the  Appellant's  bundle),  and  copies  of  money
    transfers sent to the Appellant when  he  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
    (pages 94 to 98).  In relation to  the  statement  that  one  had  been
    transferred to an unidentified third party [26], we  were  referred  to
    the transfer on page 86 which had been signed by the Appellant's mother
    and which did not contain any  other  names  apart  from  that  of  his
    mother.  It was submitted that this transfer had clearly been  made  to
    the Appellant's mother.


 7. For further evidence of dependence we were referred to  the  statements
    in support, and the documentary evidence consisting of the bank  letter
    and money transfer receipts.  It was submitted that the  Appellant  was
    dependent on the Sponsor when he was in India and the judge had  failed
    properly to consider the evidence.


 8. In relation to membership of the  Sponsor's  household  in  the  United
    Kingdom, we were referred to paragraph [23] where the judge  had  found
    that the Appellant and Sponsor were not living in  the  same  household
    owing to the oral evidence.  It was submitted that there was plenty  of
    documentary evidence, including  utility  bills,  bank  statements  and
    correspondence from the GP, which  indicated  that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor were living at the same address.  Ms Allen submitted  that  the
    judge had not taken into account this evidence.


 9. It was submitted that this evidence also went to the issue  of  whether
    or not the Appellant  was  dependent  on  the  Sponsor  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge  had  stated  that  the  Appellant's  uncle's  bank
    statements had not been provided in full [29].  We were referred to the
    statements (pages 47, 49 and 51).  It was  submitted  that  these  were
    complete statements.  We were referred to pages 51 and 53 which  showed
    transfers being made to the Appellant.


10. The judge had stated that the Appellant's bank accounts  had  not  been
    produced [29], but they had been  provided  (pages  74  to  80  of  the
    Appellant's bundle).  They showed receipts of funds from  the  Sponsor,
    and indicated  that  this  was  the  main  source  of  income  for  the
    Appellant.


11. In response Mr. Clarke relied on  the  Rule  24  response,  apart  from
    paragraph 3 which was withdrawn.  He submitted that  the  case  of  Lim
    [2015] EWCA Civ 1383 contained the definition of dependency.   We  were
    referred to paragraph [32].  "If he can support himself,  there  is  no
    dependency, even if he is give financial material  support  by  the  EU
    citizen.  Those additional resources are not necessary to enable him to
    meet his basic needs."  He submitted that the  funds  received  by  the
    Appellant did not go to meet his basic needs.  This went to  the  issue
    of materiality of any error.


12. In relation to membership of the Sponsor's household, we were  referred
    to paragraphs [22] and [23] of the decision.  The Appellant claimed  to
    share a single room with the Sponsor but there was  a  huge  amount  of
    inconsistent evidence, especially given the claim that  they  had  been
    living there for a substantial period of time.  The fact that there was
    correspondence to the Appellant and Sponsor going to the  same  address
    was not enough, especially given that there were other people living at
    the property.  He submitted that the evidence  showed  only  that  they
    lived in separate rooms in a multiple occupancy  home.   There  was  no
    error of law in the judge's finding.


13. In relation to the Appellant's prior dependency on the Sponsor, we were
    referred to paragraph [25] of the  decision.   Despite  the  fact  that
    there was a letter from the Federal Bank Limited (page 43) and  a  bank
    statement (page 46), there were larger issues of credibility  regarding
    how the Sponsor was capable of coming up with this amount of money, and
    how he was able to put this money into a bank account so the  Appellant
    could take out a loan.  He submitted that the Appellant was meeting his
    basic means from the loan.  He had been able to take the  loan  out  in
    order to meet his basic  needs  and  the  additional  money  was  going
    towards his fees and education.


14. The money transfers were for modest amounts and  it  was  open  to  the
    judge to find that there was no dependency on the basis of these (pages
    83 to 93).  We were referred to paragraph [26]  of  the  decision.   In
    relation to the money transfers from 2011 to 2013, these were difficult
    to read and were not for large sums of money (pages  94  to  98).   The
    Appellant would need more to demonstrate  that  his  basic  needs  were
    being met by this money.


15. In relation to the standard of proof  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to
    require the evidence referred to in [27] and [28].  There  was  a  high
    burden on the Appellant to show that the money was for his basic  needs
    and the evidence did not show this.  The Sponsor was simply not earning
    enough money.


16. In response Ms Allen submitted that this was not an  Appendix  FM  type
    case and therefore there was no list of specified evidence which had to
    be provided.  If the judge had concerns regarding the financial affairs
    of the Sponsor, he had not put the Appellant on notice that he had such
    concerns.  The modest amounts which were transferred did not take  into
    account the evidence in the Sponsor's witness  statement  that  he  had
    giving the Appellant money and bought him clothing, stationery etc [18]
    and [19].


17. She submitted that Mr. Clarke had misunderstood the evidence  regarding
    the loan.  The Sponsor had provided funds in a fixed  deposit  account,
    and the Appellant had taken out a loan based on this fixed  deposit  in
    order that he could access the money immediately.   The  Appellant  was
    not financially independent.  He had been dependent on his  uncle  when
    he had been in India, and when he had come to the United Kingdom.   The
    judge had simply failed to  take  into  account  all  of  the  material
    evidence before him.


Findings and Conclusions


18. As set out above, there were three issues  in  this  appeal.   We  will
    address these in the order set out in the decision, present  membership
    of the same household, prior dependency and present dependency.

Membership of the same household


19. The findings in relation to present membership of  the  same  household
    are found in [22] and [23].  The judge states:


         "As to membership of present household I do not find the assertions
         made by the Appellant and Sponsor  to  be  credible  due  to  stark
         inconsistencies during their oral evidence". [22]


20. He sets out the evidence given by the Appellant, and compares  that  to
    the evidence given by the Sponsor.  The Appellant  gave  evidence  that
    there was one double bed in the room, but the Sponsor said  that  there
    were two beds.  The  Appellant  said  that  there  was  no  television,
    whereas the Sponsor said  that  there  was  a  small  television.   The
    Appellant said that there was only a  bed  and  wardrobe,  whereas  the
    Sponsor said that there was a table, two chairs, a  cupboard,  and  the
    television.  In paragraph [23] he states:


         "In my judgment the aforesaid inconsistencies between the Appellant
         and Sponsor as to the contents of the one room that they  claim  to
         share provide clear evidence of a manufactured/fabricated  account.
         In my judgment it is inconceivable that if they  were  telling  the
         truth one of them would not know whether there was one bed  or  two
         beds in the room or whether there was a television or  not  in  the
         room.   Therefore  I   do   not   accept,   despite   there   being
         correspondence emanating from various individuals/bodies to suggest
         a common address, that the Appellant is living as a members of  the
         Sponsor's household.  They are clearly not living in the same  room
         as claimed."


21. The judge acknowledges the documentary evidence  provided,  but  places
    more weight on the oral evidence.  We find that it was the open to  the
    judge  to  place  more  weight  on  the  oral   evidence,   given   the
    inconsistencies in that evidence.  The judge was aware that they  lived
    in a shared occupancy dwelling, and it was open to him  to  find  that,
    despite evidence of correspondence being sent to both of  them  at  the
    same address, the Appellant was not part of  the  Sponsor's  household.
    We find that there is no error of law in the judge's  approach  to  the
    evidence of membership of the same household.

Prior dependency


22. The judge dealt with the issue of prior dependency from paragraphs [24]
    to [28].   He set out the evidence of the  2011  bank  loan  [25].   He
    states:


         "Although letter dated 14th November 2008 suggests that the Sponsor
         provided a sum of 800,000 Rupees, deposited  in  the  name  of  the
         Appellant as a fixed deposit, apart from such assertion there is in
         fact no  direct  evidence  as  to  the  provenance  of  such  funds
         emanating from the Sponsor."


23. At the hearing Ms Allen directed us to the other evidence  relating  to
    this loan, including the bank statement (page 46),  and  the  Sponsor's
    witness statement (page 8).   We find that  there  was  other  evidence
    relating to the loan, but we find that this evidence  shows  only  that
    the Sponsor assisted the Appellant to pay  for  his  education  on  one
    occasion.  In and of itself it does not show  that  the  Appellant  was
    dependent on the Sponsor.  Even if the judge had set  out  all  of  the
    evidence  relating  to  this  loan,  it  would  not  have  shown  prior
    dependency by itself.


24. In paragraph [26] the judge sets out the  evidence  of  the  historical
    money transfer receipts.  We have  carefully  considered  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  At the hearing  we  were  referred  to
    pages 83 to 92, and 94 to 98 of the Appellant's bundle.  Pages 83 to 92
    consist of ten money transfer receipts  for  remittances  made  to  the
    Appellant's mother in India.  The Appellant came to the United  Kingdom
    in April 2011.  It is not easy to read the dates, but those at pages 83
    to 90 appear to be dated prior to April 2011.  Those on pages 91 and 92
    are dated 2013 and 2014, at which stage the  Appellant  was  no  longer
    living in India.  We accept Ms Allen's submission that the one which is
    identified by the judge as being a transfer to an  "unidentified  third
    party" was sent to  the  Appellant's  mother,  given  that  it  is  her
    signature on the page acknowledging receipt and there is no other  name
    on it.


25. However, there remains the fact that the evidence provided shows only a
    maximum of eight money transfers covering a three year period prior  to
    the Appellant entering the United Kingdom.   The  earliest  receipt  is
    dated 2008.  While we find that it was not necessary to show  "adequate
    funds to suggest that the Appellant was being maintained throughout his
    life by the  Sponsor",  we  find  that  the  evidence  provided  showed
    relatively modest amounts sent by the Sponsor to the Appellant's mother
    on only eight occasions for a period of  three  years.   There  was  no
    evidence that the remittances were used for the Appellant himself  but,
    even if there had been, the First-tier  Tribunal  was  not  obliged  to
    accept that these relatively modest amounts showed that  the  Appellant
    was dependent on the Sponsor while living in India prior to  coming  to
    the United Kingdom.


26. The money transfer receipts on pages 94 to 98 show  transfers  made  by
    the Sponsor to the Appellant while the  Appellant  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Again these are not very easy to read, but given  that  there
    are only four provided for 2013, at which point the Appellant had  been
    living in the United Kingdom for some two years, they do not show  that
    the Appellant was dependent on the Sponsor.  We accept that  there  was
    also evidence of a loan taken out in 2011, but this was to  assist  the
    Appellant to pay for his studies.  While we accept  that  it  does  not
    appear that the judge has referred to these money transfer receipts, we
    do not find this is a material error as  they  do  not  show  that  the
    Appellant was dependent on the Sponsor.  We find that it  was  open  to
    the judge to find that the Appellant has not discharged the  burden  of
    proof  upon  him  to  establish  that  he  was  previously  financially
    dependent on the Sponsor [28].


Present dependency


27. In  relation  to  present  dependency,  the  judge  addresses  this  in
    paragraph [29].  We were referred by Ms Allen  to  the  copies  of  the
    Appellant's bank accounts in the Appellant's bundle, and we  find  that
    the judge erred when he stated that the Appellant's bank  accounts  had
    not been produced.  We have carefully considered these bank statements.
     They cover only a relatively short period of  time  between  1  August
    2014 and 16 October 2014.  These were the only bank statements provided
    for the Appellant.  They show receipt of funds from  the  Sponsor,  but
    they cover a very limited period.  The Sponsor's bank accounts provided
    also covered a period in 2014, from 16 June 2014 to 15 October 2014.


28. The decision is dated  4  February  2015  and  the  hearing  was  on  8
    September 2015.  The most recent piece of  evidence  provided  to  show
    transfer of funds from the Sponsor to  the  Appellant  was  dated  over
    three months prior to the date of decision and almost a year  prior  to
    the hearing.  There is no evidence of any transfers made after  October
    2014.  We find  that  the  evidence  provided,  even  if  it  had  been
    considered by the judge in its entirety, was not  enough  to  establish
    present dependency on the Sponsor.   We find that there is no  material
    error of law in the judge's finding that the Appellant  had  not  shown
    present dependence on the Sponsor.


29. It was accepted that, in order to meet the requirements  of  regulation
    8(2) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006,  the
    Appellant had to show prior dependency on the  Sponsor,  together  with
    present dependency, or present membership of his household.   Even  had
    the judge considered all of the evidence before him, it was not  enough
    to establish this.   Any  errors  made  in  the  consideration  of  the
    evidence, or in misstating what the Appellant  had  to  show,  are  not
    material.


Notice of Decision


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal-tier Tribunal does not  involve
    the making of a material error of law, and we do not set it aside.


 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed                                  Date 27 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

