
    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/06804/2014





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London        |              Determination        |
|                                    |Promulgated                        |
|On 7 January 2015                   |              On 7 January 2015    |
|                                    |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                            Appellant

                                     and

                                 NAVEED ABID

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant: Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent: Mr Z Nasim, instructed by M-R Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    Whilst this is an appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department,  for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  in   the
   determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant,  a  national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal against a decision made by the Secretary of State to refuse  his
   application for a residence card as confirmation of a right to reside  in
   the UK with his EEA national spouse in accordance  with  the  Immigration
   (EEA) Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations). The respondent refused  the
   application on the basis that she believed that the marriage was  one  of
   convenience entered into for the sole purpose of him remaining in the  UK
   and  because  it  was  not  accepted  that  the  appellant's  spouse  was
   exercising treaty rights in the UK. The appellant's appeal  against  this
   decision  was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Majid  under  the   EEA
   Regulations and under  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.  The
   Secretary of State now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

3. The grounds of appeal contend that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred
   in failing to deal  with  the  credibility  issues  arising  from  cross-
   examination and in failing to give adequate reasons for the  decision  to
   allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations. The respondent submitted  the
   presenting officer's minute of the hearing and contends that  the  issues
   arising from cross-examination of the appellant and  his  wife  were  not
   adequately addressed by the Judge. It is also contended that the  Judge's
   consideration of Article 8 of the ECHR is meaningless.

4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis  that
   it is arguable that the  Judge  has  given  inadequate  reasons  for  his
   findings that the appellant's marriage is genuine.

5. Mr Nasim submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  determination
   shows that he looked at all of the evidence and that he had the  evidence
   in  mind  when  he  reached  his  findings.   He   submitted   that   any
   inconsistencies between the evidence of the appellant and his  wife  were
   minor.

Error of law

6. The Judge set out some of the oral evidence adduced  before  him  in  the
   determination. He rightly says at paragraph 7 that he does  not  need  to
   set out all of the evidence nor, as he says in paragraph 9, does he  need
   to isolate every piece of evidence. However he  does  need  to  say  what
   parts of the evidence he accepts or does not accept and to give  adequate
   reasons for his decision. Although he sets out the submission made by the
   presenting officer in relation to the  credibility  issues  arising  from
   cross-examination [11] he does not make any findings in relation to those
   issues.

7. In the determination the  Judge  only  made  a  few  actual  findings  or
   observations about the evidence. At paragraph 14 he  said;  'Accordingly,
   in response to my questions, the Portuguese wife did not leave me in  any
   doubt that she was genuinely married'. At paragraph 19  he  said;  'I  am
   willing to allow this appeal because I am convinced that the marriage  is
   genuine...'. He went on to say; 'Both spouses corroborated the fact  that
   they were living together under the same roof before the marriage and had
   travelled from the same tenement in the car of  the  appellant's  brother
   who confirmed that fact in his oral evidence' [19].

8. I am not satisfied that these three sentences disclose  adequate  reasons
   for finding that this is not a 'marriage of convenience' as  asserted  by
   the Secretary of State.

9. I therefore set the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  aside.  As  the
   First-tier Tribunal Judge made no adequate findings of  fact  I  set  the
   decision aside in its entirety.

10. Mr Nasim submitted that,  in  the  interests  of  fairness,  the  appeal
   should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing.  Mr
   Avery accepted that the case came within the Practice Direction  and  did
   not object to the case being remitted.

11. I am satisfied that  the  appellant  has  not  therefore  had  his  case
   properly considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  parties  were  in
   agreement with my view that the nature and extent of  the  judicial  fact
   finding which is necessary in order for the decision to be remade is such
   that (having regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to remit the case to the
   First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The Judge made an error on a point of  law  and  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

Signed
       Date:  7 January 2015


A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge























