
IAC-AH-dh-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06499/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 December 2014                           |On 22 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     J A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Cronin, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg Peirce
& Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey, promulgated on 9 July 2014, dismissing
    her appeal against the decision of the respondent made  on  13  January
    2014 to refuse her leave to remain  on  human  rights  grounds  and  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  She has lived in  the  United
    Kingdom since she arrived in 2001 with entry clearance as a visitor  to
    see her husband who unfortunately  died  the  day  after  her  arrival.
    Shortly thereafter she was diagnosed as HIV positive and on 14 February
    2002 she applied in time for leave to remain on compassionate  grounds,
    an application refused on 25 November 2005.  The  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed on 27 February 2006; permission to appeal  those
    decisions was refused.

 3. The appellant became extremely unwell owing  to  TB  and  complications
    arising therefrom in 2009; she also had a severe  adverse  reaction  to
    her multiple drug therapy for treatment of her HIV status.

 4. On 14 July 2009 a fresh claim for leave to remain on the basis of human
    rights was submitted by the  appellant's  solicitors  but  no  decision
    thereon was made until 13 January 2014. This  decision  was  only  made
    after judicial review proceedings  to  challenge  the  delay  had  been
    brought.

 5. The appellant's case is that her removal to Sri Lanka would be a breach
    of Articles 3 and/or 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention  on  the  basis
    that:

      a) she has established a family life in the United  Kingdom  with  her
         late husband's brothers and sister-in-law upon whom she  is  wholly
         dependent for emotional and practical support;

      b) she would be without any family emotional or other support  in  Sri
         Lanka on return; and, would not be accommodated;

      c)  given  her  illness,  she  would  be  at   risk   of   significant
         discrimination and hostility, effectively ostracising her; and, her
         position  would  be  further  exacerbated  as  a  result   of   the
         discrimination she faces as a Tamil woman;

      d) given the particular  difficulties  arising  from  her  sensitivity
         towards most of the medication and the fact that her immune  system
         was still compromised (despite medication), she is  at  significant
         risk on return to Sri Lanka;  that in light of  these  factors  and
         taking into account the delay arising in this case to remove her to
         Sri Lanka would be disproportionate.

 6. The respondent's case as set out in the refusal letter  of  13  January
    2014 is that:-

      e) the appellant had not established  a  family  life  in  the  United
         Kingdom;

      f) she did not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
         Immigration Rules given that she had been  here  less  than  twenty
         years and had not provided evidence to suggest she had no remaining
         ties with Sri Lanka;

      g) antiretroviral treatment would be available in Sri Lanka  and  that
         her state of health was not so great so as that Article 3 would  be
         engaged;

      h) although invited to do so, the appellant had chosen not to make  an
         asylum claim on the basis that she would be subject to  stigma  and
         discrimination but had not done so;

      i) there were no compelling or  compassionate  issues  such  that  she
         should be given discretionary leave.

 7. When the matter came before Judge Pacey she  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant, her brother-in-law M T and her brother-in-law's wife  Mrs  M
    T.  She also had before her statements from another brother-in-law, A T
    and a nephew, R A, (son of her deceased sister).   In  addition,  there
    were  numerous  medical  reports  before  her  from  Dr  McSorley,  the
    appellant's  treating  physician,  and  a  report  from  Dr  Widger  (a
    sociologist) on the difficulties she would face in Sri Lanka  owing  to
    the stigma attached to those with HIV.

 8. Judge Pacey found that:-

      j) the appellant was an adult, not severely disabled and although  the
         health system in Sri Lanka fell  short  of  that  provided  in  the
         United Kingdom, it could not be said that there was no  appropriate
         treatment available [20]. The judge  noted that Dr Widger  did  not
         in his report state in  terms  that  the  appellant  would  die  if
         deprived of the treatment which she currently enjoys and  thus  the
         appeal on Article 3 grounds failed [22];

      k) the appellant has a family life with her  brothers  and  all  their
         family there existing between them more than the normal ties [26];

      l) the removal would interfere with  her  right  to  respect  for  her
         family life because given that all that they do for her on a day-to-
         day basis she would not be able to enjoy family life from Sri Lanka
         [28];

      m) the interference was of such gravity to engage Article  8,  as  she
         would be deprived of the physical and emotional support from family
         arising because of her medical condition [29];

      n)  nonetheless,  the  interference  would   be   proportionate,   the
         appellant's case not falling within the small  minority  of  health
         cases which could fail under Article  3  but  might  succeed  under
         Article 8 [35, 36];

      o) the decisions of the Upper Tribunal in Akhalu (Health  claim:  ECHR
         Article 8) [2013] UKUT 00400  and  Okonkwo  (Legacy/Hakemi;  health
         claim) [2013] UKUT 00401 could be distinguished on the  basis  that
         the disparity of healthcare facilities did not weigh heavily in the
         claimant's favour [37, 38] and on the basis that the appellant  had
         come to the United Kingdom as a visitor with a six months visa [40]
         her only lawful period of  residence  being  administrative  rather
         than on substantive grounds;

 1. Judge Pacey, in reaching her conclusions, took into account that:

      a) the appellant had lived in the United Kingdom  for  thirteen  years
         and had developed strong family and private life  ties  [42]  being
         supported by her husband's two brothers;

      b) the evidence of M T and Mrs M T concerning the implications of  the
         applicant returning to Sri Lanka  [44]  noting  also  the  lack  of
         relatives in Sri Lanka [43].

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      c) Judge Pacey erred in considering the applicant's circumstances only
         in comparison to other reported decisions but not, as  is  required
         by  AE  (Algeria)  in  a  careful  and  structured  way  [7];   had
         misapplied MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279 [9] by  failing
         to note that at paragraph [23] the exception identified by Moses LJ
         was pertinent given this appellant's family and private life claim;

      d) the Article 8 evaluation is manifestly inadequate, there  being  no
         proper  consideration  of  the   appellant's   longstanding   total
         dependency on her British family; her serious and volatile physical
         and mental health; the absence of a home or family  in  Sri  Lanka;
         that she will face stigma,  shame  and  imputed  discrimination  on
         return [12]; and, the judge had failed  to  give  reasons  why  the
         factors did not render the applicant's removal  a  disproportionate
         interference;

      e) Judge Pacey [15] failed to take proper account of the opinion of Dr
         Widger,  unreasonably  citing  a   lack   of   medical   diagnosis,
         incorrectly treating him as an anthropologist not a physician; and,
         failed to take into account the expert testimony of Dr McSorley  as
         to the significant risks to this appellant were her treatment to be
         interrupted;

      f) Judge Pacey failed to give weight to the appellant's  residence  in
         the UK including the length of her lawful residence and  failed  to
         give proper regard to the delay in this case.

10. We commence our analysis  by  considering  Judge  Pacey's  approach  to
    article 3. We are satisfied that the judge directed herself properly as
    to the test  applicable  to  Article  3  health  cases.   She  properly
    directed herself in accordance with the decisions in GS (India)  [2011]
    UKUT 35 and D v UK [1997] 24 EHRR 43.  It is not the  appellant's  case
    as set out either in the grounds of appeal to  the  Tribunal  that  the
    treatment that she would receive as a Tamil woman with HIV would  reach
    sufficient severity to engage Article 3.

11. Whilst the judge's comments at [21] with regard to  the  report  of  Dr
    Widger could have  been  better  expressed,  it  cannot  reasonably  be
    inferred  from  these  that  the  judge  expected  from  it  a  medical
    diagnosis; it was open to her to note that this report, which dealt  in
    detail with the treatment available and the manner in which people with
    HIV are treated in Sri Lanka was not  sufficient  to  show  that  there
    would be a lack of treatment such that she would die.   The  comparison
    being made was clearly directed  towards  the  situations  where  there
    would be no treatment available at all; that is clear from the  context
    of the cases being discussed in the judge's consideration of Article 3.
    It cannot be inferred that the  judge  was  looking  for  a  diagnosis,
    simply that she was making findings on the  availability  of  treatment
    for the appellant's condition, and it was open to her to conclude  that
    the evidence did not show treatment would not be available.

12. We turn next to the findings with respect to article 8. This is a  case
    in which the judge found, unusually, that the appellant who is an adult
    had established a  family  life  with  her  brothers-in-law  and  their
    families. This is in addition to the finding of a private life  in  the
    United Kingdom.

13. The challenge with regard to article 8 is, in summary, that  the  judge
    misdirected herself as in  law;  and,  assessing  whether  removal  was
    proportionate, failed to take into account factors in  the  appellant's
    favour in the context of this being a "family life" case.

14. Ms Cronin submitted that this latter point is implicit in the  grounds;
    Mr Whitwell argued that it was not raised and had not  formed  part  of
    the challenge to the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Having
    considered the grounds in  detail,  we  note  that  it  is  averred  at
    paragraph  [12]  that  there  was  no  proper  consideration   of   the
    appellant's longstanding total dependency on her British family and  at
    paragraph [9] that the judge had failed properly to engage  with  Moses
    LJ's observations at paragraph 23 of his decision in  MM.  Accordingly,
    we accept that, although it could have been more  clearly  pleaded,  Ms
    Cronin's point can properly be developed from the grounds as pleaded.

15.  Judge  Pacey  sets  out  in  detail  the  relevant  case  law  in  her
    determination. It is not contended that the cases to which she referred
    are not good law. The challenge to her application of the case  law  is
    two-fold: that she did not consider the appellant's circumstances in  a
    proper and structured way; and, further, failed to  take  into  account
    relevant factors, or, in the alternative, failed to give proper reasons
    for the finding that removal was proportionate.

16. We consider that whilst the findings may have been  adequate  had  this
    been simply a private life case, there is  insufficient  indication  in
    Judge Pacey's determination that  she  considered  the  nature  of  the
    interference with the family life she found had been  established.   It
    is not clear from paragraph [42] that she had taken  family  life  into
    account; what weight she had attached to it; or, whether she took  this
    factor into  account  as  a  matter  in  favour  of  the  appellant  or
    otherwise. This aspect is significant; if it is not clear on what  side
    a factor was weighed, if at all, it is not possible to discern  whether
    the judge  properly  weighed  the  existence  of  family  life  in  the
    appellant's  favour;  nor  is  it  clear  what  interference   to   the
    established family life she considered would flow from the  appellant's
    removal.  The reasoning at [44] is inadequate.

17. For these reasons, we consider that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve the making of a material error of law and  we  set
    it aside.

18. We consider that that the finding that family life in this case  is  to
    be preserved, but that there will of necessity need  to  be  a  further
    fact-finding exercise as to the effect on that family life of  removing
    the  appellant,  and  to  what  extent  that   interference   will   be
    proportionate. The judge's determination does not set out in any detail
    the evidence she heard on the  family  life  aspect  and  there  is  an
    absence of clear findings on what she appears to have been  told.  Such
    matters will of necessity require a consideration of  section  117B  of
    the 2002 Act.

19. In the circumstances, we consider that it would be appropriate to remit
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision, albeit that
    the finding that family life  exists  between  the  appellant  and  her
    brothers-in-law is preserved.  We maintain the anonymity order made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed        Date 21/01/2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


