
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06886/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 May 2016                                |On 3 August, 2016             |
|Delivered orally                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                               MR ANDREI BUZA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Smith, Counsel instructed by Messrs Fisher
                    Meredith Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen  of  Romania  born  on  2
    October 1990, against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chana
    who, sitting at Hendon Magistrates' Court on 10  June  2015,  dismissed
    the appeal of the Appellant against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 6 February 2015 to make a deportation order under  Regulation  21
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  and  to
    refuse his human rights claim.  We have noted with  some  concern  that
    there has been an undeniable and regrettable six  month  delay  between
    the hearing of this appeal and promulgation.  We note however  this  is
    not a case where  the  Judge's  conclusion  was  based  essentially  on
    matters of credibility and no doubt this will explain why  the  grounds
    of challenge have raised no issue as to the reliability of the  Judge's
    decision because of the effluxion of time.  It is however a  matter  of
    which we take note.

2.   The brief immigration history of the Appellant  is  that  he  lived  in
    Moldova for the first seven years of his  life  and  moved  to  Romania
    before coming to the UK to join his mother in September 2004 when  aged
    13 and where he has  remained  ever  since.   On  3  October  2013  the
    Appellant was convicted and  sentenced  for  blackmail  at  Blackfriars
    Crown Court for which he  was  sentenced  to  a  term  of  five  years'
    imprisonment.  His subsequent appeal against  conviction  was  refused.
    He had no previous criminal convictions in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appeal before us is concerned only with the  question  of  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error of law of a nature such  as  to
    require her decision to be set aside.  It  is  only  if  that  question
    returns a positive answer that it is open to the  Tribunal  to  disturb
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

3.   At the outset of the hearing before us  Mr  Duffy  for  the  Respondent
    most helpfully, and if we  may  say  so  realistically,  accepted  that
    clearly what the Judge had to say at paragraph 80 of her  decision  was
    "a conflation of the Immigration Rules with the Regulations"  that  are
    of course completely different and in such  circumstances  he  conceded
    that for that reason alone the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge amounted to a material error of law.  In  such  circumstances  we
    did not seek to trouble Ms  Smith  to  address  us  although  we  would
    compliment her on the  clarity  of  her  renewed  grounds  before  this
    Tribunal upon which permission was granted.  We have had no  difficulty
    upon our own consideration of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision
    to come to precisely the same conclusions.

4.   It would be as well therefore if we were to  set  out  below  what  the
    Judge indeed had to say at paragraph 80 of her decision as follows:

         "I have taken into account the public interest which is not  easily
         displaced.  I find that the public  interest  will  be  compromised
         because the appellant does  constitute  a  present  threat  to  the
         requirements of public policy and public security".

5.   That conclusion has  to  be  seen  in  the  context  of  the  preceding
    paragraph 79 in which the Judge had this to say:

         "79. I find that in this case there are  exceptional  circumstances
             where serious grounds of public policy and security trump  the
             appellant's circumstances even though he has resided  in  this
             country since the age of 13 and  has  acquired  the  right  of
             permanent residence.  The appellant by  his  own  conduct  has
             proved that he is a  potential  danger  to  women  and  public
             policy and the fundamental interests of society dictates  that
             anyone who has committed such a serious crime against a  woman
             makes this an entirely proportionate decision  to  deport  him
             from the United Kingdom".

6.   Indeed it is apparent to us  that  in  granting  permission  to  appeal
    Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane was understandably persuaded  to  grant
    permission on the basis that it was arguable that the  Judge  erred  in
    law by holding that the law "dictates that it will be proportionate  to
    deport any individual who has committed 'such a serious crime against a
    woman'".

7.   At paragraph 41 of her decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge  set  out
    in detail the requirements of paragraph 21 of the EEA 2006  Regulations
    and these of course included the  principles  enshrined  in  Regulation
    21(5) and (6) that must be applied.  It would be  as  well  for  us  to
    refer for the purposes  of  our  decision  in  the  present  appeal  by
    reference to 21(5) where whether the decision is taken on  the  grounds
    of public policy or public security it shall, in addition to  complying
    with the preceding paragraphs of this Regulation be taken in accordance
    with the following principles:

         "(c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society; and ...

         (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do not in  themselves
             justify the decision".

8.   With that in mind we refer to what the Judge had to  say  at  paragraph
    79 (above).  We have had no difficulty therefore in concluding on  this
    basis alone, that the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred  on  a
    point of law as  in  effect  the  Judge  was  saying  that  anyone  who
    committed this offence must be removed and that  conviction  in  itself
    was a sufficient justification for that removal.  Such a conclusion  is
    wholly contrary to the provisions of Regulation 21(5)  (c)  and  (e)  -
    above.

9.   Whilst the person's previous conviction is not irrelevant  because  the
    fact of it demonstrates a risk of the commission  of  an  offence,  the
    Judge erred  because  her  decision  was  that  the  conviction  itself
    justified the decision.  Bearing in mind the  Appellant  was  a  person
    convicted of a serious offence the issue for the Judge was not  whether
    on that account he should be deported but whether in the light of  that
    conviction and in the context of the evidence  as  a  whole,  it  could
    properly be said that he was a person who represented a sufficient risk
    to public security.

10.  Under Regulation  21  a  person's  criminal  conviction  cannot  itself
    justify  a  decision  to  remove  him.   The  decision  must  be  based
    exclusively on the personal conduct of the person concerned.  The  fact
    that a person's previous criminal conviction does not in itself justify
    the decision does not mean that the fact of the previous conviction  is
    irrelevant.  This is not a situation analogous to  Section  32  of  the
    2002 Act whereby the fact of the conviction  can  permit  justification
    for the removal.  The question is whether in all the  circumstances  of
    the case, including the fact that the person has committed an  offence,
    such a person represents a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of  society.   Only
    then does it become  relevant  to  consider  whether  the  decision  is
    proportionate taking into account all the considerations identified  in
    Regulation 21(5) and (6)  see  MC  (Essa  principles  recast)  Portugal
    [2015] UKUT 00520 (IAC).

11.  The parties asked that the appropriate course was to  remit  this  case
    to be heard  afresh  with  no  findings  preserved  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal before a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chana.  Indeed Ms Smith rightly  pointed  out  that  the
    error that has been identified has permeated  the  whole  decision  and
    that on that basis alone there should be a fresh hearing.

12.  Having considered as to how the decision should be re-made,  and  after
    discussion with the parties, we find that  we  are  in  agreement  with
    their proposal.  It was further agreed that having regard to the  error
    of law found, the length of the hearing (estimated at three hours), the
    fact that there were at least three witnesses, that there  were  highly
    compelling reasons falling within  7.2(b)  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement as to why the decision should not be re-made by  the
    Upper Tribunal.  It was clearly in the interests of  justice  that  the
    appeal be heard afresh in the  First-tier  Tribunal.   We  are  further
    mindful that there are human rights issues arguably  relevant  to  this
    appeal and the fact that the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge took place almost one year ago only serves to further demonstrate
    the need for this appeal to be heard afresh.

13.  For the reasons we have above given and by agreement with the  parties,
    we conclude therefore that the appeal should be remitted  to  a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chana  to
    determine the appeal afresh with none  of  her  findings  preserved  to
    Taylor House Hearing Centre  on  the  first  available  date.   We  are
    informed that for that purpose no interpreter will be required.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law such that the decision has accordingly been set aside.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 3 June 2016

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
