

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/06967/2015

                                                 IA/06968/2015

                                                 IA/06970/2015

                                                 IA/06972/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18th May 2016                          |On 6th June 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                     mrs Harpreet Kaur (first Appellant)
                    mr Bikramjit Singh (second Appellant)
                     miss Jasmeen Kaur (third Appellant)
                     miss Simran Kaur (fourth Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms C Bexson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are nationals of  India  whose  appeals  were  dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules and under  Article  8  ECHR  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lewis in a decision promulgated on 23rd October 2015.

 2. The grounds of  application  were  submitted  on  the  basis  that  the
    decision contained material errors of law  in  relation  to  Article  8
    ECHR.  Reference was made to ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 in  which  the
    primacy of the consideration of the best interests of the child  needed
    to be made clear in emphatic terms.  That had not  been  done  in  this
    case and the judge had only mentioned Section 55 of the 2009 Act as  an
    "afterthought".

 3. Furthermore the judge had failed to properly apply Section  117B(6)  of
    the 2014 Act.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable  the
    judge had failed to  give  the  best  interests  of  the  children  the
    prominence required by Section 55 albeit that those interests would not
    necessarily be determinative.

 5. A Rule 24 notice was lodged by the Secretary of  State.   It  was  said
    that the grounds were nothing more than a criticism of the structure of
    the decision and that the judge had undertaken a holistic  analysis  of
    all the issues.  He had correctly referred to the principles enunciated
    in  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (Decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC).  Furthermore the judge  had  provided
    cogent reasons why the requirements of 276ADE had not been made out and
    had undertaken a correct analysis of Article 8  outside  the  Rules  in
    terms of Razgar.

 6. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 7. For the Appellants Ms Bexson said that the judge had applied  too  much
    weight  to  the  immigration  history  of  the  parents.   It  was  not
    sufficient just to mention the obligations in  respect  of  the  child.
    These had been presented as an afterthought.  The best interests of the
    child had been dealt with in a  summary  fashion  and  only  after  the
    proportionality exercise had been carried out.  I  was  asked  to  find
    there was an error in the decision and to set the  decision  aside  and
    allow the appeal outright.

 8. For the Secretary of State Mr Walker relied on the Rule 24 notice.  The
    judge had given very  careful  consideration  to  all  aspects  of  the
    evidence - reference was made to paragraph 52 of the decision.   I  was
    asked to dismiss the appeal.

 9. I reserved my decision.

 Conclusions

10. What the judge did not do was to state that the best interests  of  the
    children was the starting point in his decision and there  is  possibly
    some merit in the observation contained in the Grounds of  Appeal  that
    their best interests as a primary consideration was not made  clear  in
    as emphatic terms as it might have  been.  However   the   judge  noted
    that the Appellants' cases were essentially put on the basis  that  the
    fourth Appellant  qualified  for  leave  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(iv) by reason of the length of  time  that
    she has been here.  The judge noted that the  Appellants'  applications
    were made just after the eldest child's 7th birthday.

11. Having said that, the judge indicated very early on in his decision  at
    paragraph  15  that  the  circumstances  of  the  children   -   either
    individually or collectively  -  were  not  such  as  to  outweigh  the
    countervailing factors of the parents' immigration history. He  clearly
    had the best interests of the children as a  primary  consideration  in
    mind and he went on to refer to Azimi-Moayed.  He found that while  the
    children only had a very basic understanding of Punjabi  and  otherwise
    spoke English, the extent of their Punjabi  language  skills  had  been
    underplayed by their parents (paragraph 19).  The judge took account of
    the fact that the child must not be blamed for matters for  which  they
    were not responsible - see Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74.  He then  turned  to
    the  history  of   the   adult   Appellants   and   referred   to   the
    disingenuousness of some of the evidence and the  lack  of  candour  in
    presenting witness statements given that the application was made  only
    after the fourth Appellant's 7th birthday (paragraph 43).  There is  no
    challenge to that observation.  The  judge  considered  the  applicable
    Immigration rules and was entitled to conclude as he did.

12. When he came to consider Article 8 ECHR he had to follow what was  said
    in ZH in that the primacy of the best interests of the children had  to
    be made clear.  In my view he did so in paragraph 52.  He said that the
    interests of a child are a primary but not paramount consideration.  He
    found that the best interests were primarily served by  remaining  with
    their parents and did not find that there was anything in particular in
    the prospect of returning  to  India  that  would  undermine  the  best
    interests for either child.  He considered Part 5A of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in  some  detail  (paragraph  53).   He
    carried out an appropriate balancing act in Article 8 referring to  the
    public interest of maintaining effective immigration control.

13. Contrary to the Grounds of Appeal he was fully aware that under Article
    8 the interests of the children were a primary consideration  and  took
    that factor fully into account in assessing the proportionality of  the
    decision to remove the family.

14. Given the judge's clear findings and that  he  plainly  did  take  into
    account the best interests of the children as a  primary  consideration
    there is no error of law in the decision which must stand.

Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

16. I do not set aside the decision.

17. No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date 6th June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
