
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06812/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                   |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 6th September 2016                           |On 7th October 2016        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     AH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Moksud, Legal Representative of International
                    Immigration Advisory Services
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the sake of clarity  and  to  avoid  confusion,  I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction in respect of  this
    appeal.  I continue that direction:

    DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY -  RULE  14  OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE
    (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant.  This direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Background

 3. On 28th April 2016 Designated Judge Woodcraft gave  permission  to  the
    respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Brunnen in which he allowed the appeal against the decision of
    the respondent to  refuse  leave  to  remain  in  accordance  with  the
    provisions of Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 4. Designated Judge Woodcraft  noted  that  the  respondent's  grounds  of
    application took issue with the First-tier Judge's findings as  to  the
    appellant's relationship with a UK partner and their child,  a  British
    citizen.  In particular the  First-tier  Judge  saw  vagueness  in  the
    appellant's evidence of the partnership and it was  apparent  from  the
    evidence of the partner that there were grounds for concern  about  the
    subsisting nature of the relationship.  The judge  had  not  adequately
    explained why  these  difficulties  and  previous  adverse  credibility
    findings in  an  earlier  decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    outweighed by the appellant's evidence.

 5. Designated Judge Woodcraft also commented that it was  not  clear  that
    the respondent had considered her duty under Section 55 of the 2009 Act
    in the refusal decision.  That might also mean  that  the  respondent's
    decision was not in accordance with  the  law  but,  nevertheless,  the
    first issue to consider was whether or not the judge's conclusions were
    adequately explained given the difficulties in evidence which the judge
    had highlighted.

Submissions

 6. Mr Moksud drew attention to a Rule 24 response by the  appellant  which
    he thought had been submitted.  The response was not  on  file  but  he
    handed in a copy and a copy was also given to Mr Bates.  I allowed time
    to read that document before proceeding.

 7. Mr Bates then made submissions.  He contended that the judge's  finding
    that the appellant was in a relationship  with  his  partner,  IK,  was
    unreasoned particularly since, in the same paragraph, he expressed  the
    view that, because of IK's "intellectual limitations", the relationship
    might be "exploitative".  In reaching that finding the  judge  had  not
    referred to  any  of  the  evidence  which  might  have  supported  the
    conclusions.  The judge had simply  summarised  the  evidence  in,  for
    example, paragraphs 22 to 26, but did not  explain  how  that  evidence
    could support the existence of a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with IK.  In particular, at paragraph 25, the judge had  noted  that  a
    letter from a local authority in January 2015, had confirmed  that  the
    appellant's name had been added to the Electoral Register for the  same
    address as IK, when the alleged relationship was claimed to  have  been
    in  existence  since  at  least  March  2013.   Further,  the   judge's
    conclusion in paragraph 38,  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with Z, was unreasoned.

 8. Mr Moksud relied on the Rule 24 reply.  This emphasised that the  judge
    had made detailed reference to the appellant's  evidence,  particularly
    in paragraphs 16 to 18, which was sufficient to show the existence of a
    subsisting and genuine  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
    partner.  Additionally, it was contended that  the  production  of  the
    birth certificate of Z showing A to be the child's father and the  fact
    that the appellant had moved back  to  the  property  occupied  by  his
    partner and played an active part in the care and upbringing  of  their
    daughter, showed the parental relationship.  The evidence summarised in
    paragraphs 22 to 27 was  also  said  to  conclusively  prove  that  the
    parties were living together in a genuine and subsisting  relationship.
    It was also contended that the  judge  did  consider  the  respondent's
    obligations under Section 55 of the 2009 Act when  assessing  the  best
    interests of the British citizen child.

Conclusions

 9. At the end of submissions and after I had considered the matter  for  a
    few moments, I announced that the decision showed errors on  points  of
    law such that it should be set aside.  My reasons for  that  conclusion
    follow.

10. The statements of the judge in paragraphs 30 and 38 that the  appellant
    was in a relationship with his partner, IK, and that the child, Z,  was
    a qualifying child within the meaning of Section 117B(6)(a) and  has  a
    genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  that  child  are
    unreasoned.  Although the  judge  may  be  said  to  have  referred  to
    evidence which might support those  contentions  when  summarising  the
    evidence in earlier parts of the decision, it was incumbent upon him to
    identify that evidence and to explain why other  unsupportive  evidence
    did not detract from his conclusions.  It is clear  from  the  evidence
    which the judge has summarised there was  room  for  significant  doubt
    about the genuineness of the relationship particularly when  the  judge
    thought it might be "exploitative" and the evidence of cohabitation was
    inconsistent.  Further, the judge also made  reference  to  a  previous
    unsuccessful appeal by the appellant in the First-tier  Tribunal  where
    the Designated Judge pointed  to  significant  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's relationship with another claimed partner and child finding
    the appellant to be incredible on that occasion.  The present  decision
    does not seek to explain why earlier significant  adverse  findings  of
    credibility had no relevance to the present favourable ones.

11. The decision of the First-tier Judge is clearly inadequately  reasoned.
    For that reason there will have to be a fresh hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal when the claims and evidence  can  be  considered  again.
    This accords with paragraph 7 of the Practice Statement by  the  Senior
    President of Tribunals of 25 September 2012.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows an error on a  point  of  law.
It is set aside for hearing afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.



DIRECTIONS

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

13. The hearing will take place at the Manchester Hearing Centre.

14. The hearing should not be  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Brunnen.

15. No interpreter will be provided for the hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal unless  representatives  or  the  appellant  indicate  to  the
    contrary.

16. The time estimate for the hearing is two hours.


Signed                              Date 7th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
