
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/06690/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 6 September 2013                           |On 24 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           muhammad shahbaz rafiq

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Daykin, Counsel instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal as  it  was  originally  by  Mr  Rafiq  against  the
    Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  14  February  2013  refusing  his
    application for leave to remain.

2.   The basis of the claim is that it was an application for settlement  in
    relation to long residence and the matter was considered by  the  judge
    who heard evidence from a number of witnesses one of whom  he  did  not
    find helpful but he found the other three witnesses, all to  be  as  he
    put it very credible and his findings in respect  of  them  are  to  be
    found at paragraph 29 of the determination and going on  to  paragraphs
    30 and 31.

3.   The key issue of dispute in this case  relates  to  documentation  that
    was produced by Mr Rafiq, whom  I  will  call  the  appellant  although
    technically before me today is the respondent.  He produced a  document
    and invoice dated 3 March 1999.  He had not kept the original,  he  had
    given it to his solicitors who he said had sent it to the Home  Office.
    He was asked about the invoice and why he did not claim  after  getting
    advice and he said it was because they did not actually do  immigration
    work, that he did not get any advice.  It was pointed out to  him  that
    the invoice said immigration advice and he had said he had gone to  the
    counter, was asked to sit for a while and was introduced to someone who
    told him they did not do immigration work and that was what they put on
    the invoice so it really was not much use to him at all.

4.   This document was part of the reasons why the application  was  refused
    by the Secretary of State and the reasons for this are set out  in  the
    refusal letter.  Concerns about the invoice were first that no  company
    name was detailed, there was a spelling mistake on the invoice and  the
    telephone number detailed on the invoice had an area code of  0207  and
    the judge expressed views on this at paragraph 32 of the determination.
     The appellant had provided an entry from a register showing that  such
    a company existed and in the absence  of  compelling  evidence  to  the
    contrary, the judge did not believe  that  mere  supposition  over  the
    invoice was sufficient to conclude that  the  document  was  false  and
    hence did not believe the application should be refused on the basis of
    using a forged document.  The Secretary of State challenged this on the
    basis that the judge had not properly addressed the concerns set out in
    the refusal letter and permission was granted on that basis and I  have
    heard helpful submissions first from Ms  Isherwood  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State reiterating and developing the points  made  in  the
    grounds of appeal and also from Ms Daykin.

5.   It is said on behalf of the appellant that first of  all,  contrary  to
    what the refusal letter says,  there  is  a  company  name  detailed  -
    Solicitors Legal Services Limited.  As  regards  the  spelling  mistake
    that is a misspelling of between (batween) and it is said that  it  was
    the kind of mistake anyone could make and  the  third  point  on  which
    perhaps most reliance is placed  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is  the
    telephone number stated which it is said in  the  refusal  letter  that
    although an area code of 0207 was given this was  introduced  until  22
    April 2000 whereas the date of the  invoice  is  3  March  1999.    The
    response in relation  to  that  point  is  evidence  that  was  in  the
    appellant's bundle to show that since 1999 both 0207 and 0208  prefixes
    had been used London-wide without geographical significance.

6.   The question is whether therefore bearing these  matters  in  mind  the
    judge was entitled to conclude as he did at paragraph 32.  The argument
    on behalf of the Secretary of State in  this  regard  is  that  it  was
    relevant to the credibility of the claim as a whole, in particular that
    it showed that his character and  conduct  was  not  desirable  to  the
    United Kingdom and he did not meet the requirements of the  Rules  with
    reference to paragraph 276B to C.

7.   Although the judge  could  I  think  have  gone  into  more  detail  in
    addressing the specific provision in this regard than the way in  which
    he did, as I have just cited in assessing this evidence and could  have
    more helpfully, I think, referred to the reasons why in more detail, he
    was satisfied that the invoice did not prejudice Mr Rafiq materially.

8.   I am satisfied that the evidence before him was such as to justify  the
    overall conclusion that he came to and the supposition over the invoice
    was not sufficient to conclude that it was false.   I  think  there  is
    force in the points made by Ms Daykin in this regard.   The  judge  was
    clearly aware that the burden was on the Secretary of State and was not
    satisfied that the burden in that regard had been established.  Clearly
    he was satisfied with the volume of oral evidence he received  for  the
    various reasons that  he  set  out  at  paragraphs  29  to  31  of  the
    determination and I consider that overall he was entitled  to  conclude
    as he did in allowing the appeal under the Rules and  the  allowing  of
    the appeal on that basis is therefore maintained.








Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

