

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/06994/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 29 September 2016                          |On 05 October 2016           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                    K B P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karim, Counsel,
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there are material errors of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N J Bennett ("FTTJ Bennett")  promulgated  on  18  March
    2016.

 2. For ease of reference and continuity, I maintain  the  descriptions  of
    the parties as appellant and respondent, as set out in  FTTJ  Bennett's
    decision, although both parties have been granted permission to appeal.

 3. No anonymity direction was  made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  I
    consider an anonymity order is  appropriate  given  the  allegation  of
    dishonesty and make one accordingly.

Background

 4. The appellant applied on 2 April 2011 for leave to remain as a  Tier  4
    (General) Student together with her  dependent  partner.   She  did  so
    following a successful appeal  on  8  March  2013  against  an  earlier
    refusal by the respondent to grant further leave to remain as a Tier  4
    (General)  student.  That  appeal  was  decided  by  FTTJ  Elson  in  a
    determination promulgated on 15 March 2013.  FTTJ  Elson  decided  that
    the respondent's decision was outstanding for a lawful decision  to  be
    made by the respondent. The respondent refused the application,  for  a
    second time, on 22 January 2015. She did so pursuant to Appendix FM and
    paragraph 276ADE and on the grounds  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances. The respondent decided to remove the appellant  pursuant
    to s10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999,  having  decided  the
    appellant had obtained her ETS certificates through deception.

 5. The appellant's appeal was heard by FTTJ Bennett on 18  February  2016.
    He took into account the previous determination of  FTTJ  Elson.   FTTJ
    Bennett allowed the appellant's appeal on  the  grounds  that  the  s10
    decision was not in accordance with the law, but dismissed  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 6. Both  parties  sought  permission  to  appeal  and  both  were  granted
    permission to appeal by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth
    on 12 August 2015, albeit the reasons for the grants of permission  are
    not identified.

Submissions

 7. Mr Karim and Mr Clarke agreed that the issues for me to decide could be
    summarised as follows:

          a. The respondent  challenged  the  FTTJ's  conclusion  that  the
             appellant's ETS certificate had not been false or fraudulently
             obtained. She relied on the fact that  witness  statements  by
             Rebecca Collings and Peter Millington had been provided at the
             hearing,  contrary  to  the  FTTJ's  finding  that   no   such
             statements had been provided. Thus the decision to remove  the
             appellant pursuant to s10 had been lawful.

          b.  The  appellant's  challenge  was  twofold:  first,  that  the
             appellant  had  demonstrated  academic  progress  by  way   of
             evidence adduced at the hearing and, alternatively, that  FTTJ
             Elson's determination was such that the respondent had  failed
             in her duty to communicate with  the  appellant  or  with  her
             college to seek further clarification as to academic progress.

 8. Mr Clarke accepted, however, that the respondent was in some difficulty
    with regard to the respondent's ground of appeal: whilst the  FTTJ  had
    failed to take into account the witness statements of Ms  Collings  and
    Mr Millington which, it was agreed, had been handed to the FTTJ by  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer (HOPO)  and  had  failed  to  take  into
    account the HOPO had relied in  her  submissions  on  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter, the HOPO had not cross-examined the  appellant  on  her
    evidence as to how she obtained the ETS certificates.  He accepted that
    the respondent was in difficulty therefore, given the  guidance  in  SM
    and Qadir v SSHD (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016]  UKUT  00229
    (IAC) that an innocent explanation could be  sufficient  to  rebut  the
    respondent's case on the generic evidence.  That explanation  had  been
    offered by the appellant and had not been challenged by the  respondent
    at the hearing.

 9. In support of the appellant's appeal, Mr Karim relied  on  Pokhriyal  v
    SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1568, paragraph 54 (iii) and (iv).  He noted  that
    FTTJ Bennett had dismissed the appeal for lack of evidence of  academic
    progress but the Court of Appeal in Pokhriyal had concluded  that  mere
    production of a CAS created a  presumption  that  the  proposed  course
    represented academic progress.  Whether there was academic progress was
    a matter for the college, not  for  the  respondent  or  the  tribunal.
    There was no allegation the CAS was  fraudulently  obtained.   Further,
    the  appellant's  CAS  provided  justification  for  attendance  on   a
    complementary course at the same or lower level as the previous course.



10. Mr Karim submitted, in the alternative, that FTTJ Elson had quashed the
    respondent's earlier decision such  that  the  respondent  should  have
    contacted the appellant or the college for clarification as to academic
    progress, in accordance with her evidential flexibility  policy  and/or
    paragraph 245AA. FTTJ  Bennett  had  misunderstood  the  scope  of  the
    earlier determination and its legal effect, ie  the  direction  of  the
    previous FTTJ. Mr Karim referred me to the four gateways  in  Paragraph
    245AA citing (b)(iv) as that which should  have  been  applied  in  the
    appellant's case.

11. Mr Clarke noted that, according to the CAS, the appellant's course  was
    at the same level; it was not at a higher level. There was  nothing  in
    the Rules which provided that a lower  qualification  would  allow  the
    applicant to meet the Rules. If it were the same  level,  justification
    could be provided if it was a complementary course. This  was  not  the
    case here. This was an issue which had been addressed  in  the  earlier
    determination of FTTJ Elson.  Pokhriyal would apply  if  the  CAS  were
    blank; that was not  the  case  here  because  the  CAS  explained  the
    justification for the appellant's seeking to attend a course at a lower
    level.    Mr  Clarke  submitted  there  was  no  requirement   on   the
    respondent, as a result  of  FTTJ  Elson's  determination,  to  contact
    either the appellant or  the  college  to  seek  evidence  of  academic
    progress.   Paragraph  245AA,  which  now  addresses  the  respondent's
    obligations pursuant to the former flexibility policy, did not  assist.
    FTTJ Elson had not made a direction that  the  respondent  should  take
    certain steps, [27] referred.  The college could have stated in the CAS
    that the course was complementary but had not done so.  As regards  the
    decision to remove, Mr Clarke accepted that,  if  the  respondent  were
    wrong about the ETS decision, the decision  to  remove  under  s10  was
    unlawful.

Discussion

12. FTTJ Bennett erred in stating that the HOPO "did not seek to  persuade"
    him that the ETS language certificate was false: he earlier  refers  at
    [21] to the HOPO relying, in her oral submissions, on the  reasons  for
    refusal and they, in turn, state the respondent's position that the ETS
    certificates were obtained fraudulently.  FTTJ Bennett also  refers  to
    not having been provided with the statements  of  Ms  Collings  and  Mr
    Millington whereas it is agreed by the parties that these were provided
    to him.  However, I note that the appellant  set  out  in  her  witness
    statement her evidence as to how she  obtained  her  ETS  certificates.
    Before me, Mr Clarke accepted the appellant was not  cross-examined  on
    this evidence. I find therefore that the appellant's explanation as  to
    how she obtained her ETS certificates was not  challenged  before  FTTJ
    Bennett and that it was open to him, on the  evidence  before  him,  to
    find  that  the  appellant's  ETS  certificates  were  not   false   or
    fraudulently obtained [25] (SM & Qadir).  Mr Clarke  conceded  as  much
    before me. Thus FTTJ Bennett's  inaccurate  references  to  the  HOPO's
    submissions and the evidence before him had no material impact  on  his
    decision as to the reliability  of  the  ETS  certificates,  which  was
    sustainable on the evidence.

13. Mr Clarke also conceded that if FTTJ's Bennett's decision  on  the  ETS
    issue were sustainable on the evidence and there were no error  of  law
    in relation to it, the respondent's decision to  remove  the  appellant
    under s10 was not in accordance with  the  law.   I  agree.   For  that
    reason, FTTJ Bennett's decision  on  this  issue  must  stand  and  the
    respondent's appeal to this tribunal fails.

14. I turn to the appellant's appeal  before  me  and  Mr  Karim's  primary
    submission to the effect that FTTJ Bennett failed to take into  account
    the guidance in Pokhriyal (a judgment which was handed down after  FTTJ
    Elson's determination was promulgated).

15. Pokhriyal is a decision arising from circumstances similar to those  of
    this appellant in that the appellant in Pokhriyal had  produced  a  CAS
    for a proposed course at a similar level to the previous one and  there
    was no explicit  contemporaneous  evidence  that  the  proposed  course
    amounted to academic progress.  At [46]  in  Pokhriyal,  it  is  stated
    "Paragraph 120B of Appendix A  makes  it  clear  that  it  is  for  the
    college, not the Secretary of State, to carry out  the  assessment"  of
    academic progress.  At [47]: "in the  ordinary  way  the  Secretary  of
    State cannot go behind the college's assessment of  academic  progress.
    ... different considerations might arise if, for  example,  there  were
    fraud,  or  if  the  college  made  an  assessment  which  was  plainly
    inappropriate on the face of the documents. It would be better to leave
    further consideration of such  situations  to  a  case  in  which  they
    arise."  At [49], Jackson LJ refers to the respondent's guidance at the
    time, published for the assistance of foreign students  coming  to  the
    UK.  This  has  application  here,  because  this  appellant  made  her
    application on 2 April 2011.  Paragraph 63 of the guidance informs  the
    student that if a college issues  a  CAS  it  has  concluded  that  the
    proposed course constitutes academic progress.  Jackson  LJ  states  at
    [51] that "the mere issue of a CAS creates a presumption or expectation
    that the stated course constitutes academic progress ... what paragraph
    120B of Appendix A requires is confirmation of that which  is  presumed
    or expected to be the case".  Jackson LJ states at [52] that "it is  no
    doubt convenient  for  the  college  to  include  the  confirmation  of
    academic progress in the CAS, but this is not obligatory".  Relying  on
    Jackson LJ's guidance in Pokhriyal, summarised at [54], I find that the
    CAS assigned to this appellant was sufficient evidence of her  academic
    progress and it follows that the decision of FTTJ Bennett  contains  an
    error of law in that, it having been identified by FTTJ Elson that  the
    appellant needed to demonstrate academic progress, FTTJ Bennett  should
    have had regard to the subsequent guidance in Pokhriyal and found  that
    the CAS assigned to the appellant  was  sufficient  for  that  purpose.
    Having said that, this error of law makes no difference to the  outcome
    because FTTJ Bennett allowed the appeal in any event.

16. For these reasons I find there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of FTTJ Bennett. His decision stands.

Decision

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error of law, for the reasons set out above.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


A M Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated:  4 October 2016



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated:  4 October 2016

