
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06638/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25th July, 2014                            |On 6th August 2014           |
|Signed 4th August 214                         |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                               mr Kalu Uka iro

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department to whom I shall refer as "the claimant".  The respondent  is
    a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 19th December, 1979.   He  entered
    the United Kingdom on 22nd August, 2011 on a  visit  visa  accompanying
    school children from Nigeria.  The visa was valid until 10th  February,
    2012 and he chose to  overstay  his  right  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

2.   On 10th November, 2012 he made application for a residence  card  under
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006.    On  6th
    February, 2013 the claimant refused the respondent leave to remain  and
    the respondent appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    heard at Taylor House on 7th May this year by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Majid.

3.   The respondent married a Romanian citizen by proxy.   At  the  time  of
    the marriage neither the respondent nor  his  bride  were  in  Nigeria.
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid  allowed  the   appeal   under   the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and under Article
    8 of the ECHR.

4.   The respondent challenged the decision on  the  basis  that  the  judge
    failed  to  consider  and  apply  Karim  and   consider   whether   the
    respondent's spouse was validly married as an EU citizen.

5.   Before me today the appellant appeared in person.  I explained  to  him
    the purpose of the hearing.  I told  him  also  that  I  had  read  the
    determination and grounds of appeal and that it appeared to me that the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in law.  It now transpires that the
    respondent has taken steps to contact the Romanian Embassy  and  is  in
    the process of ensuring that  the  proxy  marriage  with  his  wife  is
    properly recognised under Romanian law.

6.   Mr Harrison for the claimant pointed out that  there  was  no  evidence
    before the judge which could have satisfied him that  the  respondent's
    spouse was validly married as an EU citizen.  Given that the judge  had
    failed to consider and apply Karim he invited me to  set  the  decision
    aside and remake it dismissing the appeal.

7.   Unfortunately First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid failed  to  consider  and
    apply Karim (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 IAC.   Had  he
    done so he would have realised that there was no  evidence  before  him
    which could satisfy him that the respondent's wife as an EU citizen was
    validly married to  the  respondent.   In  allowing  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 he failed to  apply  the  Immigration  Rules  and  whilst  he
    acknowledged the decision  in  Nagre,  R  (on  the  application  of)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)   he
    failed to apply the decision in Nagre and in Gulshan (Article 8  -  new
    Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) .

8.   I have  concluded  that  I  must  set  aside  the  determination.   The
    Immigration Judge has failed to consider whether the respondent's  wife
    is validly married under EU law and as such his decision cannot  stand.
    I set aside his decision.  There was no evidence before the judge which
    would have enabled him to have found properly applying Karim  that  the
    respondent and his wife were validly married and I have concluded  that
    given the judge failed to properly apply Appendix FM of the Immigration
    Rules and consider  whether  they  were  satisfied.  I  set  aside  the
    decision under the human  rights  appeal.   My  decision  is  that  the
    respondent's appeal shall be dismissed.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
