
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06396/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 December 2014                           |On 12 January 2015            |
|Determination given 22 December 2014          |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                           PATRICIA BATANA MBONDA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of the Democratic Republic of Congo, date  of
    birth 15 July 1974, appeals against the Respondent's decision  made  on
    15 January 2014 to refuse a derivative residence card, pursuant  to  an
    application on 12 March 2013.

2.   The basis of the  application  was  that  the  Appellant  was  a  third
    country national upon whom a  British  citizen  was  dependent  in  the
    United Kingdom, reliant upon the case of Ruiz Zambrano (C-34/09).

3.   For reasons given, the Respondent was not satisfied that  it  had  been
    shown on a balance of probabilities that the Appellant was the  primary
    carer of a British national  and  that  the  removal  would  force  the
    British national to leave the United Kingdom or the EEA.

4.    The  matter  was  further  considered  in  respect  of  private   life
    considerations arising under Appendix FM  and paragraph 276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

5.   The appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Osborne (the judge) who, on 19 June  2014  for  cogent  reasons  given,
    found  that  the  Appellant's  claim  could  not  succeed   under   the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006  and  further  that  there  was  no
    jurisdiction to entertain that appeal.  The judge went on  to  consider
    the matter under Article 8 of the ECHR outside of the Immigration Rules
    and concluded again the appeal should be dismissed.

6.   Application was made on 26 June 2014 for  permission  to  appeal  which
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale on 6 August  2014.
    The Respondent made a Rule  24  response,  essentially  supporting  the
    findings that the judge had made particularly on the issue  that  there
    was no right of appeal and therefore the appeal was properly  dismissed
    for want of jurisdiction.

7.   The judge in giving permission essentially  noted  that  there  was  no
    substance to any challenge and concluded that there  was  no  right  of
    appeal.  However, the judge, heard argument about  it  at  the  hearing
    particularly from the Presenting Officer.Permission to appeal was given
    on the basis that there might be jurisdiction to entertain an Article 8
    ECHR claim: nevertheless  there  was  of  course  in  the  Respondent's
    original  decision,  no  removal  directions  or  requirement  of   the
    Appellant to remove: Rather the indication given in the refusal  letter
    was that a further decision would be made in due course.

8.   At the outset of the hearing the  Appellant  did  not  appear  and  her
    nominated representatives JM Wilson confirmed by  brief  letter  of  22
    December  2014  that  they  were  not  attending   and   were   without
    instructions.

10.  Having considered the case file and the most recent notice  of  appeal,
    I was satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  sent  to  the  Appellant  at  her
    identified address, the notice of the hearing by first-class post on 28
    October 2014.  There was no explanation for the Appellant's absence, no
    request in advance for a postponement of the hearing and no request, by
    or on the Appellant's behalf, for the matter to be adjourned.

11.  In these circumstances I  was  satisfied  the  Appellant  has  absented
    herself from the hearing and that no purpose is served, not least given
    the merits of the claim and any other information provided to show that
    she would attend on a  further  hearing  or  could  make  any  relevant
    contribution to the legal issues raised, at any adjourned hearing.

12.  I have considered whether or not there is any basis for  an  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and it is apparent to me that the judge made no
    error of law on that issue under the EEA 2006 Regulations.  Whilst  the
    judge did go on to consider Article 8 issues outside of the  Rules  and
    was not  a  matter  that  fell  to  be  determined  and  there  was  no
    jurisdiction to do so.  In the circumstances the appeal fails.
    The original Tribunal's decision stands.

ANONYMITY
No anonymity direction has been made  nor  was  one  requested  nor  is  one
appropriate.

Signed                                  Date 7 January 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
