
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06846/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd October 2014                             |On 9th October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                            haben Jayanilal Patel
                       (no anonymity direction given)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge D S Borsada promulgated on 20th May 2014, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham on 14th May 2014.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
    the appeal of Haben Jayanilal Patel, who subsequently applied for,  and
    was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of India, who  was  born  on  26th
    October 1968.  She appeals against the decision of the Respondent dated
    20th January 2014 refusing her application for leave to remain  in  the
    UK and directing that she be removed back to India.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she entered the UK on 4th  November  2008
    as a wife of a UK Sponsor,  Jayantilal  Patel,  a  person  present  and
    settled in the  UK,  who  was  a  British  citizen.   She  subsequently
    overstayed.  However, her Sponsor, had lived in the UK and worked  here
    for 40 years, and had never lived in India, although he spoke Gujarati.
     The Respondent had accepted that the  Appellant  met  the  suitability
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  However, the Appellant had  not
    lived in the UK for a continuous period of  twenty  years.   Therefore,
    she could return to India with her Gujarati speaking husband.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had regard to leading case law in this jurisdiction,  namely,
    to Sanade [2012] UKUT 0004; to Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27,  and  to  Hayat
    [2011] UKUT.  He observed that there was no dispute  that  this  was  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship, that the Appellant and the Sponsor
    enjoyed a close family life "and that if a separation  were  forced  on
    them then  this  would  adversely  affect  their  emotional  wellbeing"
    (paragraph 7).  The Sponsor had not lived in India but he was  "from  a
    culturally similar background to his wife and  speaks  Gujarati".   The
    judge was also cognisant of the fact that if the Sponsor had to move to
    India "he would have to give up all his rights and privileges as  a  UK
    citizen", although the Sponsor's relationship with his children  "would
    not be affected by the move" (paragraph 7).  The judge went on to  also
    recognise "the very great difficulties and problems this  couple  might
    face moving to India in order to continue family life there", but  this
    did not "meet the insurmountable obstacles test"  (paragraph  8).   The
    judge was clear that there were no exceptional circumstances  and  that
    it was not "unjustifiably harsh"  to  require  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor to return to India (paragraph 9).  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge's  conclusions  were
    perverse and irrational in suggesting that there were no insurmountable
    obstacles for family life continuing in India, and in  suggesting  that
    there were no exceptional circumstances, given the  basic  findings  of
    fact made.

 6. On 16th July 2014, permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that
    it was arguable that there  was  an  inadequacy  of  consideration  and
    reasoning by the judge in considering the evidence from  the  Appellant
    and the sponsoring husband, who appeared at the hearing  unrepresented.



 7. On 24th July 2014, a Rule 24 response was  entered  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.



Submissions

 8. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Ahmed,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, referred to his skeleton argument and relied upon the  cases
    of Sanade and MF (Nigeria).  He submitted that it  was  not  reasonable
    for a British citizen, who had not ever lived in India, to go to  India
    and relinquish his right to remain in the country of  his  citizenship,
    just so as to be able to enjoy family life with his Indian  wife.   The
    Sponsor had only gone to India for one  week  in  order  to  marry  the
    Appellant.  In MF (Nigeria) the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  had
    conceded (see paragraph 72) that a British citizen "not be required  to
    leave the  country  of  his  citizenship".   Similar  conclusions  were
    reached in Sanade.

 9. For his  part,  Mr  Mills  submitted  that  reliance  upon  Sanade  was
    misplaced because it was well-known that  the  British  government  had
    subsequently introduced new Rules in order to overcome the  effects  of
    Sanade, opening up the possibility for British citizens to be  required
    to relocate to another country.  The judge was clear that there were no
    insurmountable obstacles, although there might be a degree of harshness
    in requiring the Sponsor to go to India.  This is because the judge had
    made clear findings that the Sponsor spoke Gujarati,  was  of  Gujarati
    extraction, and could reasonably live in India.

10. In reply, Mr Ahmed repeated his reliance upon Sanade and  MF  (Nigeria)
    which did not countenance the possibility of a  British  citizen  being
    required to live elsewhere.  In particular paragraph 49 of MF (Nigeria)
    was relevant because Lord Dyson advocated the very  outcome  which  the
    Appellant relied upon in this case.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

12. First, there are the very findings of fact made by the  judge  himself.
    The Sponsor, Jayantilal Patel, is a  British  citizen.   He  has  never
    lived in India.  He has only been married there to the Appellant.   The
    judge made no finding that the Sponsor was willing to go and live in  a
    country where he had never lived, having resided in the UK for 40 years
    and worked here.  On the contrary, the judge held that,  "I  noted  and
    accepted that the Appellant and the Sponsor did enjoy  a  close  family
    life and that if a separation were  forced  on  them  then  this  would
    adversely affect their emotional wellbeing" (paragraph 7).

13. The judge also concluded that there were "very great  difficulties  and
    problems this couple might face moving to India in  order  to  continue
    family life there ..." (paragraph 8).

14. In these two conclusions, the judge has first found that  a  separation
    between the couple  would  make  the  living  of  a  family  life  very
    difficult.  The judge has then found that an enforced  living  together
    in India for both of them would present "very  great  difficulties  and
    problems".

15. In the recent judgment of Lord Aikens in MM (Lebanon) [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    985, the Court of Appeal held that there  is  no  further  intermediary
    test if an Appellant cannot comply with the Immigration Rules  because,
    "if the applicant cannot satisfy the Rules  then  there  either  is  or
    there is not  a  further  Article  8  claim.   That  will  have  to  be
    determined by the relevant decision maker" (paragraph 128).

16. On this basis, given the findings that the judge had already  made,  it
    was irrational to conclude that there would be no "unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences" and  no  "exceptional  circumstances"  because  what  was
    unjustifiably harsh or exceptional had already been highlighted by  the
    judge.

17. Secondly, and no less importantly, the Sponsor is a British citizen who
    has made the United Kingdom his home, and has exercised his right to be
    here by living in this country for 40 years.  The right of  citizenship
    is not without consequence.  In MM [2013] EWHC 1900  Mr  Justice  Blake
    stated that  "British  citizens  ...  had  a  constitutional  right  of
    residence in their own country as well as a human right to marry, found
    a family and have respect accorded to  their  family  life"  (paragraph
    126).  Although the case of MM has subsequently been overruled  in  the
    Court of Appeal, as clear from the judgment  of  Lord  Justice  Aikens,
    this particular aspect of  the  judgment  in  the  High  Court  remains
    intact.  Indeed, the case of Sanade and  MF  (Nigeria)  make  it  clear
    (especially at paragraph 72 of the latter)  that  requiring  a  British
    citizen to enjoy his family life in another country, which is  not  the
    country  of  his  citizenship,  is  bound  to   be   an   "exceptional"
    circumstance and one that  is  correspondingly  "unjustifiably  harsh",
    such as to require particular justification.  None exists in this  case
    given that this is a genuine and subsisting marriage,  and  given  that
    family life is being enjoyed between the couple.

Remaking the Decision

18. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that I have  set  out
    above.

Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

20. No anonymity order is made.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th October 2014


