
                                    [pic]
St

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06447/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
| on 4th October 2016               |on 17 November 2016                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                               MR. FORTUNE [M]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

No application for anonymity was made and there is no apparent reason for
anonymity.


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr B Lams, Counsel, instructed by SBG Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. For convenience I will refer to the parties as they were named in the
      First tier Tribunal.

   2. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State for the Home Department
      (hereinafter referred to as the respondent) against the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul allowing the appeal on the basis the
      respondent's decision was not in accordance with the immigration
      rules.

   3. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe born on 17 July 1972. He
      claims to have arrived in United Kingdom in May 1997.

   4. He applied for discretionary leave to remain on the basis of his
      relationship with a settled person, Ms Saina [C] and their son, [TC],
      a British national. On 7 November 2011 he was granted leave to remain
      for three years, which is until the 6 November 2014.

   5. On 3 November 2014 he applied to vary that leave so that he could
      remain. In the application he revealed he was living apart from Ms
      Saina [C] and their daughter. He said this was due to work
      commitments. He was living in Northampton and they resided in Essex.

   6. His application was refused on 30 January 2015. This was because the
      respondent was not satisfied the relationships were subsisting. The
      application was considered against the immigration rules and appendix
      FM in relation to the partner and parent routes. The conclusion was
      that the eligibility requirements were not met. The appellant was not
      married to Ms Saina [C] and the evidence did not indicate they had
      been cohabiting for two years in a relationship akin to marriage.
      Consequently, EX1 did not apply.

   7. Under the parent route he could not succeed if the partner of the
      child's mother (E-LTRP 2.3(b)). He also could not succeed because he
      had not demonstrated he played an active role in the child's
      upbringing (E-LTRP 2.4(b)).

   8. Regarding his private life and paragraph 276 ADE his claim was that he
      came to the United Kingdom in 1997 and so did not meet the required 20
      years presences. He could reintegrate into life in Nigeria and so was
      not assisted by paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi).

   9. No exceptional circumstances were identified indicating the decision
      otherwise breached his article 8 rights.

The Fist tier Tribunal

  10. First-tier Judge Paul at paragraph 10 concluded from the evidence that
      the relationships were true and subsisting. The appeal was allowed on
      the basis the decision was not in accordance with the rules.



The leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal application

  11. The appellant's representatives had accepted that the requirements of
      appendix FM could not be met. Permission to appeal was granted on the
      basis that the purported allowance of the appeal under the rules was
      not consistent with this concession. Instead, the judge should have
      considered whether a freestanding article 8 assessment was
      appropriate.

The Upper Tribunal hearing.

  12. Both representatives accepted the judge was wrong in stating that the
      respondent's decision was not in accordance with the rules. The
      application had been for discretionary leave. It was suggested this
      may have been a slip and the judge intended to state that the decision
      was not in accordance with the law rather than the rules. Mr Clarke
      did not seek to challenge the central finding at paragraph 10 of the
      decision that the parties were in a subsisting relationship.

  13. Mr Lams provided a copy of the respondent's policy instructions
      version 7 applicable from 18 August 2015 which is similar in terms to
      the previous version. Section 10 provides that applicants who are
      granted discretionary leave before the 9th July 2012 under the policy
      in force at the time would normally continue to be dealt with under
      that policy through to settlement. Decision-makers were required to
      consider whether the circumstances prevailing at the time of the
      original grant of leave continued and if so and a criminality check
      was satisfied a further period of discretionary leave should normally
      be granted. Where there had been a significant change or an issue of
      criminality then the application should be refused.

  14. The respondent in refusing the application did so on the basis the
      grounds on which the previous grant was made no longer applied, namely
      the family relationships. There was no question of any criminality.
      The finding of First-tier Judge Paul that the relationships were
      continuing has been accepted by the respondent. Consequently it was
      argued that on this basis the policy was in favour of a further grant.

  15.  Reliance was placed upon AG and others (policies; executive
      discretions; tribunal's powers) Kosovo [2007] UKAIT 00082.Where a
      policy creates a presumption in favour of granting leave on the facts
      and there is nothing to displace that presumption or anything under
      the terms of the policy requiring further consideration a substantive
      decision in a claimant's favour could be made with a direction that
      leave be granted. In such a situation there was no need to base a
      decision on human rights grounds. Consequently, it was submitted that
      if the reference by First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul to allowing the
      appeal under the immigration rules was seen merely as a slip then
      there was no material error of law in the decision. Alternatively, it
      was submitted that I could remit the matter back to the respondent was
      a direction that he should be granted leave sought.

  16. Mr D. Clarke reminded me of paragraph 5 of the head note of AG and
      others (policies; executive discretions; tribunal's powers) Kosovo
      [2007] UKAIT 00082 whereby if the benefit of the policy is dependent
      upon the exercise of discretion outside the rules the tribunal has no
      power to substitute its own decision.

  17. Section 87 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
      provided that where an appeal is allowed under section 82 the tribunal
      may give a direction to give effect to its decision. In the course of
      the hearing an issue arose as to whether this section, repealed by the
      2014 Act, was preserved in the appellant's case because of the
      transitional provisions. Mr Lams with the agreement of Mr Clarke
      subsequently produced a submission on this issue to the effect that
      section 87 still applies.

Conclusions

  18. First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul dealt with the central issue of the
      relationship. The finding was one open to the judge on the evidence of
      the appellant, Ms Saina [C] and the documentary evidence considered.
      No challenge has been made to this. The judge incorrectly referred to
      the appeal being allowed on the basis the decision of the respondent
      was not in accordance with the rules. This clearly was wrong because
      the application was not under the rules and it was accepted the rules
      could not be met. There is no reference in the decision to the policy.
      I do not find it established that the reference to the rules was
      simply a slip on the part of the judge. Consequently, I find there is
      a material error of law and the decision as made cannot stand.

  19. Having regard to the policy and the accepted finding of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Paul I find there is nothing further to determine.
      Consequently, as there is no discretion to exercise the appellant
      should be granted the three years discretionary leave applicable.

Decision

      The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul contains a material
      error of law and cannot stand. The finding at paragraph 10 of the
      decision that the relationships are subsisting is preserved.

  20. Given this preserved finding and the absence of criminality then under
      the terms of the policy there is no remaining discretion to exercise.
      Consequently, I allow the appeal and direct the respondent to grant
      the three years discretionary leave applicable.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

