
-[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/06428/2014
                                                               IA/08108/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2 December 2014                         |On 9 December 2014         |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                    MS BETINA FERNANDES AZEVEDO JUNQUEIRA
                     MISS LADJA FERNANDES MUNHOZ QUEIROZ
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Ms S Wortley a legal
           representative from Wortley Legal Consultants
          For the Respondent: Mr S Walker a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are citizens of Brazil born respectively  on  22  March
      1978 and 21 October 1997. They are mother and daughter.  The  daughter
      is the mother's dependant for the purposes  of  this  appeal.  I  will
      refer to them as the appellant and the daughter. They have been  given
      permission to appeal the determination of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
      JDL Edwards ("the FTTJ")  who  dismissed  their  appeals  against  the
      respondent's decisions of 15 October 2013 to refuse their applications
      for residence card as confirmation of their right  to  reside  in  the
      United Kingdom. The appellant  had  applied  on  the  basis  that  she
      retained a right of residence as the former spouse of an EEA  national
      under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  ("the
      2006 Regulations") with her daughter as her family member.


   2. The respondent refused the applications because she was not  satisfied
      that the appellants had submitted sufficient documentary  evidence  to
      show that they met regulation 15(1)b of the 2006 Regulations.


   3. The appellants  appealed  and  the  FTTJ  heard  their  appeal  on  11
      September 2014. Both parties were represented, the  appellants  by  Ms
      Wortley who appeared before me.


   4. In paragraph 10 of the determination the FTTJ said; "The sole point at
      issue in this appeal is whether or not Mrs Junquiera  qualifies  under
      Regulation 10(5). She married Mr Ule in New York on  7th  March  2000.
      They were divorced by Cambridge County Court on 19th of July 2011.  It
      is accepted that Mr Ule was and is exercising treaty rights in UK."


   5. The FTTJ's conclusion was set out in paragraph 15; "In  the  light  of
      the evidence by Mrs Junquiera, that she was neither an employee, self-
      employed person nor a self-sufficient person between her  divorce  and
      30th of March 2012, she cannot satisfy Regulation 10(6). There is  not
      reference therein to a person seeking employment as the Mrs  Junquiera
      (sic) claimed. This appeal must fail on that basis."


   6. The FTTJ went on to consider Article 8 human rights grounds,  reaching
      the conclusion that no human rights point arose because there had been
      no decision to remove the appellants. The appeals were dismissed under
      the 2006 Regulations and on human rights grounds.


   7. The appellants applied for and were granted permission to appeal.  The
      main point in the grounds is that the FTTJ erred in law by stating  in
      paragraph 15 that the appellant had to show that she was "an employee,
      self-employed person or self-sufficient person" Mr Walker concedes and
      I find that this was a clear and  material  error  of  law.  What  the
      appellant had to show was that she  was  "a  worker,  a  self-employed
      person or a self-sufficient person under regulation 6" (my  emphasis).
      Regulation 10 of the 2006 Regulations provides;
         "Family member who has retained the right of residence"

         "10. (1) In these Regulations, "family member who has retained the
         right of residence" means, subject to paragraph (8), a person who
         satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

         (2) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

         (a) he was a family member of a qualified person when the qualified
         person died;

         (b) he resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
         Regulations for at least the year immediately before the death of
         the qualified person; and

         (c) he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6).

         (3) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

         (a) he is the direct descendant of-

                  (i) a qualified person who has died;

                  (ii) a person who ceased to be a qualified person on
                  ceasing to reside in the United Kingdom; or

                  (iii) the person who was the spouse or civil partner of
                  the qualified person mentioned in sub-paragraph (i) when
                  he died or is the spouse or civil partner of the person
                  mentioned in sub-paragraph (ii); and

         (b) he was attending an educational course in the United Kingdom
         immediately before the qualified person died or ceased to be a
         qualified person and continues to attend such a course.

         (4) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if the
         person is the parent with actual custody of a child who satisfies
         the condition in paragraph (3).

         (5) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

         (a) he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person on the
         termination of the marriage or civil partnership of the qualified
         person;

         (b) he was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
         Regulations at the date of the termination;

         (c) he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and

         (d) either-

                  (i) prior to the initiation of the proceedings for the
                  termination of the marriage or the civil partnership the
                  marriage or civil partnership had lasted for at least
                  three years and the parties to the marriage or civil
                  partnership had resided in the United Kingdom for at least
                  one year during its duration;

                  (ii) the former spouse or civil partner of the qualified
                  person has custody of a child of the qualified person;

                  (iii) the former spouse or civil partner of the qualified
                  person has the right of access to a child of the qualified
                  person under the age of 18 and a court has ordered that
                  such access must take place in the United Kingdom; or

                  (iv) the continued right of residence in the United
                  Kingdom of the person is warranted by particularly
                  difficult circumstances, such as he or another family
                  member having been a victim of domestic violence while the
                  marriage or civil partnership was subsisting.

         (6) The condition in this paragraph is that the person-

         (a) is not an EEA national but would, if he were an EEA national,
         be a worker, a self-employed person or a self-sufficient person
         under regulation 6; or

         (b) is the family member of a person who falls within paragraph
         (a).

         (7) In this regulation, "educational course" means a course within
         the scope of Article 12 of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 1612/68 on
         freedom of movement for workers.

         (8) A person with a permanent right of residence under regulation
         15 shall not become a family member who has retained the right of
         residence on the death or departure from the United Kingdom of the
         qualified person or the termination of the marriage or civil
         partnership, as the case may be, and a family member who has
         retained the right of residence shall cease to have that status on
         acquiring a permanent right of residence under regulation 15."

   8. It is common ground  that  the  appellant  meets  these  requirements,
      subject to the condition in 10(6)(a) and for her daughter, subject  to
      the condition in 10(6)(b). Regulation 6 provides;
         "Qualified person"
              6. (1) In these Regulations, "qualified person" means a person
      who is an

         EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

         (a) a jobseeker;

         (b) a worker;

         (c) a self-employed person;

         (d) a self-sufficient person; or

         (e) a student.

         (2) A person who is no longer working shall not cease to be treated
         as a worker for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-

         (a) he is temporarily unable to work as the result of an illness or
         accident;

         (b) he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after having
         been employed in the United Kingdom, provided that he has
         registered as a jobseeker with the relevant employment office and-

            (i) he was employed for one year or more before becoming
            unemployed;

            (ii) he has been unemployed for no more than six months; or

            (iii) he can provide evidence that he is seeking employment in
            the United Kingdom and has a genuine chance of being engaged;

         (c) he is involuntarily unemployed and has embarked on vocational
         training; or

         (d) he has voluntarily ceased working and embarked on vocational
         training that is related to his previous employment.

         (3) A person who is no longer in self-employment shall not cease to
         be treated as a self-employed person for the purpose of paragraph
         (1)(c) if he is temporarily unable to pursue his activity as a self-
         employed person as the result of an illness or accident.

         (4) For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), "jobseeker" means a person
         who enters the United Kingdom in order to seek employment and can
         provide evidence that he is seeking employment and has a genuine
         chance of being engaged."
   9. Whilst in paragraph 5 the FTTJ mentions the appellants' two bundles of
      documents running to 86  pages  these  do  not  appear  to  have  been
      considered in any detail; in particular the detailed skeleton argument
      between pages 4 and 16,  the  appellant's  witness  statement  between
      pages 17 and 20 and the supporting documentary evidence in the rest of
      the bundles. I find that the FTTJ erred in  law  by  failing  to  give
      proper consideration to the evidence before him.


  10.  It  is  most  unusual  for  a  Presenting  Officer  representing  the
      respondent in the First-Tier Tribunal to concede an  appeal.  However,
      this is what appears to have happened. The FTTJ records, in  paragraph
      12; "For the respondent, Miss Chopra submitted that Mrs Junquiera  had
      demonstrated that she qualified for a  permanent  residence  card,  by
      virtue of Regulation 10(6)". It is  reasonable  to  conclude  that  Ms
      Chopra did so in the light of the evidence before her and the FTTJ.


  11. Mr Walker  not  only  conceded  that  the  determination  contained  a
      material error of law and should be set aside but that on the evidence
      before him the FTTJ should have allowed the appellants' appeals  under
      the 2006 Regulations. I agree.  The  recognition  by  both  Presenting
      Officers that the appeals should be allowed under the 2006 Regulations
      enables me to summarise my reasons for the same conclusion.


  12. It is common ground, accepted by the respondent, that the  appellant's
      EEA sponsor was exercising Treaty rights at the  date  of  the  decree
      absolute of divorce. By that stage the marriage had lasted  more  than
      three years and the appellant and her husband had  lived  together  in
      the UK for at least one year during the  marriage.  I  find  that  the
      evidence submitted by the appellant establishes, to  the  standard  of
      the balance of probabilities, that between the date of the divorce and
      the date of the application she was at all times either  a  worker  or
      self-employed. She was a worker because she was employed,  in  receipt
      of Jobseeker's Allowance or on holiday in Brazil for a short period of
      less than two months. During the holiday in Brazil she was both  self-
      employed and continued to seek work in the UK using the  Internet  and
      sending emails. By the time she returned from holiday in Brazil and as
      a result of her efforts she had obtained employment with  her  current
      employers which commenced on 24 September 2013. There  was  no  period
      during which the appellant did not fall within  one  of  the  required
      categories.


  13. I  find  that  the  appellant  has  established  that  she  meets  the
      requirements of the 2006 Regulations and is entitled  to  a  residence
      card as confirmation of her right to reside in the UK. Her daughter is
      also entitled to a residence card as her family member.


  14. Ms Wortley said that if the appellant's appeals were allowed under the
      2006 Regulations they did not wish to pursue the appeals on Article  8
      human rights grounds.


  15. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and  can  see  no
      good reason to do so.


  16. Having found that the FTTJ erred in law I set aside the decisions  and
      remake them, allowing the appeals of both appellants  under  the  2006
      Regulations.







      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 3 December 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
