
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06752/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 July 2016                               |On 23 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR ZIAUR RAHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Hizami, of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. No anonymity direction is made.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Gibbs who, in a decision promulgated on 13  January
    2016, allowed the appeal of Mr Rahman ("the claimant").   The  claimant
    had appealed against the Secretary of State's decision  to  refuse  his
    application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student.  The Secretary of State  refused  to  grant  further
    leave to remain under paragraphs 322(1A) and 245ZX of  the  Immigration
    Rules HC395 (as amended).

Background Facts

 3. The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh whose date of birth is 16 April
    1973.  On 28 March 2014 he applied for further leave to remain  in  the
    UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  The Secretary of State refused  that
    application on the basis that the claimant had  obtained  his  Test  of
    English   for   International   Communication   ('TOEIC')   certificate
    fraudulently.  The Secretary of State also considered that the claimant
    had  not  provided  evidence  that  he  had  a  valid  Confirmation  of
    Acceptance for Studies ('CAS').

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The First-tier Tribunal found that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    discharged the burden  of  proof  upon  her  to  demonstrate  that  the
    claimant had used deception when obtaining his TOEIC  certificate.  The
    judge also found that, although the claimant had not provided  a  valid
    CAS, this was as a result of the problems with his  TOEIC  certificate.
    On that basis the judge found that the Secretary of State had failed in
    her duty to give the claimant an opportunity to address the grounds for
    refusal relying on the case of Naved (Student - fairness  -  notice  of
    points) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 14 (IAC).

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The first ground of appeal was that the judge had  erred  in
    concluding that the claimant in the  instant  case  was  in  a  similar
    position to that in the case of Patel (Revocation of sponsor licence  -
    fairness) India [2011] UKUT 211.  The Secretary of State  asserts  that
    the claimant's application for further leave was submitted on 28  March
    2014 and that there  was  no  accompanying  CAS  as  confirmed  by  the
    claimant.  It was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  a
    mistake as to a material fact.  The Secretary of State  refers  to  the
    Educational Testing Services'  ('ETS')  Secure  English  Language  Test
    ('SELT') source data document which was attached  as  Annex  A  to  the
    witness statement of Ms Singh.  It was  submitted  that  this  document
    indicated that the Secretary of State was notified by  ETS  on  30  May
    2014 of the questionable nature of the claimant's  tests  taken  on  25
    July 2012 and the invalidation of the two  tests  taken  on  22  August
    2012.  The Secretary  of  State  asserted  that  as  this  notification
    occurred some  two  months  after  the  submission  of  the  claimant's
    application for further leave, it was an impossibility for this to have
    caused any interference in the claimant's ability to obtain a CAS.

 6. The second ground of appeal asserts the judge erred in concluding  that
    there is no specific reference to the claimant in the evidence provided
    by the Secretary of State to support the allegation of  fraud.   It  is
    also asserted that the First-tier Tribunal failed to apply the  correct
    standard of proof.

 7. On 10 June 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes granted the  Secretary
    of State permission to appeal.  However, that permission was restricted
    solely to the First-tier Tribunal's findings and conclusion with regard
    to the CAS.  The Secretary of  State  was  not  granted  permission  to
    appeal against the findings  of  the  judge  in  relation  to  the  ETS
    language certificate  or  with  regard  to  the  judge's  findings  and
    application of the standard of proof.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 8. Mr Avery relied upon the grounds of appeal.  He submitted that the  ETS
    results were not available at the time that the claimant had  submitted
    his application: the problems associated with ETS had only just  become
    publicly available. He  submitted  that  in  this  case,  even  if  the
    claimant's college had refused  to  issue  the  CAS  on  the  basis  of
    concerns with regard to the TOEIC certificates, if that was based  upon
    the general knowledge in the academic community following the  Panorama
    programme that would not be the fault of the  Secretary  of  State  and
    therefore no fairness issues arose. It was some two months  later  that
    the Home Office was given specific information about the claimant.

 9. Ms Hizami submitted that from the evidence in front of  the  judge  the
    claimant found it impossible to get his CAS in March  2014  because  he
    was tainted by the general awareness in  the  academic  community  that
    there were problems with certificates obtained through ETS.  When asked
    where in the determination this was made clear in terms of the  timing,
    she indicated that that was not in the determination.  We  referred  Ms
    Hizami to various pieces of evidence that were in the bundle and  asked
    her to take us to evidence that  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge that supported  the  judge's  finding  that  it  was  because  of
    difficulties with the ETS certificates that the college had refused  to
    provide the  claimant  with  a  CAS.   We  noted  that  the  Record  of
    Proceedings indicated that the judge had asked the claimant a  question
    to confirm that he did not have a CAS to which the  claimant  responded
    that was correct and that he 'had an offer letter and  they  said  they
    would provide him with a CAS letter but then  they  said  there  was  a
    problem because of the TOEIC and now the licence is revoked'.

10. Ms Hizami was  asked  to  consider  her  Record  of  Proceedings.   She
    indicated that she had recorded 'and they said they would  think  about
    giving me a CAS.  The college revoked licence he's lost his money'.  We
    also referred Ms Hizami to the offer letter that was before  the  judge
    dated 29 March 2014.  It is clear  from  that  offer  letter  that  the
    claimant's college, Global Vision College, indicated that the  claimant
    would be eligible for a CAS once he had  met  a  number  of  conditions
    which included payment of a tuition  fee  and  administration  fee  and
    providing evidence of his English language test certificate.

11. We  also  referred  to  the  claimant's  witness  statement  which,  at
    paragraph 23, indicated that "in these circumstances it was open to the
    Secretary of State to refuse my application on the basis  that  I  have
    not provided a CAS and therefore was not eligible  for  30  points  for
    attributes".  No reference  was  made  in  that  witness  statement  to
    difficulties in obtaining a CAS as a result of problems with ETS  TOEIC
    certificates.

12. Ms Hizami did not take us to any other evidence to support the  judge's
    finding that it was as a result of  the  problems  with  the  ETS  test
    certificates that the claimant had not been provided with a CAS at  the
    time of his application.  She indicated that if our conclusion was that
    there was no evidence to support the judge's findings  on  the  CAS  we
    should still preserve the findings regarding the issue of deception  in
    relation to the language testing certificate.

Discussion

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in this case found at paragraph 24 that:

         "24. The appellant accepts that when he made his application on  28
             March 2014 he did not provide a valid CAS.   His  evidence  is
             that he was able to provide an offer letter from Global Vision
             College but they would not issue a CAS because of the problems
             with his TOEIC certificate.  Although Ms Nizami concedes  that
             the appeal cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules  because
             of this her submission is that the appellant has been  treated
             unfairly because he was not given the opportunity  to  respond
             to the allegations made against him.

         25.  I find  that  the  appellant  finds  himself  in  a  situation
             analogous to that in Patel (revocation of  sponsor  licence  -
             fairness) India [2011] UKUT 211 in  so  far  as  he  has  been
             placed at a disadvantage because of decisions  taken  by  both
             ETS and the respondent about which he has not  been  consulted
             or had the opportunity to challenge.  It was because  of  this
             that he was unable to obtain a new CAS.  The appellant is  now
             aware of the standing of  his  TOEIC  certificate  and  he  is
             therefore aware of the remedial action that he  must  take  to
             ensure he can obtain a valid CAS.  I am satisfied that  it  is
             only fair that he be afforded  the  opportunity  to  obtain  a
             CAS..." (emphasis added)

14. We consider that the judge  has  fallen  into  error  and  has  made  a
    material mistake of fact.  It is clear  that  a  mistake  of  fact  can
    amount to an error of law - see MM (Unfairness; E  &  R)  Sudan  [2014]
    UKUT 00105 (IAC).  What is required is  that  there  is  a  mistake  or
    ignorance of a relevant fact and that the fact is  established  in  the
    sense that it could be shown by objective and uncontentious evidence.

15. In this case it is clear from the offer letter, referred to above, that
    Global Vision College, as at the date of the claimant's application for
    further leave to remain, had not refused to issue a CAS because of  any
    concerns about an English  language  test  certificate.   There  is  no
    mention in that letter  of  any  concerns  about  the  claimant's  test
    certificate.  The letter indicates that the reason that no CAS at  that
    point had been provided was because  the  claimant  has  not  paid  the
    relevant fees and had not even provided his TOEIC  certificate  to  the
    college.  Further, the evidence in the document annexed to  Ms  Singh's
    witness statement shows that ETS did not notify the Home Office of  the
    invalidity of his test results until the end of May 2014 which  is  two
    months after the claimant had submitted his application.

16. The judge appears to have assumed that  the  reason  that  no  CAS  was
    provided at the date of application was connected to  the  issues  with
    the TOEIC. It was our view that the evidence before the judge  did  not
    allow for this conclusion and that a material mistake of fact was made.
    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for these reasons

17. The Tribunal's finding that the burden of  proof  (to  prove  that  the
    claimant's ETS TOEIC test certificate was obtained  by  deception)  had
    not been discharged and therefore the claimant's application should not
    have been refused under paragraph  322(1A)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    stands, however.

Re- Making the Decision

18. As above,  the  evidence  here  indicates  that  at  the  time  of  the
    claimant's application no valid  CAS  had  been  provided  because  the
    claimant had not paid the requisite fees nor had he provided his  TOEIC
    certificate to the college. The respondent was not required to wait for
    the CAS before making her decision or revert to  the  claimant  on  the
    grounds of fairness. The appeal has to fail where no CAS  was  provided
    with the application.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to the extent  set  out
above. We re-make the appeal as refused.

The Tribunal's  finding  that  the  burden  of  proof  (to  prove  that  the
claimant's ETS TOEIC test certificate was obtained  by  deception)  had  not
been discharged and therefore the claimant's  application  should  not  have
been refused under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 23 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

