
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06293/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th August 2014                             |On 22nd August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                              promise chikezie
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Okoro, Counsel instructed by Curling Moore
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Manchester
    made following a hearing at North Shields on 25th April 2014.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 3rd April 1977.   On  8th
    October 2013 he applied for a residence card as confirmation of a right
    of residence in the UK but was refused by letter of 10th  January  2014
    on the grounds that the Secretary of State was not satisfied  that  the
    EEA national Sponsor was exercising treaty rights nor that he was in  a
    durable relationship with her.  The Secretary of  State  recorded  that
    the Appellant arrived in the UK on 21st March 2010 with a student visit
    visa valid for two months, and on a previous visa application  in  2009
    he had given as his spouse the name of Nkechi Chikezie.  The  Secretary
    of  State  said  that  she  had  taken  into   account   his   personal
    circumstances and looked at the  application  on  its  own  merits  but
    considered that he had claimed to be in a durable relationship with the
    Sponsor solely to facilitate his remaining in the UK.

 3. The judge found in the Appellant's favour both in  respect  of  whether
    the Sponsor was  exercising  treaty  rights  and  in  relation  to  the
    durability of the relationship.

 4. The judge wrote as follows:

         "Thirdly, there is the issue whether in any event the discretion to
         issue the residence card should be  exercised  in  the  Appellant's
         favour and in this respect I have been  guided  by  the  principles
         established in the decision of the Tribunal in the case of YB  (EEA
         reg 17(4) - proper approach) Ivory Coast.  In this respect,  it  is
         clear that the Respondent did not in the  refusal  letter  consider
         the exercise of the discretion since it was decided that it had not
         been established that the application was an extended family member
         within the Regulations which is of course a condition precedent.

         I find that it is appropriate therefore in view of my  findings  to
         move on to consider the exercise of the discretion."

 5. The judge recorded that the Appellant had been an overstayer after  the
    expiry of his visit visa in 2010 and there were no difficulties to  him
    travelling abroad to make an application for an EEA family permit.   He
    said that he had not shown that discretion should be exercised  in  his
    favour and dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred.  He had found that the Appellant's partner was  a  qualified
    person and that he was in a durable relationship with her and  she  was
    therefore wrong to dismiss the appeal.  The issue  of  overstaying  was
    never raised and neither the Appellant  nor  his  representatives  were
    given  any  opportunity  to  address  the  Tribunal.   There   was   no
    requirement under Regulation 17(4) that the applicant must  have  valid
    leave to remain in the UK in order  to  qualify  for  the  grant  of  a
    residence card.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Lever  on  20th  June  2014.
    Judge Lever said that it was not clear whether the judge had  available
    to him  the  European  Casework  Instruction  giving  guidance  to  the
    Respondent on the exercise of discretion.  Reference to overstaying  is
    not placed as a major feature and finance does  not  feature.   It  was
    arguably an error of law for him to have exercised  discretion  in  the
    first instance and to have done so without providing  either  side  the
    opportunity to deal with the matter.

 8. In the reply served on 3rd July 2014 the Respondent  acknowledges  that
    it may have been the correct or better course of action for  the  judge
    to remit the  appeal  back  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider
    Regulation 17(4) before considering it for himself.

The Hearing

 9. Mrs Pettersen accepted that the judge had  erred  in  law.   Regulation
    17(4) had not been considered in the reasons for refusal letter.  Given
    the findings of the judge he ought  to  have  allowed  the  appeal  and
    remitted it back to the Secretary of State so that she  could  exercise
    her discretion and  decide  whether  it  was  appropriate  to  issue  a
    residence card in this case.

10. Mr Okoro sought to argue that the appeal  should  be  allowed  outright
    because, in reliance on the passages in the reasons for refusal letter,
    the Secretary of State had already exercised her discretion.

Conclusions

11. The judge erred in law.  Having made findings on the two issues  raised
    by the Respondent for refusing to issue a residence card  he  ought  to
    have allowed the appeal, particularly when he dismissed it  on  grounds
    not raised by the Respondent and not addressed by either party  to  the
    appeal.

12. Although Mr Okoro sought strenuously to persuade me that the  Secretary
    of State had already considered the exercise of  her  discretion  under
    Regulation 17(4) it is plain that she has not.  There is  no  reference
    to Regulation 17(4) in the reasons for refusal letter.  The  references
    to having taken into account the Appellant's personal circumstances are
    solely in the context of the Secretary of State's belief  that  he  was
    not in a durable relationship.

13. Regulation 17(4) states as follows:

         "The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to  an  extended
         family member not falling within Regulation 7(3) who is not an  EEA
         national on application if -

         (a)  the relevant EEA national in relation to the  extended  family
             member is a  qualified  person  or  an  EEA  national  with  a
             permanent right of residence under Regulation 15 and

         (b)  in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of  State
             appropriate to issue the residence card."

14. In this case the Secretary of State has  not  made  a  decision  as  to
    whether it is appropriate to issue  the  residence  card.   That  is  a
    matter for her in the first instance.

Decision

15. The original judge erred in law and his decision is set aside.   It  is
    re-made as follows.  The Appellant's appeal is allowed and remitted  to
    the Secretary of State in order  for  her  to  make  a  decision  under
    Regulation 17(4).







Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

