
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/06819/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 December 2015                  |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                         MR RANA PARBATBHAI GORANIYA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Ydvisas
(Globevisas.com)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by Mr Rana Goraniya against a decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal, Judge Wallace dated 23  June  2015  in  which  the
    judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the   Respondent's
    decision of 2 February 2015 refusing to vary his leave  and  issuing  a
    removal decision under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The history of this matter is that the Appellant is a national of India
    who first came to the United Kingdom with leave to enter as a  student.
    Entry clearance was granted to him on 2  December  2010  as  a  Tier  4
    Student valid until 24 June 2012.  Prior to the expiry of that leave to
    remain he made an application for further leave  to  remain  which  was
    granted as a Tier 4 Student valid until 13 April 2014.

 3. On 10 April 2013 the Appellant's leave to remain was curtailed  by  the
    Secretary of State to expire on 9 June 2013 because on  18  March  2013
    the Respondent received  notification  from  the  Appellant's  Sponsor,
    London State College, that they had stopped  sponsoring  the  Appellant
    due to non-attendance.  It is to be noted that  on  that  occasion  the
    curtailment provided the Appellant with 60 days in  which  he  had  the
    opportunity of making a further application for leave to remain with  a
    new Certificate of Acceptance for Studies letter if he so  wished.   He
    did make a further application for leave to remain as a Tier 4  Student
    at a different college, being the Academy de London and he  was  on  30
    August 2013 granted further leave to remain valid until 18 April  2015.



 4. On 5 December 2013 the Appellant's leave to remain was again  curtailed
    to expire on 3 February 2014 - again 60  days  later  -  because  on  1
    November 2013 the Tier 4 (Sponsor) licence for the  Academy  de  London
    was revoked.

 5. On 3 February 2014 i.e. the same day on which his current leave was due
    to expire, the Appellant applied for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    Student to study at the  London  College  of  Business  Management  and
    Information Technology to study a course from  5  February  2014  to  4
    December 2015.

 6. I pause there to reflect that at paragraph 10 of the  judge's  decision
    he appears to suggest that the  Appellant  was  outside  his  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom at the time that he made his  most  recent
    application.  If that is what the judge intended to find I cannot agree
    with him.  The Secretary of State's decision letter of 2 February  2015
    records that the Appellant's most recent  application  was  made  on  3
    February 2014 i.e. the same date on which his last period of  leave  to
    remain was due to expire.  It seems  to  me  therefore  that  the  last
    application the Appellant made for further leave to remain was made  in
    time.

 7. That application was not considered immediately  by  the  Secretary  of
    State but instead a decision was made upon it almost a year later on  2
    February 2015.  The application for further leave to remain was refused
    resulting in the decision now appealed against.   The  basis  for  that
    refusal was that when the Tier 4 Sponsor  Register  was  checked  on  2
    February 2015 it was discovered that the  London  College  of  Business
    Management and Information Technology was not listed on that  register.
    The Respondent therefore formed the view that the CAS letter which  the
    Appellant had been issued in relation to that course of  study  was  no
    longer valid and declined to award 30 points under the Tier 4 scheme.

 8. The Appellant appealed against that decision requesting  only  a  paper
    appeal.  The Appellant was represented in preparing  for  that  appeal,
    and a skeleton argument was prepared by Ms Iqbal, who appears before me
    today. The skeleton argument is undated, but  was  clearly  before  the
    First-tier Judge.  In that skeleton argument Ms  Iqbal  refers  to  the
    existence of the modernised guidance for Tier 4, Version 27, valid from
    6 November 2014 and she quoted from it:

         "If the Tier 4 Sponsor's licence expires, is revoked or surrendered
         whilst an applicant had an application under consideration  in  the
         Home Office then (there are then set out  a  number  of  scenarios,
         including the following)

          . If their permission to stay runs out whilst they are waiting for
            a decision on their application you must delay  the  refusal  of
            their application for 60 days to allow them to  get  a  new  CAS
            from a different Sponsor adjourned vary  their  application  for
            leave in the UK.

            ...

            In all cases you must write to the applicant to  tell  them  the
            date by which they must provide a new CAS. ..."

 9. A copy of the relevant Tier 4 guidance was also included in the  bundle
    of papers prepared and submitted to the Tribunal  ahead  of  the  paper
    appeal.  That appeal was considered by  the  judge  on  the  papers  in
    Glasgow on 10 June 2015.  The judge formed the  view  that  the  simple
    fact that the Appellant did not have a valid CAS  letter  at  the  date
    that the Respondent considered his application  for  further  leave  to
    remain resulted in the Respondent being correct not to award any points
    under the relevant Appendix of the  Immigration  Rules.   There  is  no
    reference within the judge's decision to the existence of  the  Tier  4
    guidance which had been brought to his attention or that  any  skeleton
    argument had been submitted in support of the appeal.

10. The Appellant then appealed to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  grounds  again
    quoting from the Tier 4 guidance arguing that  the  correct  course  of
    action for the judge to have followed would have  been  to  have  found
    that the decision of the Secretary of State was not made in  accordance
    with the law, on the basis that a relevant  published  policy  had  not
    been complied with by the Secretary of State.

11. Having discussed all these matters with both  Advocates  before  me  it
    seems there is agreement between the parties that the First-tier  Judge
    did err in law in the manner in which he approached this appeal.  It is
    clear to me that the Respondent's non-compliance with her own published
    policy results in the Respondent having  proceeded  not  in  accordance
    with  the  law;  a  ground  of  appeal  under  s.84(1)(e)  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('NIAA 2002'), still available  to  the
    Appellant in the present case due to the date  of  decision.  What  the
    Respondent should have done was to have granted the applicant 60  days'
    grace in which to make a further application for leave to remain with a
    further CAS letter, if he so wished.  The judge ought to  have  allowed
    the  appeal  under  s.86(3)(a)  NIAA  2002  on  the  basis   that   the
    Respondent's decision was made not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and
    therefore the judge's decision contains a material error of law.




    Decision

12. The decision of the First tier involved the making of a material  error
    of law.

13. I set aside the judge's decision and I re-make the decision ruling that
    the Appellant's  appeal  is  to  be  allowed  on  the  basis  that  the
    Respondent's decision was made not in accordance with the law.

14. The result accordingly is that the Appellant's application for  further
    leave to remain  dated  3  February  2014  remains  extant  before  the
    Respondent, for a lawful decision to be made upon it.


Signed:

    [pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

Date: 27.1.16

