
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/06906/2015
                                                               IA/07181/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 December 2015                  |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                       Mr Pankajkumar Anilkumar Joshi
                       Mrs Devalben Pankajkumar Joshi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Burrett, Counsel instructed by Sangat Advice
Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of India.  Mr Joshi made an application  on
    4 February 2015 to vary his leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant
    under the  points-based  system  and  Mrs  Joshi,  his  wife,  made  an
    application to be his dependant.  The applications were made on 21 June
    2014 and refused by the Secretary of State on 4 February 2015.

2.   The reason for the refusal was that the Confirmation of Acceptance  for
    Studies (CAS) which was submitted with the application was not valid as
    the Tier 4 Sponsor Register as of 30 January 2015  indicated  that  the
    college was not listed as a Tier 4 sponsor as of that date.

3.   The appellants appealed and their appeals were dismissed  by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Fox in a decision that  was  promulgated  on  1
    June 2015 following determination on the papers at the request  of  the
    appellants.  The judge dismissed the appeals under the Rules and it  is
    necessary to quote the following paragraphs from the judge's decision:

         "12. Within the Appellant's bundle is a letter dated 16 March 2015,
             which contains  information  relevant  to  this  Appeal.   The
             Appellant contends that he submitted  his  application  on  21
             June 2014.  His application included a CAS from Essex  College
             Ltd.  At that stage it is reasonable to presume that  the  CAS
             was valid.  What we know from the letter of 16 March from  one
             of the Respondent's officers, is that by 24  June  2014  Essex
             College Ltd had its licence revoked.  What I am unaware of is,
             the actual date that that licence was revoked.  In the absence
             of any information to assist me I must  presume  that  it  was
             revoked on after 24 June 2014.  When the  Appellant  made  his
             application he did so with a valid CAS.

         13.  There is an onus on the Respondent  to  notify  the  Appellant
             that Essex College Ltd had its licence revoked and that he has
             a  further  period  of  time  (60  days)  to  present  another
             certificate.  The Appellant contends that he did  not  receive
             notification  to  this  effect  from  the   Respondent.    The
             Appellant contends in paragraph 6 of  his  statement  that  he
             found out that he was aware of the position regarding his  CAS
             on 23 June  2014,  namely  that  Essex  College  Ltd  had  its
             sponsorship  licence  revoked.   This  suggests  two   things.
             Firstly, that the licence must have been revoked prior  to  24
             June 2014.  Secondly that the Appellant was fully aware of his
             position that his application could no  longer  be  considered
             valid and he should do something about it.

         14.  The suggestions are important because the onus rests with  the
             Appellant in the first instance to ensure that  he  has  valid
             CAS to submit when he  makes  his  application.   On  his  own
             evidence this was not the case.

         15.  The fact that he was aware of a problem involving the  college
             should have motivated  him,  in  some  direction  or  another,
             whether the Respondent came back to him or not.   So,  between
             23 June 2014 and 4 February 2015 when the  Appellant  received
             formal notice from the Respondent  that  his  application  was
             refused (including the reasons for the refusal), the Appellant
             did nothing to secure his position by seeking  out  a  further
             College and course."

4.   The appellants were granted permission by Upper Tribunal Judge  Canavan
    in a decision of 30 September  2015.   At  the  hearing  before  me  Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller on behalf of the Secretary of State conceded that the
    judge had made an error of law because he failed to identify  the  date
    of revocation of the sponsor's licence.  If the  revocation  had  taken
    place post the date of the application then it  was  incumbent  on  the
    Secretary of State to apply the relevant policy which  would  give  the
    appellant 60 days in order to allow him to regularise  his  stay.   The
    appellant's leave expired on 28 June 2014.

5.   The judge made a material error of law for the  reasons  identified  by
    the appellants and this was conceded by the Secretary of State.  It  is
    clear to me that the judge's findings on this are  ambiguous.  However,
    he was not assisted by either party, who were  unable  to  confirm  the
    date of the revocation and even before me  there  was  not  information
    about this from the parties.

6.   I accept Ms Brocklesby-Weller's submission that  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State was not in accordance with the law because there  is
    no consideration of whether or not the policy  applies  and  indeed  no
    consideration or identification  of  the  date  of  revocation  of  the
    sponsor's licence. The failure to resolve  this  issue  amounts  to  an
    error of law and I set aside the decision.  I communicated this to  the
    parties at the hearing before me.

7.   In the circumstances the application remains outstanding.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 14 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

