
[pic]
IAC-HX-DML-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06590/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2015                   |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway


                                   Between

                     MS GRACE OLUWAFUNMILAYO FOLORUNSHO
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Hena
For the Respondent:    Ms Sreeraman


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  in  1967.   She  appeals
    against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 13 January 2014 to
    refuse her application for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. The immigration history is that she arrived  on  23  March  2006  on  a
    student visa valid until 3 September  2006.   On  29  August  2006  she
    sought leave to remain as a nurse in a supervised practice but this was
    refused on 6 October 2006.  An appeal  was  dismissed  on  28  November
    2006.

 3. On 22 December 2006 she sought leave to remain as a student  which  was
    granted until 31 January 2008.  On 22 January 2008 she  sought  further
    leave to remain as a student which was granted until 31 October 2009.

 4. On 21 October 2009 she sought further leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student which was granted until 28 February 2011.

 5. A still further application was made for leave to remain as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student which was granted until 30 May 2013.  On  22  May  an
    application was made for indefinite leave to remain outside  the  Rules
    on compassionate grounds.  It is  that  application  which  formed  the
    subject of the appeal.

 6.  The  Respondent  considered  the  application  in   respect   of   any
    family/private life the Appellant might have  established  in  the  UK.
    Under family life she had to satisfy paragraph A277C and Appendix FM of
    the Rules.  She did not claim to have a child or partner in the UK  and
    did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM and  her  application  was
    refused under paragraph D-LTRP.

 7. Her private life was considered under paragraph 276ADE but she had  not
    lived in the UK for a continuous period of 20 years.  The  majority  of
    her life had been spent in Nigeria.  She  had  ties  in  Nigeria.   Her
    application was refused under paragraph 276CE with reference to 276ADE.

 8. The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant had provided  evidence
    of any sufficiently compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances  which
    would justify a grant of leave outside the Rules.

 9. She appealed.

10. The Appellant did not attend the hearing at Hatton Cross  on  17  March
    2015 before Judge of the First-tier Quinn.  At  paragraph  [2]  of  his
    decision he stated: "Notice of the hearing was sent to the Appellant on
    7 April 2014 to her correct address.  The Appellant sent an email on 16
    March indicating that she was not feeling well and  she  would  not  be
    able to attend the court case on 17 March.  No representative  appeared
    on her behalf".  The judge proceeded to  hear  the  appeal  in  absence
    under  Rule  28(a)  and  (b)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.

11. In summary, he found that the Appellant had spent most of her  life  in
    Nigeria. Although she had been absent  for  7  years  she  had  social,
    cultural and family ties there.  She had come as a student and had  not
    had permission to work apart from 10 hours a week in  term  time.   She
    could not satisfy the Rules. She "appeared to be trying to  get  around
    the Rules." If she intended to come to the UK to  work  originally  she
    needed a Tier 1 or Tier 2 work permit but she had not applied for this.
    "She came here to study and is at the end of her studies." [25]

12. The judge found that the Appellant is  in  good  health,  with  a  good
    education and should have no  difficulty  in  obtaining  employment  in
    Nigeria.

13. She had, he concluded,  "not  provided  evidence  of  any  sufficiently
    compelling or compassionate circumstances which would justify  a  grant
    of leave to remain in the UK on an exceptional  basis  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules". [29]

14. He went on to dismiss the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and  on
    human rights grounds.

15. Permission to appeal was sought.  The grounds contend that the decision
    of the judge is vitiated by a procedural error of law, namely  that  on
    the date of the hearing the Appellant had telephoned  the  Tribunal  to
    request an adjournment on the basis of ill health but  that  the  judge
    proceeded to hear the appeal in her absence.

16. Permission was granted by a judge on 29 July 2015 who stated:

         "...

         2.   It is submitted that the Appellant was unable  to  attend  the
             hearing due to illness.  At paragraph 2 of  the  Decision  and
             Reasons it states that the Appellant sent an email on 16 March
             2015 to the Tribunal indicating she was not well and would not
             be in attendance the next  day  which  was  the  date  of  the
             hearing.  The judge noted that there was no representative and
             proceeded to hear the case in the  Appellant's  absence.   ...
             The grounds state that the Appellant telephoned  the  Tribunal
             on the day of the hearing to request an  adjournment  and  the
             Tribunal was informed.  It is arguable that the judge did  not
             receive the Appellant's request.  If he had and the  Appellant
             had been granted an adjournment and thereafter had  been  able
             to attend on  another  day,  the  evidence  may  have  made  a
             material difference to the outcome or to the fairness  of  the
             proceedings.

         3.   The grounds state that confirmation of the Appellant's illness
             is supported by a GP letter  which  accompanied  the  grounds.
             Unfortunately no letter was lodged.   However  this  does  not
             take away from the fact that the judge appears  to  have  been
             given no notification of the request for an adjournment by the
             Appellant on the day.  The fact that  there  is  a  GP  letter
             (which no doubt can be produced for  the  next  stage  of  the
             Appellant's  appeal)  simply  supports  the  reason  why   the
             Appellant could not attend the hearing."

17. At the error of law  hearing  before  me  Ms  Hena  lodged  a  skeleton
    argument.  In summary, her position was that on 16 March 2015, the  day
    before the hearing, the Appellant sent a short email to  her  solicitor
    stating she was not well and had seen her GP and needed to  have  blood
    tests.  As a result she would not be able to attend the  hearing.   The
    solicitors forwarded the email to the Tribunal.

18. The solicitors uncertain of how ill the Appellant was,  needed  further
    information, so no application for an adjournment was made on 16  March
    2015.  The Appellant did not respond to the solicitor's enquires  about
    her health.

19. On the day of the hearing a  member  of  the  Tribunal  staff  and  the
    solicitors spoke on the telephone.  Ms Hena could not say who contacted
    whom or the details.  But she recalls that the Tribunal were told  that
    the Appellant was  ill  and  could  not  attend.   In  the  absence  of
    instructions from the Appellant as to her state of health the barrister
    who had been instructed to appear was cancelled.  No one  appeared  for
    the Appellant.

20. No medical note was submitted at the time, only, Ms  Hena  added,  with
    the grounds seeking permission.

21. The judge's decision to proceed in  absence  was,  in  her  submission,
    unfair.  She asked that the case be set aside to be reheard.

22. Ms Sreeraman's  position  was  that  the  judge  had  directed  himself
    appropriately.  No adjournment request had been received.  It  did  not
    appear even at this stage that there was any medical  evidence.   There
    was no unfairness.

23. In considering this matter the only issue is whether  the  decision  of
    the judge to proceed with the hearing was vitiated by procedural  error
    by his proceeding in absence despite, it is claimed in the grounds,  an
    adjournment request having been made on the basis  of  the  Appellant's
    ill health.

24. The issue is one  of  fairness.   In  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) it was held  that  if  a  Tribunal  refused  to
    accede to an adjournment request, such decision could, in principle, be
    erroneous in law in several respects: these include a failure  to  take
    into  account  all  material  considerations;   permitting   immaterial
    considerations to intrude; denying the party concerned a fair  hearing;
    failing to  apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting  irrationally.   In
    practice, in most cases  the  question  will  be  whether  the  refusal
    deprived the affected party of his right to a fair hearing.

25. The first problem for the Appellant is that it is accepted  that  there
    was no written adjournment request before the  judge,  merely  a  brief
    email from her dated 16 March 2015 forwarded by the solicitors  stating
    that she is "not feeling well (sick) at this moment".   She  had  "seen
    her doctor and I've asked to do some series of blood tests".  She would
    not be able to attend the hearing the next day.

26. It may well be that on the day of the hearing  there  was  a  telephone
    call between the solicitors and the Tribunal administration although Ms
    Hena could not remember the details. All she could say to me  was  that
    it was explained that the Appellant was ill and could not attend. It is
    not clear that an adjournment was sought orally via the administration.

27. What is clear is that no written application was made on the day.  Such
    could easily have been done by fax or email. The  solicitor's  decision
    not to do so was apparently because the Appellant failed to respond  to
    their request for instructions in relation to her  ill  health.   Their
    lack of confidence in their client was  such  that  the  barrister  was
    cancelled and nobody, even from the firm, appeared before the judge  to
    make an oral application which would have been the appropriate  course.



28. Strikingly, despite the claim in the grounds: "... 2.   The  Appellants
    (sic) did not attend the hearing.  She was unable to do so through ill-
    health.   Evidence  from  the  First  Appellant's  GP  to  that  effect
    accompanies the grounds"; and despite the  comment  by  the  judge  who
    granted permission that no medical letter was before him but "which  no
    doubt can be produced for the next stage of the Appellants appeal"; and
    despite Ms Hena repeating that it was submitted with the grounds,  when
    asked to produce it she could not do so.

29. Thus, in summary, the situation is as follows.  No adjournment  request
    on the basis of the Appellant's claimed ill health  was  made  the  day
    before the hearing.  It is not established that any  such  request  was
    made orally on the day  of  the  hearing  via  the  administration.  No
    adjournment request was made on the day when the  case  called  to  the
    judge orally or in writing the reason being that the solicitors did not
    have  instructions  from  the  Appellant  with  the  result  that  they
    cancelled the attendance of counsel and no one  attended.   No  medical
    evidence in support of the claim by the Appellant that she  was  unable
    to attend due to ill health and which would thus have given good reason
    for  an  adjournment  was  submitted  at  the  time  or  at  any   time
    subsequently.

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to proceed in absence for
    the reasons he gave shows  no  unfairness.   There  was  no  procedural
    irregularity capable of making a material difference to the outcome  or
    the fairness of the proceedings.

31. No challenge had been made to his decision on the merits of the case.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows no material error of  law  and
that decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

