
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06837/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |              Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|On 9 February 2016                       |              On 4 March 2016         |
|                                         |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                MEHNAZ SAJID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L Mair, instructed by Prolegis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mehnaz Sajid, was born on 1 October 1981 and is a female
    citizen of Pakistan.  She entered the United Kingdom as a  work  permit
    dependant on 7 March 2012 and applied for leave to remain on the  basis
    of a relationship with Sajid Iqbal in May 2014.   Her  application  was
    refused on the basis that the certificate she  provided  regarding  her
    competence in the English language had not been issued by a provider on
    a list approved and accredited by the respondent (see Appendix O of  HC
    395 (as amended)).  She appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Shimmin) which, in a decision promulgated on 12 June 2015 dismissed the
    appeal.  She now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Although he did not concede the appeal on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State, Mr Diwyncz, a Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  did  not
    disagree with the analysis provided  by  Miss  Mair,  Counsel  for  the
    appellant.  Miss Mair submitted that the appeal turned on the  validity
    of the certificate.  Unfortunately, the judge had failed to have regard
    to the Secretary of  State's  transitional  provisions  concerning  the
    accredited providers of English language testing.  The appellant has  a
    grade 2 Graded Examination in Spoken English (Entry  Level  Certificate
    in  ESOL  International  (speaking  and  listening)  (Entry  1)).   The
    certificate was issued on 30 March 2015.  The  transitional  provisions
    concern immigration applications made until 5 November  2015  but  only
    "when [the English language test] has been taken on or before  5  April
    2015."  The appellant's application fell within those parameters.   The
    table produced by Miss  Mair  shows  that  the  certificate  issued  by
    Trinity College London to the appellant remained valid until 5 November
    2015 in respect of an immigration application  as  her  test  had  been
    undertaken before 5 April 2015.  Judge Shimmin, therefore, erred in law
    when he found [16]  that  the  certificate  did  not  comply  with  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. A Rule 24 statement issued by the respondent rather cryptically submits
    "that it is unclear from the transitional provisions HC  532  that  the
    appellant's  assertions  on  this  matter  are  correct."   Miss   Mair
    helpfully produced a copy of the Statement of  Changes  in  Immigration
    Rules HC 532.  I am satisfied having considered that document  that  it
    is not relevant to the present appeal and does nothing  to  render  the
    appellant's English language certificate invalid.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which had  been  promulgated  on  12
June 2015 is set aside.  I  have  re-made  the  decision.   The  appellant's
appeal against the respondent's decision dated 5 February  2015  is  allowed
under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 18 February 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



