
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06311/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 November 2013                           |On 28th November 2013        |
|Prepared 19 November 2013                     |                             |


                                   Before

           LORD MATTHEWS SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                               jatinder singh

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C Hulse, of Counsel, instructed by Lords
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Miss K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of India, born on 1 July  1980,  appeals  with
    permission against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  P-J
    White who, in a determination promulgated on  22  June,  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State made on
    8 February 2013 to refuse him leave to remain under the long  residence
    provisions of the Rules.

2.   The appellant did not claim to have had ten years' lawful residence  in
    Britain.  Rather he claimed that he had lived, without  permission,  in
    Britain for fourteen years and therefore qualified under the provisions
    of paragraph 276B(i)(b).

3.   The judge considered a number of documents produced  by  the  appellant
    and heard  evidence  from  him  and  various  witnesses.   It  was  the
    appellant's claim that he had entered Britain in March  1995  with  the
    help of an agent and  had  lived  here  continuously  since  then.   He
    claimed that he had first lived  at  114  Goodmayes  Road,  Ilford  and
    produced a tenancy agreement for that address, but that  thereafter  he
    had moved to an address in  East  Ham.    He  claimed  that  his  first
    employment had been at an Indian restaurant in South  Wales  where  his
    employer had arranged a temporary national insurance  number  which  he
    had used ever since.

4.   The appellant stated than he had  known  a  Mr  Avtar  Singh,  who  has
    Parkinson's disease since 1998, and also a Mr  Ranjit  Singh  Mann  for
    over thirteen years. He also claimed to have known  Mr  Arjinder  Singh
    Bagral since 1997/8 and a Mr Nalin Mukundlal Shah since 1998.

5.   Counting back from the date of the decision  -  8  February  2013-  the
    relevant fourteen year period would have had to  have  begun  before  8
    February 1999.

6.   In paragraphs 32 onwards of the determination the  judge  set  out  his
    findings of fact. The judge gave himself the appropriate self-direction
    regarding the difficulties which those who  are  in  Britain  illegally
    might have in obtaining documentary evidence particularly  with  regard
    to their employment.  He then considered the first  document  presented
    to him, which was  a  tenancy  agreement  dated  1  April  1997.   That
    document indicated the  grant  of  a  twelve  month  assured  shorthold
    tenancy to the appellant and Gurpreet Singh  at  a  rent  of  �150  per
    month.  The judge  did  not  accept  that  document  was  genuine.   In
    paragraph 34 he set out cogent reasons for that conclusion  given  that
    the appellant was claiming that shortly after arrival as a 16 year  old
    without work and without money it was not  likely  that  the  appellant
    would have been able to take on a tenancy and pay rent.  He  noted  the
    agreement misspelled the appellant's name and although he discounted  a
    submission by the Presenting Officer that the ink on the form  appeared
    newer than the paper, he  did  refer  to  a  number  of  misprints  and
    grammatical and typographical errs in what was supposed to be  an  Oyez
    standard form agreement.

7.   He  therefore  rejected  the  tenancy  agreement  as  evidence  of  the
    appellant living in Britain at that time.

8.   He then considered evidence which the appellant had produced  regarding
    what he said was his first job in South Wales.  The appellant  had,  he
    considered, given unreliable evidence of that employment and the  judge
    gave reasons in paragraph 45 for rejecting the evidence of his work  in
    South Wales, stating that the payslips appeared to show that he  worked
    there from April 1998 until March 1999 and that the  appellant's  claim
    was that he was to be paid monthly in cash with no deductions  for  tax
    and national insurance.  He noted that the payslips  were  for  exactly
    the same amount in respect of how many days  the  appellant  worked  in
    each month.  The judge did not accept that those payslips were evidence
    that the appellant had been  in Britain at that time.

9.   He considered a P60 from the appellant's claimed second employer  which
    appeared to indicate that the appellant had  been  employed  for  seven
    months.  However the judge noted that the appellant had stated  that  a
    job had been arranged for him for "a  week  or  two"  which  the  judge
    stated  was  a  very   different   period.    He   considered   further
    documentation from a number of restaurants  where  the  appellant  said
    that he had worked but pointed out that each appeared to have paid  the
    appellant a flat rate either monthly or  weekly  but  the  amount  paid
    never varied to take into account differences in the number of hours or
    days worked.

10.  His conclusion was that, regarding  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    claimed work  record he could not take the  view that the documents  of
    themselves were reliable evidence of unbroken residence in Britain from
    1997 onwards.  He also found that the  tenancy  agreement  was  "wholly
    unreliable".

11.  He considered the evidence received from Mr  Bhogal,  Mr  Shah  and  Mr
    Avtar Singh and stated that he was unable to accept that their evidence
    of when they first  met  the  appellant  was  reliable.  He  found  the
    evidence of Mr Aftar Singh that he had met the appellant in 1998 at the
    Gurdwara in Seven Kings unreliable as the appellant had  said  that  he
    had only been attending the Gurdwara in Barking and did not  attend  at
    Seven Kings until about 2001 - therefore Mr Avtar Singh could not  have
    met him in 1998.  Similarly, Mr Bhogal had said that  he  had  met  the
    appellant at the Gurdwara in Ilford in 1997/98 but said that  that  did
    not match the appellant's initial account.  When it had been put to  Mr
    Bhogal that the Gurdwara in Ilford had  only  been  built  in  1999  Mr
    Bhogal had said that they first met  in  Barking  and  that  later  the
    Barking Gurdwara had bought a building for a second temple in Goodmayes
    and that therefore in about 2005/6 they had met in Ilford.

12.  With regard to the evidence of Mr Shah, which was that he had  met  the
    appellant in 1998 and the appellant had started working in his  garden,
    that evidence was not accepted by  the  judge  as  at  that  stage  the
    appellant had claimed that he was working in Wales five or six  days  a
    week and going to Gurdwara on Sundays where he had referred to  staying
    until the evening. The appellant could therefore not have been  working
    in Mr Shah's garden at that time.

13.  The judge considered the evidence of Mr and  Mrs  Mann,  accepting  Mrs
    Mann's evidence that she had met the appellant at her wedding  in  2001
    and stated that therefore it was commonsense that if the appellant  had
    been a guest at the wedding he  might  have  become  friends  with  the
    husband sometime before.  He went on to say letters from the  Gurdwaras
    are also consistent with the appellant first  becoming  known  to  them
    during the period between 1999 and 2001.

14.  In paragraph 53 the judge stated:

         "53. In the light of  that,  and  notwithstanding  my  reservations
             about the employment documents, I am satisfied on the  balance
             of probabilities that the appellant first entered  the  United
             Kingdom in about 1999 or 2000.  I am not satisfied that he was
             here earlier than that, whilst still a child.  His  employment
             and other evidence  is  very  patchy  for  a  long  period  of
             continuous residence.   His witnesses all said that they  were
             sure that he had not left the country since they knew him  but
             only one  of  them  in  my  judgment  described  the  sort  of
             relationship and regular contact which would  enable  such  an
             assertion to be confidently made.  That one is Mr Avtar Singh,
             who says the appellant has lived with him since 2003  and  who
             would therefore know whether  the  appellant  had  left  since
             then.  I have already given my reasons for  finding  Mr  Avtar
             Singh unreliable on  the  issue  of  when  he  first  met  the
             appellant.  I further note that his evidence to me  was  of  a
             close relationship with the appellant, who is almost like  his
             son to him.  None  of  the  other  witnesses,  who  claim  the
             appellant is a close friend said anything about his very close
             relationship with Mr Singh."

15.  In paragraph 54 the judge stated:


         "54. The appellant's  entry  was  illegal,  and  according  to  his
             immigration  status  questionnaire  he   came   for   economic
             advantage.  It might be thought that having once  got  in,  in
             such a case, he would stay.  On the other hand his  entry  was
             apparently with a false British passport and he  has  remained
             in close contact with his family in  India.   If  he  had  the
             means to  pass  openly  but  undetected  thorough  immigration
             control (as opposed, say to being  smuggled  in  in  a  lorry)
             there is no overwhelming presumption that he has only done  so
             once


         55.  Accordingly, I am not  satisfied  either  that  the  appellant
             first came here 14 years before the decision (when service  of
             the notice of decision would have stopped  time  running)  nor
             that  his residence has  been  continuous  since  whenever  he
             first arrived. He cannot  therefore  succeed  under  paragraph
             276B."

16.  The judge then turned to the issue  of  the  appellant's  rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  He found that the appellant could  not  succeed
    under the Rules but went on to say that he accepted that the  appellant
    had established private life here and then in paragraph 61 set out  his
    findings on the issue of proportionality.  He wrote:-

         "61. The public interest in the maintenance  of  a  firm  and  fair
             system of immigration control is always a matter to  be  given
             significant weight.   The  appellant  has  been  here,  on  my
             findings, for roughly 13 years now,  which  is  a  significant
             period. On the other hands, the evidence of his  private  life
             shows it to consist of a series  of  intermittent  jobs,  some
             voluntary at one or more Gurdwaras, and a circle  of  friends.
             I have no reason to doubt that he could find work, engaging in
             voluntary service and make  friends  on  returning  to  India,
             where in addition he would have his family.  He will not  have
             such a close contact with the friends he has made here, but he
             will be able to keep in touch with them if he wishes.  All  of
             his stay has been unlawful, and therefore he  has  known  that
             his position was precarious.   His working has been  unlawful.
             I accept, as ZH makes clear, that working unlawfully is not  a
             reason to (?for) rejecting  an  otherwise  valid  claim  under
             paragraph 276B, but that is not the same  as  suggesting  that
             the irregularity  of  his  work,  as  well  as  his  stay,  is
             irrelevant to the assessment of proportionality.  I am in  all
             the  circumstances  satisfied  that   that   decision   is   a
             proportionate response.   The  appeal  in  reliance  on  human
             rights also fails."

17.  An application for leave to appeal was  then  submitted  in  which  the
    grounds  asserted  that  full  evidence  had  been  provided  that  the
    appellant had  lived  in  Britain  for  fourteen  years  and  that  the
    respondent had accepted that all the documentary evidence was "original
    and genuine". It was stated that the respondent  had  only  refused  to
    accept the documentary evidence because  there  was  no   corroborating
    evidence.

18.  Having referred to what the judge wrote in paragraph 61 -  his  finding
    that the appellant had lived in Britain "for roughly thirteen years"  -
    it was argued that he had failed to state on what he based that finding
    and therefore that he had erred in law in not  giving  reasons  in  the
    determination.

19.  The grounds went on to question why the judge had stated  that  he  was
    not satisfied that the appellant  had  continued  to  live  in  Britain
    since "whenever he first arrived" and  it was  alleged  that  that  was
    merely an assumption. It was pointed out that it was not alleged in the
    refusal letter that the appellant had ever left Britain.

20.  The grounds then  questioned  the judge's finding that service  of  the
    notice of decision would have stopped time running, before referring to
    the fact that the judge had appeared to find Mr and Mrs  Mann  credible
    witnesses, pointing out that Mr Mann had stated that  he  had  met  the
    appellant some time in 1999.  They asserted that the judge should  have
    found that the appellant had lived in Britain for  fourteen  years  and
    therefore qualified under paragraph 276.

21.  Having referred to the evidence of Mr Shah  it  was  claimed  that  the
    judge had no right to reject his evidence or indeed the evidence of  Mr
    Avtar Singh or that from Mr Boghal.

22.  With regard to the mistakes in the tenancy agreement,  it  was  claimed
    that these were the fault of the landlord rather  than  the  appellant.
    Other grounds stated that it was not surprising that the appellant  had
    been lent money for his half share  of  the  rent.   The  grounds  also
    claimed that the appellant had established "a sort of family life" with
    Mr Avtar Singh and that therefore his removal was not proportionate.

23.  Miss Hulse relied on the grounds of appeal and  asserted  that  it  had
    not been argued by the respondent that the appellant had travelled  out
    of the country for a period of more than six months during the fourteen
    year period during which he had lived in   Britain illegally.  Moreover
    she argued that the fact  that  the  appellant  had  lived  in  Britain
    illegally should not have been a reason why  the  judge  had  concluded
    that the removal of the appellant would not be disproportionate.

24.  She claimed that the appellant had provide detailed  evidence  that  he
    had arrived in  1997  and  that  his  evidence  was  supported  by  the
    witnesses emphasising that the judge  appeared  to  have  accepted  the
    evidence of Mr Mann which indicated that he  had  known  the  appellant
    since 1999.  Given the fact that the date when the appellant  had  been
    in Britain in 1999 was crucial, the judge  should  have  made  a  clear
    finding thereon.  She referred to the fact that the  judge  had  stated
    that the appellant had lived in Britain for "roughly" thirteen years.

25.  She referred to the evidence of Mr Shah and stated that  that  evidence
    was clear and that the evidence of Mr Shah was linked to  a  particular
    date - that of his son's 20th  birthday.  If the judge  had  wished  to
    question that it was open to him to do so.

26.  With regard to the evidence from the Gurdwaras she  argued  that  clear
    answers had been given to the questions about when  the  appellant  had
    attended the Gurdwaras and that the reasoning was clear - there was  no
    reason why  the  appellant  could  not  have  attended  more  than  one
    Gurdwara.  Her submission was that the conclusions of  the  judge  were
    not sustainable.  She therefore asked us to set aside his decision.

27.  In reply Miss Pal argued that the determination was both  reasoned  and
    sustainable  and  there  was  nothing  irrational  about  the   judge's
    findings.  It was for the appellant to prove his case and the judge had
    considered the evidence before him  and  reached  relevant  conclusions
    thereon.  He had concluded the appellant could not  succeed  under  the
    Rules and furthermore  his  conclusions  regarding  proportionality  of
    removal were fully open to him.

28.  We find that there is no material error of law in the determination  of
    the Immigration Judge. Indeed, we have concluded that  the  grounds  of
    appeal are no more than a  disagreement with findings which  the  Judge
    was entitled to make on the evidence before him.

29.  It is clear from the determination that  the  judge  had  in  mind  the
    relevant test: that is whether  or  not  the  appellant  had  lived  in
    Britain for fourteen years prior to the  decision  to  refuse  made  in
    February 2013.   The fourteen year period is referred to by  the  judge
    in paragraph 1 of the determination and again in  paragraph  55,  where
    the judge makes the clear and unequivocal statement  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had come to Britain fourteen years  before
    the decision.

30.  The judge reached that conclusion  after  a  careful  analysis  of  the
    evidence.  He gave clear reasons why he did not accept that the tenancy
    agreement  could  be  relied  on,  let  alone  the  payslips  for   the
    appellant's claimed employment  at  the  Mouchak  Restaurant  in  South
    Wales.  He further gave reasons  as  to  why  he  did  not  accept  the
    payslips from Lee Spice, the job which the appellant  left  in  October
    2000, given that the appellant had stated that he had had that job  for
    "a week or two" rather than the seven months which the P60 would imply.



31.  Moreover the judge dealt in considerable detail with the evidence  from
    the Gurdwaras but the reality is that that evidence does not  take  the
    appellant back before February 1999.  His reasoning for  rejecting  the
    evidence of the Gurdwaras insofar as it related to  the  period  before
    February 1999 is detailed and cogent.

32.  We consider that the judge also gave sustainable reasons for  rejecting
    the evidence of Mr Shah, as he stated that it was improbable  that  the
    appellant would have been looking for or able to  carry  out  gardening
    job in the summer of 1998 if the appellant was working in  South  Wales
    five or six days a week and going to the Gurdwara on Sunday.

33.  It is correct that the judge accepted the evidence of Mr and  Mrs  Mann
    but the reality is that the evidence of Mr Mann was that he had met the
    appellant in 1999, not that he had met the  appellant  before  February
    1999.

34.  While it is correct that the judge in paragraph 61 stated that  he  had
    found that the appellant had lived in  Britain  for  "roughly  thirteen
    years" that is clearly a different finding  from  a  finding  that  the
    appellant had lived in Britain for fourteen years - the requirement  of
    the Rule - and the requirement which the judge clearly had in mind  for
    the reasons which we have set out above.

35.  Miss Hulse correctly withdrew the ground of  appeal  which  had  stated
    that the judge had been wrong to say that the service of the notice  of
    decision would have stopped time running.  The terms of Rule  276(i)(b)
    are quite clear. It refers to fourteen years' continuous residence:

         "excluding any period spent in the United Kingdom following service
         of notice of liability to removal or notice of a decision to remove
         by way of directions under paragraphs  8  to  10A,  or  12  to  14,
         Schedule 2 to the  Immigration  Act  1971  of  Section  10  of  the
         Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, or of a  notice  of  intention  to
         deport".

36.  The appellant was considered by the Secretary of State to be  a  person
    to whom removal directions may be given in accordance with paragraphs 8
    to 10A of the Schedule 2 of the Immigration  Act  1971  as  he  was  an
    illegal entrant.

37.  We therefore  find  that  the  judge  was  correct  to  find  that  the
    appellant could not qualify for leave to remain under the Rules.

38.  The judge did  properly  consider  the  issue  of  the  rights  of  the
    appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR.  In paragraph 61 he set out  his
    conclusions  that  the  removal  of  the   appellant   would   not   be
    disproportionate.  He did take into account the fact that the appellant
    had  lived  in  Britain  for  a  significant  period,  had  done   some
    intermittent work here, some voluntary work     and  had  a  circle  of
    friends.  He was entitled to conclude that the appellant would be  able
    to find work and engage  in  voluntary  service  and  make  friends  on
    returning to India.  He was also entitled to place weight on  the  fact
    that the appellant's stay in Britain had been unlawful and therefore he
    had always known that his position was precarious.   He  did  not  take
    into account as weighing in the balance against the appellant the  fact
    that he had worked unlawfully.

39.  Indeed, the judge could have in that paragraph mentioned the fact  that
    the appellant had said that he phones his parents, two  sisters  and  a
    brother who are in India, once a week.

40.  In all we  consider  that  his  consideration  of  the  rights  of  the
    appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR was fully  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.

41.  We therefore find that there are no  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Judge and his decision, dismissing this
    appeal both under the Immigration Rules and  on  human  rights  grounds
    shall stand.





Signed                                  Date 26th November 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
