
                                    [pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/06134/2015
                                                               IA/06135/2015
                                                               IA/06136/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th October 2016                  |On 22nd November 2016                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                         JAMAL [S] (FIRST APPELLANT)
                        AASIA [J] (SECOND APPELLANT)
                           [T S] (THIRD APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Praisoody
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The First Appellant born on 14th August 1974 is a citizen of  Pakistan.
    The  Second  Appellant  born  on  14th  February  1981  is  the   First
    Appellant's wife and also a citizen of Pakistan.  The  Third  Appellant
    is their daughter and born on 22nd August 2008 and also  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan.  The Appellants had made application on 5th October 2014  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a student and dependents of  a
    student.  That application had been refused by the Respondent  and  the
    Appellants had appealed against that decision.  The appeal was heard at
    Richmond on 24th February 2016 in front of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Young.  At the hearing it was conceded on the Appellants'  behalf  that
    they could not succeed under the Immigration Rules  and  therefore  the
    appeal  proceeded  simply  on  the  basis  that  removal  would  be   a
    disproportionate breach of their rights under Article 8  of  the  ECHR.
    The judge dismissed the appeals.

 2. The Appellants sought permission  to  appeal  that  decision  and  that
    application was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Saffer  on  18th
    August 2016.  The judge concluded that there  were  no  merits  in  the
    ground and whilst had not specifically used the phrase the child's best
    interests (the basis of the application) the judge  was  plainly  aware
    and had considered such matters.

 3. The Grounds of Appeal were renewed and on  12th  September  2016  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Canavan said that it was arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred to give adequate consideration to the best interests
    of the child.  The matter came before me in accordance with  directions
    to firstly consider whether or not the First-tier Tribunal had made  an
    error of law.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 4.  Miss  Praisoody  began  her  submissions  by  stating  that  both  the
    Respondent and the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to  assess  the
    position of the child and parents on return to their home country.   It
    was said by Miss Praisoody that in all likelihood the adult  Appellants
    would have sold their home in order to come to  the  UK  and  would  be
    destitute upon return and that level  of  destitution  would  adversely
    affect the child.  I asked Miss Praisoody where the evidence  for  such
    assertions was contained and it transpired when I  examined  the  adult
    Appellants' witness statement and a summary of the oral evidence at the
    appeal that no such matters had  been  raised  by  the  Appellants  and
    indeed when looking at the First Appellant's  witness  statement  there
    was almost an entire absence of evidence concerning  the  circumstances
    in Pakistan or that which they may face on return to Pakistan.   It  is
    not the function of  a  representative  to  make  assertions  that  are
    neither based on evidence or any discernable instructions or to involve
    themselves in pure speculation.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr Walker essentially adopted the approach that had been taken  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge who had refused the application.

 6. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    raised in this case.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The First Appellant had come to the United Kingdom in about 2009  as  a
    student and thereafter his wife and child had come to the UK  in  2010.
    It is clearly the case therefore that the Appellants had only ever  had
    a temporary basis for remaining in the UK  and  that  given  the  First
    Appellant had arrived as a student the  proper  inference  is  that  he
    would have indicated an  intent  to  return  to  his  home  country  on
    completion of his studies.  There has never been  therefore  any  basis
    for presuming that  their  time  in  the  UK  would  be  other  than  a
    relatively short temporary period.  The Appellant's right to remain  in
    the United Kingdom concluded on  6th  October  2014.   The  Appellant's
    application to remain, made on 5th October 2014 was not only refused by
    the Respondent but quite clearly could never have succeeded  under  the
    Immigration Rules as the First Appellant did  not  have  the  necessary
    requisites to continue as a student.  That point was  conceded  by  the
    Appellant's representative at the start of the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  Again it is a  proper  inference  that  from  the
    outset of the application made the Appellants and/or the representative
    would have known that the application  was  bound  to  fail  under  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  therefore  in  reality  in  October  2014  the
    Appellants were attempting to remain permanently in the UK  by  use  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 8. At the time therefore of, perhaps that  somewhat  cynical  application,
    the child had been in the UK for only four years but at the time of the
    appeal hearing had been in the UK for some six years.

 9. The judge had set out the evidence in this case and in  particular  had
    set out the evidence relating to the position of the child.  The  judge
    had further noted and it was accepted that the family would be  removed
    as a unit to Pakistan and therefore in that sense  there  would  be  no
    interference with family  life  and  the  case  was  largely  therefore
    focussed on private life.

10. It is questionable whether it was even necessary for the judge to  look
    at Article 8 in  this  case.   The  case  did  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and accordingly there would only have been a need  to
    look at the case outside of  the  Rules  if  there  existed  compelling
    circumstances so  to  do.   It  is  difficult  to  identify  compelling
    circumstances in  this  case  in  what  is  a  not  unfamiliar  set  of
    circumstances.

11. However in fairness to the Appellants the judge had looked at Article 8
    outside of the Immigration Rules and had therefore  by  necessity  also
    considered Section 117  of  the  2002  Act.   The  judge  had  properly
    identified the law and the statutory features of Section 117B  referred
    to by the judge at paragraphs 47 and 48 of the decision.

12. Given the  Respondent  was  considering  removal  of  a  child  it  was
    necessary for the Respondent to consider Section 55 of the Borders  Act
    2009 and "the best interests of a child".   The  submission  raised  by
    Miss Praisoody is that neither the Respondent nor the judge  considered
    the best interests of the child nor made the necessary enquiries and as
    indicated above seemed to rely upon speculative facts  to  support  her
    submissions.

13. The judge did not specifically refer to the phrase "best interests of a
    child".  He does not need to do so in those terms.  Indeed that  phrase
    has become so overused, misconstrued, and well-worn that it long  since
    lost any proper perspective.

14. The Respondent had considered the best interests of the  child  in  the
    refusal letter.  It is not the case therefore that the  Respondent  had
    simply ignored that fact.  The consideration is not detailed  but  that
    is for fairly obvious reasons.

15. These Appellants were legally represented.  If it  is  being  suggested
    that the best interests of a child lie in remaining in the UK  then  it
    seems fairly obvious that two classes of evidence need to  be  provided
    in some  detail.   Firstly  there  needs  to  be  evidence  as  to  the
    activities, lifestyle and position of the child in the UK and  secondly
    there needs to be evidence provided of  the  circumstances  within  the
    home country  so  that  an  individual  looking  at  the  alleged  best
    interests of a child can compare and contrast to arrive at an  informed
    decision.

16. The evidence of the child's position in the UK had been  provided.   It
    disclosed nothing of great significance.  It  merely  demonstrated  the
    child was being educated in the UK and had a circle of friends and some
    social life.  As indicated above  there  was  in  reality  no  evidence
    provided as to the circumstances for this family on return to Pakistan.



17. The judge was clearly appraised of all the available evidence  relating
    to the child.  The fact that that may be relatively  brief  is  neither
    the fault of the judge or the Respondent but a matter for the Appellant
    to produce evidence of any assertions or position they seek  to  claim.
    It would be nonsense and unrealistic  to  suggest  that  such  evidence
    could or should be provided from any other source.

18. The judge had concluded that this whole family  could  be  returned  to
    Pakistan.  That was an entirely proper and reasonable decision.

19. In seeking to suggest that the  judge  had  not  considered  the  "best
    interests of the child" neither the Grounds of  Appeal  nor  the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge granting permission identifies what evidence or  aspects
    of the case the judge had failed to consider.  The simple repetition of
    a well-worn phrase does not disclose that any material error of law was
    made in this case and First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer who had  refused
    permission to appeal in the first instance had correctly and accurately
    identified the position.



Notice of Decision

20. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

21. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

