
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06206/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd June, 2016                            |On 11th August 2016           |
|Dictated 23rd June, 2016                      |                              |
|Signed 30th June, 2016                        |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                   Between

                       Mr JOSHUA IDRISS SANKOH SHERIFF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     M J Victor-Mazeli, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Brocklesby-Welles, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who was born on  3rd  March,
    1992.

2.   He was granted a medical visit visa from 9th September, 2007 until  9th
    March 2008 and arrived in the United Kingdom on 9th October,  2007.  On
    7th March, 2008, an application was submitted for the appellant as  the
    child  of  settled  parents/relatives.   On  28th  March,   2008,   the
    application was refused

3.   The appellant appealed that refusal but the  appeal  was  dismissed  on
    24th July, 2008. On 31st July, 2008, the  appellant's  application  for
    High Court  review  was  also  refused.   By  19th  August,  2008,  the
    appellant had exhausted his rights for appeal.

4.   On 14th August 2008, the appellant submitted a further leave to  remain
    application as a  visitor  for  private  medical  treatment.   On  10th
    October, 2008, he was granted leave to remain until 10th  April,  2009.
    On 9th April, 2009, he made a further application for leave  to  remain
    as a visitor for private medical treatment  but  this  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on 20th May, 2009.

5.   On 27th May, 2009, the appellant  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a visitor for medical treatment and this application too  was
    rejected on 16th June, 2009.  On 23rd June, 2009,  he  made  a  further
    application for leave to remain for medical treatment, but that too was
    also refused, on 20th January, 2010 with no right for appeal.  On  14th
    April, 2010, the appellant submitted a request for reconsideration  and
    on 30th  November,  2010,  that  application  was  considered  and  the
    original  decision  was  maintained.   On  21st  February,   2011   the
    appellant's MP expressed an interest in his case  and  on  21st  March,
    2011, the Home Office responded to that letter.

6.   The appellant  was  served  with  form  IS151A  notifying  him  of  his
    immigration status as an overstayer and his liability to detention  and
    removal from the United Kingdom,  on  12th  February,  2014.   On  23rd
    December, 2014, further representations were made by the appellant  and
    on 23rd January, 2015, a decision was made to refuse the application.

7.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  his  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson at  Taylor  House  on  13th
    August, 2015.  At paragraph 3 of the determination the judge noted that
    the appellant claimed that removing him to Sierra  Leone  would  breach
    his rights under the Human Rights Act 1998, and  he  claimed  that  the
    Secretary of State had failed to consider his length of  residence  and
    the fact that he has made a private  and  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom and has a medical condition.

8.   The judge considered the appellant's Article 3  appeal  by  considering
    medical reports and other evidence before him.  The  appellant  adopted
    his statement and was simply asked by his barrister to confirm that  he
    lived in Sierra Leone for the first fifteen years  of  his  life.   The
    appellant said that he had gone to the Gambia for  over  a  year.    At
    that stage the appellant's Counsel asked no further questions.

9.   The judge noted all the evidence before  him  and  the  fact  that  the
    appellant' suffered with epilepsy. Having examined  the  evidence,  the
    judge concluded that the circumstances of the appellant  did  not  meet
    the high threshold for an Article 3 claim as laid down in the case of N
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 31.  He  noted
    that there was no evidence that the appellant's removal would result in
    fatal relapse or that there will be no adequate treatment or support on
    the appellant's return to Sierra Leone.  He dismissed the appeal  under
    Article 3.

10.  The judge noted that no submissions had been made to him in respect  of
    Article 8. The judge  concluded  that  undoubtedly  the  appellant  had
    private life in the United Kingdom, having been in the  United  Kingdom
    since 2007, but found that he did not meet  the  requirements  of  Rule
    276ADE(iii), because he had not been resident for  twenty  years.   The
    judge noted that the appellant was an adult who was unmarred and not in
    a durable relationship. He has no children and in the  absence  of  any
    exceptional circumstances which might be interpreted as family life, he
    does not have any family life capable of being  respected.  As  to  the
    appellant's private life, the judge accepted at  paragraph  30  of  the
    determination that having been in the United  Kingdom  for  some  eight
    years he did enjoy private life.  However, the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant did not satisfy the requirements  of  paragraphs  276ADE(iii)
    and dismissed his appeal under the Rules.

11.  The judge went on to consider  the  appellant's  circumstances  outside
    the Rules and concluded that there was nothing about the  appellant  or
    his circumstances which would amount to a disproportionate interference
    with the appellant's private life such as would justify  the  appellant
    being granted leave to remain on the basis  of  his  Article  8  rights
    outweigh the Immigration Rules.   He  concluded  that  the  appellant's
    removal would not be  a  disproportionate  interference  and  that  the
    appellant had been in the United Kingdom at all times  illegally  apart
    from two short periods.  He has since May 2009 remained notwithstanding
    the dismissal of his applications.

12.  Before me today Counsel urged me to find that the judge  had  erred  in
    law by failing  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  might  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

13.  She suggested that it was incumbent  on  the  judge  to  carry  on  and
    consider the application of that paragraph,  notwithstanding  the  fact
    that counsel who appeared on behalf of the appellant to  represent  him
    had not made any submissions on the point.  She asked me to  note  that
    the appellant had adopted a witness statement which appears at pages 19
    to 22 in his bundle.  In it, the appellant explained that he arrived in
    the United Kingdom at the age of 15 with  his  mother  seeking  medical
    treatment for his illness.  He had previously travelled  to  Gambia  to
    receive surgery and he remained in  Gambia  for  nearly  eleven  years.
    Unfortunately, his mother took him back to Sierra Leone in 2004 and the
    appellant suffered an attack  in  2006,  following  which  his  doctors
    misdiagnosed him as a result of which he was in a  coma  for  some  six
    days.  During that time his suffered  irreversible  brain  damage.  His
    brother-in-law made arrangements for the appellant and  his  mother  to
    travel to the United Kingdom and pays for his  treatment  privately  in
    the United Kingdom.  Commenting on the Reasons for Refusal Letter,  the
    appellant pointed out that according to the Home Office he had lived in
    Sierra Leone for the past fifteen years. He  explained  that  for  some
    eleven years he lived in Gambia.

14.  At paragraph 13 of his statement the appellant points out that he  left
    Sierra Leone at the age of 1.  He has no family or relatives in  Sierra
    Leone and nowhere to live there.  The appellant knows no family members
    in Sierra Leone and the Sierra  Leone  community  will  not  accept  or
    accommodate him because they perceive his  illness  as  being  demonic.
    Were he to return to Sierra Leone he suggests he would  suffer  another
    attack there. Ms. Victor-Mizeli submitted that in the light of what the
    appellant had said in his statement, it was incumbent upon the judge to
    at least consider if he met the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(vi).
    I reserved my decision.

15.  The appellant does not appear to have been best served by  his  Counsel
    at the hearing  before  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.   Counsel  made  no
    submissions to the judge at all in respect of Article 8.

16.  Ordinarily, I do not  believe  that  a  judge  who  fails  to  consider
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) when not addressed by Counsel  in  submissions  on
    Article 8 would make an error of law.   However,  in  this  appeal  the
    appellant had adopted a quite detailed statement in which he  makes  it
    clear that he has not lived in Sierra Leone since the age of 1.   Given
    that he was aged 23 at the time he appeared before the judge, I believe
    that the judge should have been alerted by the appellant's statement to
    the possibility  that  the  appellant  might  quality  under  paragraph
    276ADE(v).  Paragraph 276ADE(vi) provides as follows:

         "The appellant at the date of the application is aged 18  years  or
         over, has lived continuously in the UK for less than  twenty  years
         (discounting any period for imprisonment) but there would  be  very
         significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  into  the
         country to which he would be required to go if  required  to  leave
         the United Kingdom."

17.  In the circumstances, I believe  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Davidson did err in law by failing to  take  account  of  the  evidence
    which was clearly before him and considering  if  the  appellant  could
    satisfy paragraph 276ADE(vi).  The decision  cannot  stand,  I  set  it
    aside.

18.  When the judge was considering the appellant's Article 8 claim  outside
    the Immigration Rules, he referred to the appellant  having  spent  the
    first fifteen years of his life in Sierra Leone  and  the  Gambia.   He
    referred to the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  mother,  but  did  not
    specifically refer to the appellant's adopted witness statement.  It is
    not clear, therefore that the judge actually read it.

19.  Paragraph 13 of the appellant's statement is as follows:

         "As I continue to take the medication and receiving  moral  support
         from the church in the UK I have regained my right mind [sic].    I
         reasoned properly and able to retain information [sic] and helps me
         to live a better life.  I cannot return to Sierra Leone as  I  left
         there at the age of 1 year and some months old.  I have  no  family
         or relatives in Sierra Leone and if I am returned there I will have
         nowhere to live.  It was mentioned that I still have family members
         in Sierra Leone.  I do not have any family members in Sierra  Leone
         and even if I do, I do not  know  their  whereabouts.   The  Sierra
         Leone community will not accept or accommodate me as they  perceive
         my illness as demonic.  I would go through the same trauma  I  went
         through when I was much younger and it will get worse this time  as
         the culture has not changed towards people who suffer this type  of
         illness.  To Sierra Leonean community it is a  'taboo'  and  it  is
         contagious.  The only family I have is in France, my sister and her
         family who take care of me financially and my niece and nephew aged
         15 and 7 years respectively.  I see them quite often as they  visit
         me in the UK now and again."

20.  Given that the appellant has been in the United Kingdom  now  for  some
    seven years, having arrived at the age of 15 years and given also  that
    he has no friends or relatives in Sierra Leone and he has not lived  in
    Sierra Leone until some little time after  his  first  birthday,  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant does meet the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE and having set aside the judge's decision, I allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision

21.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson  was  wrong  in  law
    and I set it aside.  My decision is that the appellant's appeal  should
    be allowed.

Fee Award

To the extent that a fee has been paid or is payable, I make a fee award  in
favour of the appellant.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
