
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06766/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th November 2014                        |On 29th December 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                                SACHAH SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Julian Wells, Counsel for Malik & Malik, Solicitors,
London
For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 1st January 1938.  He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 6th January  2014
    refusing his application for leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    outside the Immigration Rules and  on  the  basis  of  his  family  and
    private life under Article 8.  His appeal was heard  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Sweet  on  27th  August  2014.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed in a determination promulgated on 9th September 2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Reid on 23rd October  2014.
    The grounds of application are that the judge misdirected himself as to
    the country of return.  The Appellant's claim is that he has  lived  in
    India for 22 years, not Afghanistan, although that is  the  country  of
    which he is a national.  He held a return visa for India restricted  to
    a 90 day absence which he exceeded due to documented ill  health.   The
    permission states that the judge's  conclusions  at  paragraph  23,  in
    relation to being readmitted to India are arguably speculative and lack
    reasoning.   The grounds also state  that  the  judge  failed  to  make
    findings in respect of the Appellant's health and failed to  take  into
    account when considering exceptional  circumstances,  the  difficulties
    for the Appellant if he is removed to Afghanistan.

 3. Counsel for the Appellant referred to the Appellant's return to  India.
    He submitted that  the  Appellant's  residence  permit  for  India  had
    expired at the date of the hearing.  He submitted that the judge failed
    to address the Appellant's return to Afghanistan where he has no family
    and where, being elderly and infirm, he will  be  unable  to  care  for
    himself.

 4. He submitted that the judge's findings about the Appellant's health are
    flawed as he refers to a medical report in paragraph 22 and then states
    that he has not seen the medical report.  Counsel  submitted  that  the
    medical report on file which is dated 4th October 2013 states that the
    Appellant is not fit to travel.

 5. Counsel then referred to the Appellant's difficulties  in  Afghanistan,
    submitting that  the  judge  made  no  finding  about  his  exceptional
    circumstances if he is returned there.

 6. Counsel submitted that cumulatively these are material  errors  of  law
    and the appeal should be reheard.

 7. The Presenting Officer made her submissions first of all  dealing  with
    the Appellant's return to India.

 8. She referred to the Judge's findings  at  paragraph  22,  in  which  he
    refers to the medical report of October 2013 but states that he has not
    seen any updated medical report showing whether the  Appellant  is  now
    fit to return.  The medical report he had was almost a year old at  the
    date of the hearing.  The Presenting Officer submitted  that  as  there
    was no updated medical report the  Appellant  can  return  of  his  own
    volition to India.  She submitted that the judge took  everything  into
    account but did not believe the evidence.  She submitted that the judge
    made no error when he referred to the medical evidence at paragraph  22
    of the determination.

 9. With regard to the judge's failure  to  make  findings  on  exceptional
    circumstances, she submitted that that is not a  material  error.   The
    judge looked at the Appellant's habitual  residence,  which  is  India.
    She  submitted  that  there  is  no  error  on  that   basis   in   the
    determination.   She  submitted  that  the   Appellant   returning   to
    Afghanistan does not require to be considered and  the  judge  made  no
    error by considering the Appellant's return to  India.   She  submitted
    that he should have considered the Appellant going back to  Afghanistan
    for completeness but this is not a material error.

10. Counsel then submitted that for the judge to find it reasonable for the
    Appellant to return to India is purely speculative.   This  depends  on
    the Indian authorities.  His residence permit has expired and he has no
    automatic legal right to reside in India.  He submitted  that  that  is
    why the Home Office made the removal directions out to Afghanistan.  He
    submitted that the fact that the  judge  did  not  consider  return  to
    Afghanistan is a material error of law.

11. Counsel submitted that with regard to the Appellant's  health  problems
    it is speculative when the judge suggests that his medical evidence  is
    enough to overcome his lapsed  residence  permit.   He  was  previously
    found unfit to travel and he submitted that the judge failed to look at
    his current situation in the United Kingdom.   He  submitted  that  the
    medical report on file is not very old and  the  doctor  made  specific
    findings about his fitness to travel.  He submitted that if his  health
    has stabilised this has not been made known but  even  if  it  has  not
    stabilised his general frailty must be a material factor especially  if
    he is returned to Afghanistan.  He has no family there  and  conditions
    there will be adverse.  He submitted  that  Sikhs  are  a  minority  in
    Afghanistan.  They have problems there.  He submitted  that  the  judge
    should have considered how the Appellant would be treated on return  to
    Afghanistan as a member of a persecuted community.

12. I was asked to find that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's determination.

Decision

13. The medical report is almost a year old  and  there  is  no  up-to-date
    medical evidence.  The judge was therefore correct to find  that  there
    was nothing before him to show whether the Appellant is fit  to  return
    to India or not.

14. In paragraph 22 the judge  notes  that  the  Appellant  last  lived  in
    Afghanistan in 1991 and has not been back since.  He is well  aware  of
    the Appellant's situation in the United Kingdom. He has considered  the
    situation in India which is the Appellant's  habitual  residence.   The
    Appellant did not deliberately overstay his residence permit and he has
    medical evidence to show this.  As India was his habitual residence and
    he has been there for 21 years  and  as  he  can  produce  his  medical
    certificate, the judge believes that he can return there. It  would  be
    an exaggeration to say that that is speculative. This seems to  be  the
    most likely step for the Appellant to take. He states at  paragraph  23
    that he can continue to be looked after by his son  there.   The  judge
    was given evidence about his son in India's health but finds that  that
    evidence is not sufficient to  show  that  he  cannot  look  after  the
    appellant.  The Judge goes on to refer to credibility  issues  relating
    to this part of the evidence.

15. At  paragraph  23  the  judge  considers  the  Appellant  returning  to
    Afghanistan.  He states that there is no evidence of him  being  unable
    to return to India because he has exceeded his six month visa.  In fact
    he finds that the medical  evidence  which  was  before  him  would  be
    sufficient to counter any argument about this.

16. The judge makes valid points relating to  the  Appellant's  health  and
    gives proper reasons for finding that the  Appellant  can  go  back  to
    India.  At paragraph  23  he  states  "I  do  not  accept  the  further
    submission made  on  his  behalf  that  he  would  have  to  return  to
    Afghanistan rather than India because India would not accept  him  back
    because he had exceeded his six month visa."  Based on what was  before
    him he was entitled to make this finding.

17. It is sufficient to show that the judge has considered this  point  and
    does not find it necessary to go into this more deeply.

18. All three grounds have therefore been dealt with properly by the judge.
     He notes at paragraph 24 that this is a  claim  for  leave  to  remain
    outside  the  Immigration  Rules  and  he  finds  that  there  are   no
    exceptional circumstances  which  would  justify  him  considering  the
    appeal pursuant to the case of Gulshan but even if he did consider this
    appeal outside the Rules he does not find it would be  disproportionate
    for the Appellant to return to India and continue to be looked after by
    his oldest son and his family there.

Notice of Decision

There  is  no   material  error  of  law  in   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
determination.

The  determination  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Sweet
promulgated on 9th September 2014 must stand.



Signed        Date 27th December 2014

Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
