
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/06882/2015
                                                               IA/06944/2015
                                                               IA/06952/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 August 2016                    |On 6 September 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Vijayaraghavan [P]
                                ANURADHA [B]
                                    [S N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss D Qureshi, Counsel, instructed by Legend
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS





Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal which allowed the appeal  of  Mr  [P]  ('the  first
    claimant') and his two dependants ('the second and third claimants').

 2. The claimants are all citizens of India.  The first claimant  was  born
    on 11 October 1977, his wife, the  second  claimant,  was  born  on  15
    September 1980 and  his  son,  the  third  claimant,  was  born  on  27
    September 2008.  On 21 January 2015 a decision was made to curtail  the
    first claimant's leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   However,  the
    decision to curtail the claimant's leave did not give rise to  a  right
    to the appeal.  The first claimant was also subject to a decision  made
    on 17 February 2015 which was a refusal of leave to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom.  The decision to refuse leave to enter the United Kingdom does
    attract a right of appeal.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The First-tier Tribunal allowed  the  claimants'  appeals,  considering
    solely the decision made on  21  January  2015  to  curtail  the  first
    claimant's leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal also considered issues raised by the  Secretary  of  State  in
    respect of the first claimant's TOEIC  qualification.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal allowed the appeals to the extent that the curtailment  letter
    ought to be properly served  upon  the  claimants  and  for  the  first
    claimant to be given 60 days to apply for a new college/sponsor. It was
    also decided by the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  respondent  should
    reconsider the refusal grounds in  relation  to  the  first  claimant's
    TOEIC qualification in light of the interview that  was  said  to  have
    occurred with the claimant in or around May 2015.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal against  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds of  appeal
    set out that the First-tier Tribunal had misdirected  itself  and  that
    this amounted to a material error of law.   It  is  asserted  that  the
    first claimant's appeal was against  the  refusal  of  leave  to  enter
    decision made on 17  February  2015  and  not  an  appeal  against  the
    decision to curtail the claimant's  leave.   The  decision  to  curtail
    leave does not attract a right of appeal but  the  decision  to  refuse
    leave to enter does.  It is further asserted that the  Tribunal  failed
    to take into account or resolve conflicts  of  fact  or  opinion  on  a
    material matter.  The respondent drew attention to the  fact  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal set  out  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    represented at the hearing whereas in fact the Secretary of  State  was
    represented by a Presenting Officer.   The  record  of  the  Presenting
    Officer's attendance at the hearing has been provided.





The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. At the commencement of the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  Miss
    Qureshi indicated that the claimants accepted that there  had  been  an
    error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

Discussion

 6. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  by  considering
    that  the  appeal  was  against  the  decision  to  curtail  the  first
    claimant's leave to remain in the UK  made  on  21  January  2015.   As
    submitted by the Home Office this decision does not attract a right  of
    appeal.  The only decision that could have been  appealed  against  was
    the decision of February 2015 which was a refusal of leave to enter the
    United Kingdom.  This was a clear error of  law  on  the  part  of  the
    Tribunal as it had no jurisdiction to entertain an appeal  against  the
    decision to curtail leave to remain in the UK.

 7. Further, the Tribunal had no power to remit the matter to the Secretary
    of State. Pursuant to Section 86 of the 2002 Act the judge  either  had
    to dismiss the appeals, allow  them  outright  or  allow  them  to  the
    limited extent that the decisions were not in accordance with the  law.



 8. This is a case in which there were no findings of fact in  relation  to
    the matters under appeal and therefore this matter must be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a de-novo hearing before a judge other than
    Judge Lucas.  It was not possible to fix a hearing date at the  hearing
    before me.  Therefore, the matter is remitted to be heard on  the  next
    available date at Taylor House hearing centre.

Notice of Decision

 9. The First-tier Tribunal's decision contained a material  error  of  law
    and is set aside. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to
    be heard on the next available date at Taylor house  before  any  judge
    other than Judge Lucas.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 3 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

