
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06426/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 October 2014                          |On 15 October 2014         |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR LIYAKATALI YASIN KAPADIA
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr T Melvin a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
          For the Respondent: Mr F Gaskin of counsel instructed by Chesham
& Co

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  ("the
      Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen  of  India  who  was
      born on 27 May 1962 ("the claimant"). The Secretary of State has  been
      given permission to appeal the determination  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Judge A M Black ("the FTTJ") who  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  on
      Article 8 human rights grounds only against the Secretary  of  State's
      notice dated 30 January 2014 stating that he was considered  to  be  a
      person to whom removal directions could be given as an illegal entrant
      because he had admitted to having entered the UK using  a  counterfeit
      British passport on 21 October 2002.


   2. The claimant claimed to have arrived in the UK on 15 June 1994 and  to
      have lived here ever  since.  On  14  December  2010  he  applied  for
      indefinite leave to remain based  on  his  length  of  residence.  His
      application was refused on 15 February 2011. The  Secretary  of  State
      concluded that there was no evidence of lawful entry and that he could
      not demonstrate 10 years  continuous  lawful  residence.  He  had  not
      provided evidence which established 14 years non-lawful residence.


   3. The claimant appealed and the FTTJ heard the appeal on  9  July  2014.
      Both parties were represented, the appellant by Mr Gaskin who appeared
      before me. The FTTJ considered, as a preliminary  issue,  whether  the
      claimant had an in country right of appeal. He  concluded  that  there
      was such a right of appeal, a decision which is not now contested.


   4. The FTTJ heard  oral  evidence  from  the  claimant  and  three  other
      witnesses. He found that the claimant had  demonstrated  that  he  had
      been continuously resident in the UK since October 1998.  This  was  a
      period of 15 years  prior  to  his  being  served  with  a  notice  of
      liability to removal in January 2014.


   5. The FTTJ found that as the claimant's Article 8 claim was  decided  in
      2011 the Article 8 issues fell to be decided under the  provisions  of
      paragraph 276ADE  and  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
      appellant did not meet the requirements in Appendix FM because he  had
      no family here. He did not  meet  the  criteria  in  paragraph  276ADE
      because he had not lived in the UK for a period of 20 years.


   6. The FTTJ applied Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules  -  correct  approach)
      [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC). She found that there were arguably good grounds
      for granting leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.  This  was
      "because the respondent's delay in making a removal decision and  then
      doing so on the prompting of the appellant's solicitors suggested that
      the public interest in removal of this appellant is of less concern to
      the respondent than in other cases. The respondent made  her  decision
      to refuse the appellant's Article 8 claim in February 2011, yet it was
      not until three years later in January 2014 that she made the  removal
      decision. In addition, had the respondent made a  timely  decision  to
      remove the appellant his claim would have been  considered  under  the
      Convention rather than the Immigration Rules."


   7. The FTTJ considered the facts of the claimant's case in the  light  of
      Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.  She  reached  the   conclusion   that   the
      interference with his private life would not be proportionate  to  the
      public interest given the respondent's delays  in  taking  enforcement
      action against him.


   8. The Secretary of State applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
      appeal submitting that the FTTJ erred in law by  failing  to  identify
      any compelling or exceptional circumstances. There  were  no  adequate
      reasons for a conclusion that the claimant's circumstances were either
      compelling or exceptional. At all times he would have been aware  that
      he was not here legally, his position was precarious and he  could  be
      required to leave at any time. He had shown a  blatant  disregard  for
      the immigration laws. His claim was no more than an  ordinary  private
      life claim. The Secretary of State acknowledged that  there  had  been
      delay but argued that it should not be  determinative.  The  FTTJ  had
      failed to apply EB (Kosovo) UKHL 14 principles.


   9.  Mr  Melvin  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.   The   exceptional
      circumstances relied on by the FTTJ appeared to be no  more  than  the
      delay on the part of the Secretary of State. He  accepted  that  there
      was no explanation for the delay. Mr  Melvin  then  alleged  that  the
      claimant had already been removed from the UK  and  had  returned.  Mr
      Gaskin objected. In reply to my questions,  Mr  Melvin  accepted  that
      there was no mention of this in the refusal letter and  nothing  about
      it in the grounds of appeal or the determination. I find that this  is
      a new and unsubstantiated allegation which I do not take into account.


  10. Mr Gaskin submitted that there was plainly three years  delay  by  the
      Secretary of State. It could be argued that the delay was as  much  as
      six years. He accepted that delay by the Secretary of State should  be
      considered in the light of EB Kosovo but argued that the FTTJ had done
      this, as  appeared  from  paragraph  33.  The  claimant  had  suffered
      substantial prejudice because his claim had been considered under  the
      Article 8 provisions in the new Immigration Rules. Otherwise he  would
      have succeeded under the 14 year rule. In reply  to  my  question,  he
      accepted that the Article 8 claim was on private  life  grounds  only.
      There was no family life. What the FTTJ said in  paragraph  35  was  a
      reasonable summary of the evidence and together with the  delay  these
      comprised the reasons for allowing  the  appeal  on  Article  8  human
      rights grounds outside the Immigration Rules. Mr Gaskin accepted  that
      if I found that there was an error of law and set aside the decision I
      should remake the decision.


  11. In his reply Mr Melvin accepted that the only refusal letter was  that
      dated 15 February 2011. The 14 year  point  was  dealt  with  in  this
      letter. The new Article 8 provisions in  the  Immigration  Rules  came
      into effect in July  2012.  The  FTTJ  found  that  the  claimant  had
      established continuous residence in the UK since October 1998. He  had
      not been here for 14 years by July 2012 at which stage the requirement
      became 20 years. If I found that there was an error of law I was asked
      to remake the decision in the light of the  requirements  of  sections
      117 (4) and (5) of the Immigration Act 2014.


  12. In EB Kosovo Lord Bingham said;


         "14. It does not, however, follow that delay in the decision-making
         process  is  necessarily  irrelevant  to  the  decision.  It   may,
         depending on the facts, be relevant  in  any  one  of  three  ways.
         First, the applicant may during the period  of  any  delay  develop
         closer personal and social ties and establish deeper roots  in  the
         community than he could have shown earlier. The longer  the  period
         of the delay, the likelier this is to be true. To the  extent  that
         it is true, the applicant's claim under article 8 will  necessarily
         be strengthened. It is unnecessary to elaborate  this  point  since
         the respondent accepts it.
         15. Delay may be relevant in a second, less obvious, way. An
         immigrant without leave to enter or remain is in a very precarious
         situation, liable to be removed at any time. Any relationship into
         which such an applicant enters is likely to be, initially,
         tentative, being entered into under the shadow of severance by
         administrative order. This is the more true where the other party
         to the relationship is aware of the applicant's precarious
         position. This has been treated as relevant to the quality of the
         relationship. Thus in R (Ajoh) v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2007] EWCA Civ 655, para 11, it was noted that "It was
         reasonable to expect that both [the applicant] and her husband
         would be aware of her precarious immigration status". This reflects
         the Strasbourg court's listing of factors relevant to the
         proportionality of removing an immigrant convicted of crime:
         "whether the spouse knew about the offence at the time when he or
         she entered into a family relationship" see Boultif v
         Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR 50, para 48; Mokrani v France (2003) 40
         EHRR 123, para 30. A relationship so entered into may well be
         imbued with a sense of impermanence. But if months pass without a
         decision to remove being made, and months become years, and year
         succeeds year, it is to be expected that this sense of impermanence
         will fade and the expectation will grow that if the authorities had
         intended to remove the applicant they would have taken steps to do
         so. This result depends on no legal doctrine but on an
         understanding of how, in some cases, minds may work and it may
         affect the proportionality of removal.
         16. Delay may be relevant, thirdly, in reducing the weight
         otherwise to be accorded to the requirements of firm and fair
         immigration control, if the delay is shown to be the result of a
         dysfunctional system which yields unpredictable, inconsistent and
         unfair outcomes. In the present case the appellant's cousin, who
         entered the country and applied for asylum at the same time and
         whose position is not said to be materially different, was granted
         exceptional leave to remain, during the two-year period which it
         took the respondent to correct its erroneous decision to refuse the
         appellant's application on grounds of non-compliance. In the case
         of JL (Sierra Leone), heard by the Court of Appeal at the same time
         as the present case, there was a somewhat similar pattern of facts.
         JL escaped from Sierra Leone with her half-brother in 1999, and
         claimed asylum. In 2000 her claim was refused on grounds of non-
         compliance. As in the appellant's case this decision was erroneous,
         as the respondent recognised eighteen months later. In February
         2006 the half-brother was granted humanitarian protection. She was
         not. A system so operating cannot be said to be "predictable,
         consistent and fair as between one applicant and another" or as
         yielding "consistency of treatment between one aspiring immigrant
         and another". To the extent that this is shown to be so, it may
         have a bearing on the proportionality of removal, or of requiring
         an applicant to apply from out of country. As Carnwath LJ observed
         in Akaeke v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA
         Civ 947, [2005] INLR 575, para 25: "Once it is accepted that
         unreasonable delay on the part of the Secretary of State is capable
         of being a relevant factor, then the weight to be given to it in
         the particular case was a matter for the tribunal"
  13. I find that the FTTJ properly considered the Article 8  grounds  under
      the Immigration Rules.


  14. The summary of the effect of Gulshan, prepared by the author  of  that
      determination,  Cranston  J,   states;   "(b) After applying the
      requirements of the Rules, only if there may be arguably good  grounds
      for granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for  Article
      8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
      circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under  them: R  (on  the
      application  of)  Nagre  v   Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
      Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)"; and "(c) The term "insurmountable
      obstacles" in provisions such as Section EX.1 are not obstacles  which
      are impossible to surmount: MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012]
      UKUT 393 (IAC); Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC);
      they concern the practical possibilities of relocation. In the absence
      of such insurmountable obstacles, it is necessary to show  other  non-
      standard and particular features demonstrating that  removal  will  be
      unjustifiably harsh: Nagre."


  15. The grounds do not argue that the FTTJ erred  in  law  by  failing  to
      consider the first stage of whether there were "arguably good  grounds
      for granting leave to  remain"  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
      submission is that she failed to identify compelling circumstances not
      sufficiently recognised under them or,  in  a  similar  argument,  she
      failed to provide adequate reasons why  the  claimant's  circumstances
      were exceptional (or compelling).


  16. The appellant never claimed to have a family life in this country. His
      human rights grounds were based  on  private  life  only.  The  FTTJ's
      findings in relation to private life are set out in paragraph 35 where
      she said;


         "I bear in mind the following facts about the  appellant's  private
         life. He has lived in this country for 15 years and  8  months.  He
         entered the country illegally. He has  had  no  immigration  status
         here but sought to rectify this in 2008 by making  a  human  rights
         claim. He has friends here. He has  been  employed  as  a  domestic
         worker but has not paid tax or National Insurance contributions. He
         attends his local mosque on a regular basis.  He  has  no  criminal
         convictions. There is no evidence that the appellant has maintained
         contacts with family and friends in India."


  17. The FTTJ addressed the question of delay in paragraph 36 in which  she
      said;


         "36. There were a number of delays following the submission of  the
         appellant's human rights claim.  The  appellant's  solicitors  sent
         various chasing letters to the respondent and even  made  a  formal
         complaint. On one occasion the  respondent  lost  his  file.  As  a
         result of the delays, the appellant was required  to  complete  two
         different application forms. The decision was eventually made three
         years after he had made his claim. There then  followed  a  further
         three years delay before  the  removal  decision  was  made.  These
         delays are not  consistent  with  the  respondent  considering  the
         appellant's lack of immigration status  and  removal  a  matter  of
         concern."


  18. I find that the FTTJ erred in law by not applying the  appropriate  EB
      Kosovo principles to the consequences of delay  by  the  Secretary  of
      State, even though these are unexplained. It cannot be said  that  the
      claimant has to any substantial extent developed closer  personal  and
      social ties or established deeper roots in the community than he would
      have shown had it not been for the delay. He has not  established  any
      family life and his private life remains at a low level. The  claimant
      has always known that his status in this country has been  precarious.
      He has not developed any  personal  relationships  which  have  become
      measurably closer during the period of delay. The delay has  not  been
      shown to  be  the  result  of  a  dysfunctional  system  which  yields
      unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair outcomes. It was  not  open  to
      the FTTJ to conclude that the delay made any significant difference to
      the weight otherwise to be accorded to the requirements  of  firm  and
      fair immigration control.


  19. I also find  that  no  different  outcome  would  have  resulted  from
      considering the claim before or after the Article 8 provisions in  the
      Immigration Rules which came into effect in July 2012. After that date
      would have failed on the principles I have set out. Prior to that date
      it would have failed under  the  Strasberg  jurisprudence  and  Razgar
      principles.


  20. The new Article 8 provisions in the Immigration Rules came into effect
      in July 2012.  The  FTTJ  found  that  the  claimant  had  established
      continuous residence in the UK since October 1998.  He  had  not  been
      here for 14 years by July 2012 at which stage the  requirement  became
      20 years.


  21. Having erred in law in her assessment of the weight  to  be  given  to
      delay as a countervailing factor to the requirements of firm and  fair
      immigration control I find that  it  was  not  open  to  the  FTTJ  to
      conclude that there were  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
      recognised under the Article 8 provisions in the Immigration Rules  or
      to allow the appeal on this basis.


  22. Having found that the FTTJ erred in law I set aside the decision which
      I now remake.


  23. I adopt the findings of the FTTJ that the claimant  failed  under  the
      Article 8 provisions in the  Immigration  Rules.  This  has  not  been
      disputed by the claimant. I also adopt her findings of fact which have
      not been disputed. I find that the claimant has not shown  that  there
      are arguably good grounds for granting leave  to  remain  outside  the
      Immigration Rules. Even if I had concluded that  there  were  arguably
      good grounds I would have  found  that  the  claimant  had  not  shown
      compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised   under   the
      Immigration Rules.


  24. The claimant has not established a family life in this country. He has
      established a private life to the  extent  recorded  by  the  FTTJ  in
      paragraph 35 which I have set out. The delay by the Secretary of State
      is material to the very limited extent to which the claimant's private
      life has become any better or more deeply rooted. There  is  a  strong
      public interest in the preservation of immigration control  which  has
      not been reduced to any substantial degree by the delay on the part of
      the Secretary of State. The claimant arrived here  illegally  and  has
      never had any leave to be here. He has worked illegally and been  paid
      in cash to avoid paying tax and National Insurance. Until  he  thought
      that he had been here long enough to regularise his status he did  his
      best to remain undetected.


  25. I must now apply the provisions of paragraphs 117A  and  117B  of  the
      Immigration Act 2014. I am required to find that  the  maintenance  of
      effective immigration control is in the public interest.  It  has  not
      been suggested that the claimant is not able  to  speak  English.  The
      claimant  has  not  established  that  if  he  remained  he  would  be
      financially independent. I give little  weight  to  the  private  life
      which he has established whilst he has been in this country  illegally
      and his immigration status has been precarious.


  26. Taking all these factors into account I find that the claimant has not
      established that the Secretary of State's decision would infringe  his
      Article 8 human rights. I would have reached the same conclusion  even
      if I had not been obliged to  take  into  account  the  provisions  of
      paragraphs 117A and 117B of the Immigration Act 2014.


  27. The FTTJ did not make an anonymity direction. I have not been asked to
      do so and can see no need for such a direction.


  28. Having set aside the decision of the FTTJ I remake  the  decision  and
      dismiss the claimant's appeal both under the Immigration Rules and  on
      human rights grounds.












      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 7
      October 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

