
 [pic]


Upper Tribunal


(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: IA065352015




|At  Field House                           |                            |
|on 6th June  2016                         |                            |
|                                          |Decision and Reasons        |
|                                          |Promulgated                 |
|                                          |                            |
|                                          |15th June 2016              |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                          MR MUHAMMAD UMER ZEESHAN
                                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                          Appellant

                                     And


               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent



    No application for an anonymity order was made and there is no apparent
    reason for making an order.


Representation:

For the Appellant: Unrepresented.
For the Respondent: Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer.




                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction


   1. Although it is the respondent who is appealing I will continue to
      refer the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal for the sake
      of convenience.


   2. The appellant is from Pakistan. He came to the United Kingdom in
      August 2010 as a student with leave until 5 May 2011. This was
      extended until 27 October 2014 on the basis he had enrolled in a
      degree course. On 27 October 2014 he made an application to vary his
      leave indicating there had been difficulties with the provider; that
      he had engaged in agent to find an alternative who absconded with the
      monies he paid; and that he needed more time in order to make
      alternative study arrangements.

   3. His application was refused on 2 February 2015. There was no provision
      in the immigration rules for what he sought and his circumstances were
      not seen as sufficiently compelling to justify a grant of leave
      outside the rules. It was suggested the appellant could complete his
      studies in Pakistan or alternatively make application from there when
      he had a new provider.

   4. His appeal against that decision was heard by Judge of the First-tier
      tribunal Bird on 1 October 2015. In a decision promulgated on 23
      October 2015 the judge found that in line with paragraph 323(i) of the
      rules the respondent's decision was lawful as leave was being sought
      for a purpose not covered by the rules. The judge found the appellant
      did not qualify under paragraph 276 ADE in respect of private life.

   5. The judge did find the circumstances were exceptional and that
      consideration on a freestanding article 8 basis was justified. This
      was on the basis that he had demonstrated progression with his
      studies. His difficulties arose from the provider and the agent he
      engaged.

   6. In carrying out the article 8 assessment the judge described the
      appellant as a diligent student who had pursued a logical and
      consistent course of study and had acquired qualifications in the
      courses he has attempted. Reference was made to the time and
      expenditure incurred and that he was left with a qualification which
      indicated he had only completed part of the course and this would be
      of limited help in seeking employment in Pakistan. The judge said he
      was nearly at the end of his degree qualification and had been offered
      a place by alternative providers on courses commencing in September
      2015.However, he could not be given a CAS because he did not have
      leave. The judge found that private life was engaged and that the
      public interest did not require him to return to Pakistan before
      completing his studies. To expect this in the view of the judge was
      disproportionate given the cost and disruption and was akin to a
      Chikwamba situation.

   7. In seeking leave to appeal the respondent contended the judge was
      wrong to conclude that exceptional circumstances existed justifying
      consideration of article 8. The time and the qualifications obtained
      did not justify this. It was suggested that the judge was seeking to
      use article 8 as a general dispensing power contrary to the Supreme
      Court decision in Patel [2013] UKSC 72. It was also submitted that the
      appellant's desire to continue his studies and gain qualifications did
      not engage the protection of article 8 and his remedy was to return
      home and study there or reapply from there.

   8. If article 8 was engaged then those rights were not enhanced because
      he was a diligent student. Furthermore it was submitted the judge did
      not adequately or at all consider the factors set out in section 117
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. It was also
      submitted that the principles in Chikwamba were not engaged.

   9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      Nicholson on the grounds sought and in particular the lack of evidence
      that the judge had given any consideration to the requirements of
      section 117B.

  10. At hearing, Mr Duffy relied upon the grounds advanced in the leave
      application. He said there was no provision in the rules to extend
      time for the purpose sought. He pointed out that unlike the situation
      in Chikwamba family life was not engaged. In summary he submitted that
      the judge erred in proceeding to carry out a freestanding article 8
      assessment and having done so failed either expressly or impliedly to
      have regard to the factors in section 117 B.

  11. The appellant attended and was unrepresented. I asked him what had
      happened in the interval and he said he could complete his studies at
      the University of Ulster but was unable to enrol there or at other
      institutions because he did not have leave. He referred to having
      almost completed his studies when the college had its licence revoked.
      He said he was a genuine student who had paid the fees due and have
      studied hard. I asked about return to Pakistan and he referred to the
      costs involved, pointing out the money he had already spent on his
      incomplete studies.

Consideration.

  12. Judge of the First-tier tribunal Bird on 1 October 2015 found that the
      appellant could not succeed under the immigration rules. The grounding
      application was for a purpose not covered by the rules. The Secretary
      of State's discretion to allow leave to remain outside the rules may
      be unrelated to any protected human right and the merits of a decision
      not to depart from the rules is not reviewable on appeal.

  13. No question of family life arises. Paragraph 276 ADE is designed to
      cover leave to remain on the basis of a private life. The appellant
      had only been in the United Kingdom since 2010 and so was not close to
      the required 20 years. Most of his life has been spent in Pakistan.
      There was no suggestion that he could not adjust to life in Pakistan.
      The judge accepted that this rule was not met. It is difficult to see
      how realistically any other conclusion could have been arrived at.

  14. There is no automatic progression to a freestanding article 8 where
      the rules are not met. The rules are meant to be article 8 compliant.
      To go beyond that it is necessary to identify compelling circumstances
      not sufficiently recognised by the rules that require the grant of
      such leave. In Patel and others (Appellants) v Secretary of State for
      the Home Department (Respondent) [2013] UKSC 72 Lord Carnwath at para.
      said :

         "It is important to remember that article 8 is not a general
         dispensing power...article 8...is concerned with private or family
         life, not education as such. The opportunity for a promising
         student to complete his course in this country, however desirable
         in general terms, is not in itself a right protected under article
         8."

  15. The judge  felt justified in proceeding to carry out a freestanding
      article 8 assessment on the basis he came here as a student and has
      acquired qualifications whilst here. I do not see this as amounting to
      an exceptional circumstance justifying a freestanding assessment. He
      came here for a temporary purpose. He only managed to part complete
      the further studies he embarked on. It is open to him to return to
      Pakistan and reapply.

  16. In Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC) the Upper
      Tribunal pointed out the vagaries of the concept of a "private life"
      with a wide spectrum of scenarios. The Upper Tribunal pointed out
      that:


         "... as one moves down the continuum, one encounters aspects of
         private life which, even if engaging Article 8(1) (if not alone,
         then in combination with other factors) are so far removed from the
         "core" of Article 8 as to be readily defeasible by state interests,
         such as the importance of maintaining a credible and coherent
         system of immigration control.

         15.     At this point on the continuum the essential elements of
         the private life relied upon will normally be transposable, in the
         sense of being capable of replication in their essential respects,
         following a person's return to their home country 21.     In
         conclusion on this first general matter, we find that the nature of
         the right asserted by each of the appellants, based on their
         desire, as former students, to undertake a period of post-study
         work in the United Kingdom, lies at the outer reaches of cases
         requiring an affirmative answer to the second of the five "Razgar"
         questions and that, even if such an affirmative answer needs to be
         given, the issue of proportionality is to be resolved decisively in
         favour of the respondent, by reference to her functions as the
         guardian of the system of immigration controls, entrusted to her by
         Parliament."

  17. Judge Bird was sympathetic towards the appellant. The decision
      suggests that as the appellant could not succeed under the rules the
      judge sought to use article 8 to give him a temporary respite. However
      the reasons advanced by the judge did not demonstrate why article 8
      was engaged or if it was why the decision was disproportionate.


  18. Even if the judge were entitled to find article 8 was engaged, which I
      do not find established, the judge's proportionality assessment was
      flawed. The judge makes no specific reference to section 117 B. Whilst
      it is desirable the section be referred to in order to demonstrate the
      judge has focused on the relevant considerations a mention it is not a
      fatal flaw. What is important is that the judge has demonstrated that
      regard has been hard to the relevant factors (see Dube (ss.117A-117D)
      [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC)) and AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)).

  19. In the present scenario a core consideration is section 117B (5),
      namely, the requirement that little weight should be put on a private
      life established when the person's immigration status was precarious.
      In the present situation the appellant's situation was always
      precarious. The leave granted was short-term in order to follow a
      particular course of study. He had no legitimate expectation he could
      remain beyond his leave. Nowhere in the decision is this central
      consideration demonstrated. The impression gained is that the judge
      out of sympathy for the appellant sought to use article 8 in a non-
      specific way to enable him to remain.

  20. The judge's reference to Chikwamba (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2008] UKHL 40 is otiose.
      The material facts are completely different. In Chikwamba the
      appellant came from Zimbabwe and unsuccessfully claimed asylum.
      Because of the difficult country conditions returns were not taking
      place. Time passed and she married another Zimbabwean who had been
      granted refugee status. They had a daughter. The respondent took the
      view that she should be removed to Zimbabwe and that she had the
      option of reapplying for entry clearance to join her husband. The
      House of Lords concluded that such a suggestion was unreasonable in
      the circumstance. Her husband having been granted refugee status could
      not return to Zimbabwe with her. There would be a separation only from
      her husband but also from her child for no sensible purpose.
      Conditions in Zimbabwe remained difficult. Her application for entry
      clearance had every chance of success. In the circumstances there was
      no sensible point in requiring her to return.

  21. The principle established was that were the only matter weighing on
      the respondent's side of the balance is the public policy of requiring
      a person to apply under the rules from abroad that legitimate
      objective would usually be outweighed by factors resting on the
      appellant's side of the balance. In the present situation this is not
      the situation. His leave was for a limited time and there are no real
      obstacles to the appellant returning to Pakistan. The only person
      affected is the appellant. In Pakistan he can either pursue his
      studies or make an application for entry clearance having obtained a
      CAS. To require him to do so is not perverse but is rational
      immigration control. The fact the judge felt the Chickwamba principal
      relevant is a further example of the judge being swayed by sympathy
      rather than legal principles.


  22. For the above reasons I find that the judge materially erred in law
      and the decision allowing Mr Zeeshan's appeal on article 8 grounds
      cannot stand. The essential facts are not in dispute and I remake the
      decision dismissing his appeal.

The Decision


   The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bird allowing the appeal
   of Mr Zeeshan on article 8 grounds materially errs in law. I remake the
   decision dismiss his appeal



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

