

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: IA 06647-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   17.01.2014|
|on    17.01.2014                              |sent out:                    |
|                                              |22.01.2014                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                              Ruphine Anna GUYA
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Mashood Iqbal (counsel instructed by Frederick Rine,
High Barnet)
For the respondent: Mr Nigel Bramble


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Anna Shamash), sitting at Taylor House  on  11  October
    2013, to  on article 8 grounds only a student appeal by  a  citizen  of
    Kenya, born 23 June 1986.

 2. The appellant had applied on 25 November  2012  for  tier  4  leave  to
    remain for the fourth year of her master's degree  in  pharmacy,  which
    was refused on 14 February 2013. The reasons given were  that  her  own
    funds were inadequate, without proper  evidence  of  funding  from  the
    company which was sponsoring her, First Choice Recruitment and Training
    Limited. Under paragraph 13 of appendix C to the Rules,  her  financial
    sponsor needed to be an international company, and the Home Office  did
    not accept that First Choice was. This is no longer an issue,  however,
    because the judge did accept (at paragraph 34) that it probably was  an
    international company, and  this  finding  was  not  challenged  by  Mr
    Bramble.

 3. The judge says at paragraph 32 that she was  invited  by  Mr  Iqbal  to
    allow the appeal first on the basis that the decision under  the  Rules
    was not in accordance  with  the  law,  on  the  basis  of  the  former
    evidential flexibility policy; but to take a 'pragmatic  approach'  and
    also to consider it under article 8, which she went on to  do,  without
    expressly dealing with the appellant's 'not in accordance with the law'
    case. However, the judge pointed out  at  34  that  the  appellant  had
    submitted no bank statements from First Choice, as the Rules  required;
    so the decision had probably been correct on that basis.

 4. Mr Iqbal sought before me, not only to support the judge's decision  on
    the article 8 basis she gave for it, to  which  I  shall  come  in  due
    course, but to  maintain  that  she  should  also  have  found  in  the
    appellant's favour on her 'not in accordance with the law' case. He did
    so without there having been any attempt on her behalf to  comply  with
    r. 24 (3) of the Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,  which  requires  a
    response from a respondent to an appeal to the Upper Tribunal (in  this
    case her) containing

       (f) the grounds on which the respondent relies,  including  [(in  the
        case of an appeal against the decision of  another  tribunal)]  any
        grounds on which the respondent was unsuccessful in the proceedings
        which are the subject of the appeal, but intends  to  rely  in  the
        appeal;

 5. Nor was Mr Iqbal able to  produce  a  copy  of  the  former  evidential
    flexibility  policy,  or  of  the  Tribunal's  decision  in   Rodriguez
    (Flexibility Policy) [2013] UKUT 42 (IAC), on which he also relied. His
    explanation that he had not expected this point to arise carried little
    conviction, since he himself was seeking to maintain the result reached
    by the judge on the basis of it. He was  unable  to  refer  me  to  any
    particular provision of the former  evidential  flexibility  policy  on
    which the appellant would have  been  entitled  to  rely,  and  had  to
    concede that the decision under appeal in Rodriguez had been made on 21
    April 2012, well before the present paragraph  245AA  appeared  in  the
    Rules.

 6. As the Tribunal pointed out in Rodriguez at paragraph 25, the effect of
    paragraph 245AA did not arise and had  not  been  argued  in  the  case
    before them. It was however in force from 6 September 2012, before both
    the application and the decision under appeal in this case, and  in  my
    judgment  was  clearly  intended  to  replace  the  former   evidential
    flexibility policy. Paragraph 245AA requires the specified documents to
    be produced with the application: while it allows leave to be given  on
    an exceptional basis if, for example, one of a series  is  missing,  or
    they are in the wrong format, it  does  not  allow  for  the  specified
    documents, in this case First  Choice's  bank  statements,  not  to  be
    produced at all.

 7. It follows in my view  that,  even  if  the  appellant  had  filed  the
    response required by r. 24 (3) (f), she could not have  maintained  the
    judge's decision on the basis that she was entitled to succeed, even in
    having her case reconsidered under the  former  evidential  flexibility
    policy. So I shall turn to her case under article 8. Here permission to
    appeal was given on the basis that the judge  had  effectively  allowed
    the appeal on the basis of Miah & others [2012] EWCA Civ 261, upheld in
    Patel & ors [2013] UKSC 72.



 8. Mr Iqbal referred me to Lord Carnwath's judgment  in  Patel  &  ors  at
    paragraphs 55 - 56, where  he  acknowledged  the  continuing  potential
    relevance of  "the  practical  or  compassionate  considerations  which
    underlie [a] policy" to the cases of those who fall  just  outside  it,
    and that "...  the  context  of  the  rules  may  be  relevant  to  the
    consideration of proportionality ...".

 9. Mr Iqbal did not go on to refer to  the  passage  which  follows,  from
    paragraph 56 - 57:

       ... a near-miss under the rules cannot provide substance to  a  human
       rights case which is otherwise lacking in merit.
       57. It is important to remember that  article  8  is  not  a  general
       dispensing power. It is to be distinguished  from  the  Secretary  of
       State's discretion to allow leave to remain outside the rules,  which
       may be unrelated to any  protected  human  right.  The  merits  of  a
       decision not to depart from the rules are not reviewable  on  appeal:
       section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's  call  in  Pankina
       for "commonsense" in the application of the rules  to  graduates  who
       have been studying in the UK for some  years  (see  para  47  above).
       However, such considerations do not by themselves provide grounds  of
       appeal under article 8, which is concerned  with  private  or  family
       life, not education as such. The opportunity for a promising  student
       to complete his course in this country, however desirable in  general
       terms, is not in itself a right protected under article 8.

10. This appellant was a very promising student, who only needs to complete
    her work experience, which she will have done  by  September  2014,  to
    have the full professional qualification which was the  object  of  her
    studies here, and which will be entitled to recognition in her  country
    of origin or elsewhere in the world. The appellant did  not  raise  any
    'private and family life' case outside the context of her studies,  and
    in the light of Patel & ors the judge was not  entitled  to  allow  her
    appeal on that basis, and her decision is reversed.

11. However, Mr Bramble pointed out that the removal  directions  given  at
    the same time as the refusal of leave to remain were unlawful as things
    stood then (see Ahmadi [2012]  UKUT  (IAC)  147)  and  should  also  be
    quashed, which I  do.  That  I  hope  will  give  the  Home  Office  an
    opportunity for further reflection as to whether there is any  pressing
    need to re-issue, or if re-issued,  enforce  them  before  the  end  of
    September, when the appellant will  have  the  full  qualification  for
    which she came to this country, and which she  thoroughly  deserves  to
    have on the basis of her record as a student.

Home Office appeal
First-tier decision quashed: appellant's appeal dismissed
Removal directions quashed
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



