
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/06367/2013
     IA/06370/2013
     IA/06375/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 28 July 2015                        |             On 19 August 2015      |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         THE HON. MR JUSTICE KNOWLES
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                              alpa amit kansara
                          amit sunil kumar kansara
                             khushi amit kansara
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is a matter that has  returned  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  after  a
    procedural course that included a period before the  Court  of  Appeal.
    By order stamped on 27 October 2014  Lord  Justice  Underhill  explored
    provisionally the potential relevance of paragraph 276ADE(iv)  and  the
    question of the formulation of that paragraph at the time material  for
    the purposes of this case.  Ultimately by order  stamped  1  June  2015
    Lord Justice Underhill on the  request  of  the  parties  remitted  the
    matter to the Upper Tribunal for a substantive hearing.

   2. Following that, Mr Sharma of Counsel has identified  in  addition  the
      potential application of paragraph 276B to the case and in the  result
      the course proposed both by the appellants and  by  the  Secretary  of
      State is that the Secretary of State should have  the  opportunity  to
      reach a determination under both of these headings.  That will be  the
      first  occasion  on  which  the  Secretary  of  State  has  had   that
      opportunity.  For reasons we need not go into paragraph 276ADE was not
      referenced during the earlier procedural history of this  case,  hence
      the engagement by Lord Justice Underhill with that paragraph.


   3. We consider the proposed course a sensible one and so without reaching
      any determination on the merits we allow the appeal in order that  the
      matter as a whole is remitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the
      purpose of the determinations we have mentioned.  In  the  event  that
      once those determinations have been made they merit a challenge of any
      sort the appellants will  have  the  remedies  available  to  them  in
      relation to that determination.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the above extent.


Signed                                  Date 14.08.2015


Mr Justice Knowles

