
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                              Appeal Numbers: IA060642015

                                                               IA060692015


                                                               IA060672015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 May 2016                                |On 9 June  2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                    [H N]
                              HAMIDJON SHODIYEV
                             MUNAVVAR ISMAILOVA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Norman, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The main appellant appeals against a decision and reasons before First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Oliver) ("FTT") promulgated on 21 October 2015  in
    which s/he dismissed the appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to
    refuse leave to remain with reference to Tier 4 and paragraph 322 (1A).
     The FTT determined the appeal on the papers  in  the  absence  of  any
    appearance by the appellant.  The appellant sent in  a  sick  note  and
    requested an adjournment, which was refused by a Duty  Judge  two  days
    prior to the hearing.  No representative attended  for  the  First-tier
    hearing, although the appellant's representatives had  written  to  the
    FTT to advise that the appellant would attend in person.  In the  event
    a representative for the respondent attended and no appearance was made
    by or on behalf of the appellant.

2.   The issue under appeal was whether or  not  the  appellant  used  false
    documentation in support of his application for leave  under  the  PBS,
    with reference to paragraph 322(1A).  The FTT found no reason  why  the
    appellant's wife could not have attended the  hearing  instead  of  the
    appellant. The FTT found that the sick note provided by  the  appellant
    was inadequate as it was a fitness for work note from his GP.  The  FTT
    took the view that the appellant's failure to provide a bundle for  the
    hearing amounted to an acceptance of the facts alleged. The  FTT  found
    that the appellant failed to answer the allegation of fraud, the burden
    of proof was on the appellant and that the standard of proof was on the
    balance of probabilities.

Grounds of application for permission

3.   The grounds of appeal settled by the  appellant  in  person  complained
    that the FTT was unfair to proceed to hear the appeal  in  his  absence
    and/or to refuse an adjournment on the grounds that the sick  note  was
    inadequate.  It is asserted that the appellant e-mailed further details
    of his illness on 7 October 2015.

Permission

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page  who
    took into account  that  the  appellant  was  unrepresented  and  found
    arguable errors of law with reference to "Robinson obvious" points.  He
    found it arguable that the FTT erred in applying the  wrong  burden  of
    proof in the appeal with respect to paragraph  322(1A).   It  was  also
    arguable that procedurally that an adjournment could have been  granted
    on the basis of further evidence as to the appellant's illness.

Rule 24 response

5.   The Respondent opposed the appeal whilst acknowledging that the  burden
    was on the Secretary of State to  show  that  false  documentation  was
    used. The evidence as to fitness to attend was in relation  to  fitness
    to attend work and not to attend the hearing.

The hearing re: error of law

6.    At the hearing before me Ms Norman provided further  evidence  of  the
    appellant's illness that had been sent to the FTT prior to the  hearing
    and unfortunately it appeared that  this  evidence  had  not  been  put
    before the FtT judge hearing the appeal.   There  was  a  full  medical
    report from  the  appellant's  GP  outlining  various  illnesses  which
    prevented him from attending the Tribunal on 8 October 2015. There  was
    in addition copies to confirm that this had been faxed to  the  FTT  in
    advance of the hearing.  Mr Brumble accepted that this was the position
    on behalf of the Respondent.

7.   Accordingly I find that  there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision and reasons which is set aside.  Firstly, I find that the  FTT
    applied the wrong burden and standard  of  proof,  which  in  deception
    matters is on the Respondent,  and  the  standard  is  the  balance  of
    probabilities with the need to produce strong and  cogent  evidence  of
    deception.   Secondly, I find a procedural error  of  law  as  the  FTT
    failed to have regard to further medical evidence sent by the appellant
    in advance of the hearing and which was relevant  to  the  decision  to
    refuse an adjournment. It is common ground before me  that  the  matter
    will now be heard de novo before the Hatton Cross Tribunal on a date to
    be fixed (excluding Judge Oliver).

Decision
8.   There is a material error of  law.  The  decision  is  set  aside.  The
    appeals are allowed.  The matter will  be  remitted  for  rehearing  at
    Hatton Cross.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 6.6.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
as the appeal issues need to be considered at a hearing.


Signed                                  Date 6.6.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
