

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: IA/06808/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 November 2014                           |On 9 December 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between

                             MISS JASPREET KAUR


                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                   Appellant

                                   And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Makol, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Shilliday, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal has been brought by the appellant, a citizen of India  born
    on 23 June 1985 against the decision of Judge Miles,  a  Judge  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal who dismissed the appeal brought by  the  appellant
    against the decision of the respondent refusing further leave to remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant  under  rule  245ZX  HC395.  The
    respondent made the decision on 22 January 2014 and the appellant  gave
    notice of appeal on 31 January 2014.

 2. The respondent refused the application of  the  appellant  for  further
    leave to remain on the basis that when her officers visited the College
    premises on 5 February 2013, it was  discovered  that  the  College  no
    longer had any presence in that building and  was  closed.  Before  the
    First Tier Tribunal the respondent produced  letter  dated  8  February
    2013 putting the college on notice that its licence  is  likely  to  be
    revoked and that is suspended forthwith. The appellant had  in  support
    of her application for further leave to remain submitted a letter dated
    30 April 2013 setting out the results of her course, which she had been
    on and was going to end on 22 March 2015. The respondent took the  view
    that having submitted a  false  document  the  mandatory  provision  of
    refusal under rule 322 (1A) HC 395  applied.  The  respondent  asserted
    that the document was false as the college had not been  functional  as
    from January 2014 and could not have issued the document upon which the
    appellant had relied. It was a document that told a lie about itself.

 3. Judge Miles heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant.  The  appellant
    confirmed that she had not  been  to  the  college  from  January  2013
    onwards having been told at the college that there  would  be  no  more
    classes. She made no contact with anybody at the college  to  find  out
    why there would be no classes and what she was supposed to  do  instead
    as a student of the course for which she had paid.  She  insisted  that
    she is a genuine student and needed the  opportunity  to  continue  her
    studies.


 4. Judge Miles analysed the evidence and made references to settled law in
    establishing the use of false document. He referred at  length  to  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in AA (Nigeria) [2010]  EWCA  Civ  773.
    Judge Milne concluded that the respondent had proved on the balance  of
    probabilities, that the transcript document is a false document and  he
    therefore dismissed the appeal under rule 322 (1A) HC 395.  The  appeal
    was also dismissed on human rights grounds  and  before  this  Tribunal
    that decision has not been challenged.


 5. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal by Judge P J  M  Hollingworth,  a  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal. In his decision dated 3 October Judge Hollingworth said, " An
    arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the standard  of  prof.
    At paragraph 18 the Judge has referred to the  burden  of  establishing
    that a false document had been  submitted  on  the  respondent  on  the
    balance of probability standard. The Judge has not referred to where on
    the spectrum of the balance of probabilities the standard falls."


 6. At the hearing before me Mr Makol argued that the Judge should not have
    dismissed the appeal and that in so  doing  he  had  applied  a  leaser
    standard of proof and that being balance of probabilities. He said that
    the evidence to establish deception on the part was lacking and that in
    the circumstances it was not open to Judge to dismiss the appeal  under
    322 (1A) HC395. He said that it had been incumbent on the respondent to
    prove her case on a high standard of not probabilities. He  asked  that
    the decision of the First Tier Judge be set aside for being in material
    error of law.


 7. Mr Shilliday for the respondent argued that the respondent  had  proved
    that the document tendered by the appellant was a  false  document  and
    based on that the First Tier Tribunal Judge was correct  in  dismissing
    the appeal. Mr Shilliday went on to  submit  that  there  is  only  one
    standard of proof in immigration matters and that  is  the  balance  of
    probabilities. He asked me to reject the argument that within the broad
    standard of balance of probabilities there are gradations. There is  no
    lower standard or higher standard of probabilities.


 8. Having given the matter my careful consideration, the standard of proof
    is a red herring in this case. On the totality of evidence Judge  Milne
    found it proved that the appellant had submitted a false  document.  He
    noted that the appellant had not challenged that the document  was  one
    that tells a lie about itself - in that it purports to state  that  the
    appellant was a student at the college and had secured certain  results
    in her examination in March. These were manifest lies as  according  to
    the  appellant  herself  she  had  not  been  to   the   college   from
    January/February onwards on advice from college. In  the  circumstances
    the argument about standard of proof has little relevance on the  facts
    presented in this appeal.


 9. Of course the legal principles set down by the House of  Lords  in  the
    historic case of Khawaja v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    (1984) 1 All 765 HL  remains  the  legally  binding  authority  on  the
    gradations of the balance of probabilities standard. Also the judgement
    of the House of Lords in re B (Children) (FC) to which my attention was
    drawn by Mr Shilliday provides very helpful principles of guidance.


10. In my judgement the decision of Judge Miles was not in  material  error
    of law. His conclusion on the applicability of rule 322 (1A) HC 395  is
    perfectly valid in law. His reasoning that underpins his conclusion  is
    sound.


11. In the circumstances Judge Miles decision to dismiss  the  appeal  does
    not need to be interfered with.












K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
4 December 2014










