
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/06145/2015
                                                               ia/06153/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th July 2016                             |On 5th August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                        Nesrine [E] (first appellant)
                          [N S] (second appellant)
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Claire, Imperium Group Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, mother and daughter, appeal, with permission, against a
    decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Farmer  promulgated  on  8th
    December 2015, which dismissed their appeals under paragraph 276ADE and
    Appendix FM and on human rights grounds.  The appellants  are  citizens
    of Egypt born on [ ] 1978 and [ ] 2009  respectively  and  applied  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom under paragraph  276ADE  Appendix
    FM and outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   On  5th  February  2015  the
    Secretary of State having considered the appellants' case  refused  the
    application and made directions  for  their  removal.   The  appellants
    appealed.

 2. The appellants' hearing was listed for 7th  December  2015  and  it  is
    asserted by the  appellants  that  on  the  day  of  the  hearing  they
    travelled to the representative's office so they could travel  together
    to the hearing centre but the representative was taken ill which  is  a
    fact accepted by  the  judge  in  paragraph  3  of  the  decision.   An
    adjournment request was made in the interests of justice  and  fairness
    and it was made clear that the appellants at that time were present  at
    the representative's office.  The judge refused the adjournment request
    and he went on to consider the case and make the decision to refuse the
    appeals.

 3. I have heard from Mr Tufan who submitted that in fact the  decision  to
    refuse to adjourn was not material; the judge  considered  the  correct
    test of fairness and he considered whether he could address the  issues
    in the absence of the appellant  and  the  representative.   The  judge
    found at paragraph 3 that the  issues  in  this  case  were  relatively
    straightforward  and  he  considered  the  statements,  documents   and
    skeleton argument.

 4. I have been referred by Mr Claire to the case of Mangudi appeal  number
    IA/43477/2014 but I believe that case is an unreported case and I am in
    fact not bound by that case. I do however refer to the case of  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 that if a Tribunal refuses  to
    accede to an adjournment request such decision could  in  principle  be
    erroneous in law in several respects, these include a failure  to  take
    into account all material considerations and denying the party  a  fair
    hearing.

 5. It is clear to me that the appellants' case to the First-tier  Tribunal
    and the grounds of appeal included the fact that they relied heavily on
    the support, or that certainly the first appellant, who is the  mother,
    relied heavily on the support of her sister who she said  provided  for
    her emotionally and that there was a strong bond in the UK between them
    and that they had established family life. It is clear from the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision and the appeal notice that that  Article
    8 was in issue in this appeal.

 6. On that basis, as Mr Claire points out, the first appellant was  denied
    the opportunity to give oral evidence and indeed her  sister  was  also
    denied the opportunity to  give  oral  evidence  which  may  have  some
    bearing on the issues.  It is difficult to say, as Mr Tufan said,  what
    further the matter could  be  taken  but  nonetheless  it  is  open  to
    challenge  on  that  basis  and  an  opportunity  to  expand   on   the
    relationship.

 7. I find that there is an error of law on the basis that  an  adjournment
    was not granted.  I  have  seen  that  the  explanation  was  that  the
    representative was ill and there was no other representative to attend,
    and on these facts therefore I find a procedural error having regard to
    Nwaigwe and the overriding objective in Rule 2 of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules 2008.

 8. I am satisfied that it is appropriate in this case to remit the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal as the appellants have not  had  their  case
    considered properly by the First-tier Tribunal.  The nature and  extent
    of the judicial fact-finding  which  is  necessary  in  order  for  the
    decision to be remade is such it is appropriate to remit  the  case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 4th August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
