
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/06187/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 30 September 2014                 |On 18 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                                Md Alim Uddin
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Khan of Universal Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         North promulgated on 26 June 2014 dismissing the Appellant's appeal
         against the decision of the Respondent dated  15  January  2014  to
         refuse to vary leave to remain  and  to  remove  him  from  the  UK
         pursuant to section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality
         Act 2006.




    Background

      2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on 2 February  1978.
         He entered the UK on 22 May 2011 with leave valid until 28 February
         2013 granted pursuant to entry clearance  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
         Student migrant. On 15 February  2013  the  Appellant  applied  for
         further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student migrant.  The
         application was refused for reasons set out in a combined  'reasons
         for refusal' letter and Notice of  Immigration  Decision  dated  15
         January  2014,  essentially  on  the  basis  that  the   Respondent
         considered that he had failed to submit  a  valid  Confirmation  of
         Acceptance for Studies ('CAS'). The section 47 removal decision was
         communicated in the same document.

      3. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

      4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  for
         reasons set out in his determination.

      5. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
         Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge J M Lewis on 20  August  2014.
         The grant of permission to appeal  was  on  the  basis  that  Judge
         North's failure to address the Appellant's submissions  in  respect
         of common law fairness was an arguable error of law.

      6. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated  28  August  2014
         resisting the challenge to the decision of Judge North. However, in
         the event Mr Duffy did not seek to place  any  particular  reliance
         upon the matters set out at paragraph 3 of the  Rule  24  response:
         the facts set out therein did  not  refer  to  the  decision  under
         appeal, and indeed did not obviously refer to the Appellant's  case
         at  all;  insofar  as  they  might  have  referred  to  an  earlier
         withdrawal of a different CAS, this was not germane to  the  issues
         that were at the core of the appeal.

Consideration

      7. The key aspects of the chronology of this case  are  referenced  at
         paragraph 6 of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  are
         also discernible from the Respondent's bundle before the First-tier
         Tribunal. The Appellant applied for further leave to remain  on  15
         February 2013. The application was made on the basis of pursuing  a
         BTEC Extended Diploma in Strategic  Management  and  Leadership  at
         London St. Andrews College, the course dates  being  given  on  the
         application form as 19 February  2013  until  30  March  2014.  The
         Appellant submitted a CAS in support of  the  application.  On  the
         Appellant's own evidence he wrote to the college on 30 July 2013 to
         indicate that he was struggling to pay the next instalment  of  his
         fees and requesting time to clear the payment. He  states  that  he
         was given time until the end of August 2013, but on 23 August  2013
         the college informed  him  not  to  attend  further  and  that  his
         sponsorship had been withdrawn because he had  failed  to  pay  the
         balance of his fees.

      8. In this latter context the following, at paragraph 7 of the  First-
         tier Tribunal's decision, is particularly germane:

        "The Appellant gave evidence to adopt his written statement. He  was
             questioned by the presenting officer and he acknowledged  that
             he  had  been  told  on  23/08/2013  that  his  CAS  would  be
             withdrawn. The Appellant acknowledged that  he  had  contacted
             the Home Office 5 months later. It was put to him that he  had
             inconsistently said in his written statement that he genuinely
             believed he was a student who made  a  valid  application  and
             that he was surprised at the  withdrawal  of  his  CAS  on  no
             notice. The Appellant  acknowledged  that  he  had  been  told
             verbally in August 2013 that the college intended to  withdraw
             his CAS."

      9.  In  light  of  the  evidence  before  him  the  Judge  found  "the
         Appellant's college withdrew  the  Appellant's  CAS  and  gave  the
         Appellant proper notice. It had grounds to do so in connection with
         non-payment of fees" (paragraph 8).  The  following  sentence  then
         appears - to which I return below:

        "The Appellant was aware of that from August and had  adequate  time
             to  rectify  the  situation  before  he  submitted  his   next
             application."

   The Judge went on to conclude "that there was no manifest  injustice  in
         the way the Appellant was treated either  by  his  college  or  the
         Respondent", and that the Respondent  had  correctly  assessed  the
         Appellant's application under the points based  system.  The  Judge
         went on to reject a submission based  on  Article  8  private  life
         (paragraph 9). (There is no challenge to the Article 8 decision  in
         the grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal;
         further the Tribunal in granting permission to appeal  did  not  of
         its own motion identify any basis of challenge in this regard.)

     10. In advancing his case before the First-tier Tribunal the  Appellant
         had placed reliance on the  decision  in  Thakur  (PBS  decision  -
         common law  fairness)  Bangladesh  [2011]  UKUT  151  (IAC)  -  see
         decision of First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 3. Reliance  was  also
         placed on this  case  before  me.  Additionally  my  attention  was
         directed to the cases of Patel (revocation  of  sponsor  licence  -
         fairness) India [2011] UKUT 211 (IAC) and Naved (Student - fairness
         - notice of points) [2012] UKUT 14(IAC).

     11.  The  Appellant's  principal  submission  is  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal inappropriately applied a  test  of  'manifest  injustice'
         rather  than  a  test  of  'fairness'.  It  was  argued  that   the
         appropriate test was that set  out  in  Thakur,  essentially  "what
         fairness demands is dependent on the context of the decision on the
         particular circumstances of the applicant", and that the Judge  had
         failed to apply such a consideration.

     12. I do not accept that submission.  In  my  judgement  the  Appellant
         seeks to place too much weight and significance on  the  choice  of
         the Judge's words - "no manifest  injustice"  -  as  being  somehow
         indicative of an approach at variance with the common law  duty  of
         fairness. In the overall context of this case  such  words  do  not
         bear the weight contended.

     13. In the line of cases dealing with fairness in the  context  of  the
         Points Based System it is to be noted that there is an  exploration
         of fairness premised on decisions  being  taken  on  the  basis  of
         matters beyond the control of the applicant  or  on  the  basis  of
         information unknown to the applicant.

   (i)      In  Thakur  the  applicant's  CAS  became  invalid  during  the
         pendency of the application because  the  Respondent  withdrew  the
         college's licence,  and  it  was  argued  in  accordance  with  the
         Respondent's Tier 4 Policy Guidance that the appellant should  have
         been granted 60 days  further  leave  to  remain  "if  he  was  not
         involved in the reasons why the licence was  withdrawn"  (paragraph
         4). It is also to be observed that it was found "the appellant  had
         neither 60 days nor a reasonable  period  to  find  an  alternative
         course by the date of decision" (paragraph 19). In contrast, on the
         basis of the findings herein, the reason for the withdrawal of  the
         Appellant's CAS was exactly down to the conduct of the Appellant in
         that he was unable to pay his course fees;  further  the  Appellant
         had a period of five months from the date of the withdrawal of  his
         CAS in which on his own evidence he took no action to try  to  find
         an alternative course - a period necessarily far in  excess  of  60
         days.

   (ii)     In Patel the headnote  makes  reference  to  the  duty  of  the
         Respondent to afford a reasonable opportunity to  an  applicant  to
         vary his application when the Respondent has revoked the  sponsor's
         licence during the pendency of the application where "the applicant
         is both unaware of the revocation and not party to any  reason  why
         the licence has been revoked" (paragraph (2) of headnote,  and  see
         paragraph 22 of the body of the decision). The  Tribunal  expressly
         observed in the context of revocation of a sponsor's  licence  that
         "none of this applies" where the applicant "has participated in the
         practices that may have led the college  to  lose  its  sponsorship
         status, or where he has had actual knowledge of the cessation  that
         the termination of the college's status as a sponsor either  before
         the application for an  extension  of  stay  was  made  or  shortly
         thereafter and when  he  had  adequate  opportunity  to  amend  the
         application by seeking to substitute an  approved  college  for  an
         unapproved one" (paragraph 25). In  my  judgement  by  analogy  the
         requirement to extend a period of grace of 60 days does  not  apply
         in the  instant  case  both  because  the  Appellant  was  directly
         responsible for the withdrawal of his CAS, and because he  had  had
         an adequate opportunity to obtain a new CAS - either by paying  the
         appropriate fees or finding  an  alternative  course  provider.  Of
         course, in this context, I recognise that the Appellant would  have
         faced a practical  difficulty  if  he  was  in  financial  straits.
         However such a practical difficulty does not avail the Appellant in
         immigration terms, and does not otherwise render  the  Respondent's
         decision unfair. If the reality of the situation was - as it  seems
         to have been accepted by the Appellant -  that  he  was  not  in  a
         position to pay his course fees, it can hardly be said to be in any
         way 'unfair' - either by reference to the normal usage  of  such  a
         word or the more legalistic usage in the context of the common  law
         duty of fairness - that the Appellant was refused leave  to  remain
         for the purpose of studies.

   (iii)    In Naved the Tribunal  held,  as  per  the  headnote  "Fairness
         requires the Secretary of State to give an applicant an opportunity
         to address grounds for refusal, of which he did not know and  could
         not have known". Plainly in the present  case  the  Appellant  knew
         that his CAS had been withdrawn.

     14. In my judgement, in the very particular circumstances of this  case
         the principles enunciated in the case law cited above do not  avail
         the Appellant. His case is to be distinguished on the facts. I find
         that there is nothing in the approach of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge that contravenes  the  guidance  set  out  in  case  law,  or
         otherwise runs contrary to the common law  duty  of  fairness.  The
         Appellant knew that his CAS had been withdrawn, and  the  Appellant
         had a substantial period of time in which to seek  to  resolve  the
         matter. It cannot have come as a surprise, and he has no basis  for
         complaint, that the Respondent refused his application  because  of
         the withdrawal of the CAS. I do not find the claimed  communication
         with the Respondent after the  withdrawal  of  the  CAS  makes  any
         material difference to the outcome of the application or appeal.

     15. In this latter context I accept that the Judge did not make a clear
         finding, and did not otherwise make a finding  as  to  the  general
         credibility of the Appellant. However, in all the circumstances  of
         the case, it is to be noted that the Appellant at no point asserted
         that he had taken any steps to obtain  a  replacement  CAS  between
         being informed by the college of its  withdrawal  and  his  claimed
         contact with the Respondent about  five  months  later.  Indeed  it
         might be thought that such a lack activity was consistent with what
         the Appellant had said about his lack of means. Be that as it  may,
         in any event in my judgement the nature of any  communication  with
         the Respondent about five months after the withdrawal  of  the  CAS
         makes no material difference to  the  acknowledged  fact  that  the
         withdrawal was in consequence of the Appellant's own conduct in not
         paying  his  fees,  and  makes  no  material  difference   to   the
         inescapable fact that a passage of time in excess of  the  60  days
         that would ordinarily be  afforded  pursuant  to  the  Respondent's
         policy elapsed without the Appellant rectifying his predicament. In
         such circumstances the potential error on the part of the Judge  in
         not making a clear credibility assessment or  finding  of  fact  in
         this  regard  is  not  material  because  it  could  have  made  no
         difference to the outcome of the appeal.

     16. In any event it is to be noted in this context that  the  Appellant
         admitted in his oral evidence that the details of his first witness
         statement  signed  on  1  May  2014  did  not  reflect   the   true
         circumstances. Had it been pertinent, it  seems  to  me  inevitable
         that a decision-maker would have concluded that in the  absence  of
         supporting  evidence  the  Appellant's  evidence  on  its  own  was
         unreliable - and moreover likely reflected what  he  considered  it
         expedient to assert rather than actual  events.  However,  for  the
         reasons already identified, the absence of  any  clear  finding  in
         this regard by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  not,  in  my
         judgement, material.

     17. I have noted above that the Judge, at paragraph 8, made a reference
         to the Appellant having "had adequate time to rectify the situation
         before he submitted his next application". Initially the  reference
         to "his next application" appears confusing because  there  was  no
         such next application. However, it seems to me that in context  the
         Judge most  likely  had  in  mind  the  circumstance  that  if  the
         Appellant had rectified the situation by obtaining a valid  CAS  it
         would have been open to him either to vary his application or  make
         a new application.  Accordingly  in  the  circumstances  I  do  not
         consider this initially confusing phrase to be  indicative  of  any
         error of law.

     18. Accordingly, in all of the circumstances I find that the First-tier
         Tribunal Judge did not materially err in law. The decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal stands.

Notice of Decision

     19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error
         of law and stands.

     20. The appeal is dismissed.

     21. No anonymity order is sought or made.




    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis 11 May 2015
