
IAC-AH-SC/DH-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06732/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 8 April 2015                               |On 22 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                             MR Evgeny Kalachev
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin, Counsel instructed by Arlington Crown
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Russia  and  his  date  of  birth  is  22
    February 1974.

2.   The appellant came to the UK on 6 June 2013 having been  granted  entry
    clearance as a visitor on 13 May 2013.  He returned  to  Russia  on  11
    June 2013 and re-entered  the  UK  on  30  August  2013.   He  made  an
    application for discretionary leave outside the Immigration Rules on 19
    November 2013.  The application was refused by the Secretary  of  State
    in a decision of 16 January 2014.

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge M R Oliver in
    a determination that is dated 3 September 2014 which followed a hearing
    at Richmond on 12 August 2014.  Permission was granted to the appellant
    to appeal by Judge of the Upper Tribunal Kopieczek on 10 February 2015.
     Thus the matter came before me.

4.   The appellant's evidence is that in May 2013  when  he  was  living  in
    Moscow with his mother he was approached  by  two  men  who  introduced
    themselves as police officers and they informed the appellant that they
    were aware that the appellant's mother was in the process of dividing a
    valuable country home  between  the  appellant  and  his  sister.  They
    attempted to extort money from the appellant.  The  appellant  believes
    that the men are corrupt members of the  Russian  police  force  or  at
    least have very strong connections to the Russian  authorities  because
    of their knowledge of the appellant  and  his  personal  affairs.   The
    appellant and his mother decided that he should move  out  and  rent  a
    flat in the northern part of Moscow in order  to  avoid  these  people.
    The appellant hoped that they would be unable to locate him there.

5.   The appellant returned to Russia from the UK on 11  June  2013.  On  13
    June 2013 whilst the appellant was at work the door  of  his  flat  was
    forced open. The appellant returned to find the same  two  men  inside.
    They asked the appellant for money.  He was threatened by the  men  who
    told him that they had found a photograph of the appellant with his ex-
    boyfriend and they informed the appellant that they would disclose  his
    sexuality and put the appellant in prison should he not pay them money.
     The appellant was again threatened by the two men on 22 June 2013 when
    he was driven to an unknown place and threatened with a gun.

6.   The appellant was scared and he borrowed money in order to pay the  men
    in the hope that he would be left alone.  On 20 July 2013 he  was  able
    to give them 3,000 euros and on 1 August  2013  he  gave  them  300,000
    rubles.  The men assaulted the appellant and demanded  that  he  should
    give them more money.  The appellant returned to the UK (his  visa  did
    not expire until 13 November 2013).  The men have visited his  mother's
    home  since  the  appellant  fled  Russia  demanding  to  know  of  the
    appellant's whereabouts.

The Decision of the First-Tier Tribunal

7.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant and a  witness  Ms  Channon
    both of whom had prepared witness statements.

8.   The judge made findings at [17] - [21]  of  the  decision.   The  judge
    found that there was no evidence  that  the  police  as  a  force  were
    institutionally involved in the  claimed  crime.   He  found  that  the
    appellant did not know if the men were police officers  or  simply  had
    contact with corrupt police officers.  He found that the appellant  had
    not availed himself of the opportunity of seeking the protection of the
    police, despite his lawyer's advice the  appellant  delayed  making  an
    application until 19 November 2013 despite having returned to the UK on
    30 August 2013 and  he  did  not  explain  why  he  delayed  making  an
    application.  The  appellant's  claim  to  believe  that  the  men  had
    connections with the police  was  based  on  his  assumption  that  the
    information they had had came from the confidential police database but
    he has been vague about what information they had  obtained  from  this
    source.

9.   The judge found that the appellant  had  described  "in  general  terms
    that it was his financial situation, which included his mother's  plans
    to settle property in part upon him". The judge found  that  no  reason
    had  been  advanced  for  the  interest  in  the  disposition  of   the
    appellant's mother's personal property and that the  explanation  given
    by the appellant for the lack of attention  paid  by  the  men  to  his
    mother was unconvincing.  The judge found that the men  were  happy  to
    use violence on the appellant but not his mother who had  ownership  of
    the property.

10.  The judge found that the fact that the  appellant  recognised  that  he
    does not satisfy the criteria of the 1951 Refugee  Convention  did  not
    explain why he did not avail  himself  the  opportunity  of  making  an
    application for humanitarian protection (see [20]).  The judge found at
    [21] that the appellant's evidence relating to  his  sexuality  was  an
    "afterthought".

The Grounds Seeking Permission to Appeal and Oral Submissions

11.  I heard oral submissions from Ms Holmes who submitted that she was  not
    in a position to defend the determination because it was clear that the
    judge had not made findings of fact in relation to the evidence  of  Ms
    Channon and secondly that the judge was  wrong  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant's sexuality was an afterthought because  this  was  an  issue
    that the appellant  had  raised  in  his  initial  application  to  the
    Secretary of State.

Error of Law

12.  In my view the judge made an error of law for  the  reasons  identified
    by Ms Holmes.  It is clear that Ms Channon's  evidence  is  capable  of
    being corroborative and the judge did not make any findings in relation
    to this evidence.   It  is  also  a  fact  that  the  appellant  raised
    sexuality in his initial witness statement which  was  submitted  along
    with his application and the judge made a factual error  in  concluding
    that it was an afterthought.  The errors identified above impact on the
    judge's assessment of credibility generally.  The error is such that  I
    set aside the decision of the Judge pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and remit the  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)(i)
    having heard representations about  venue  and  having  had  regard  to
    paragraph 7 of the Practice Statement of the IAC of the FtT and  UT  of
    Senior President of Tribunals of 13 November 2014.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 15 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
