
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06785/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 September 2016                           |On 13 September 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                             ranjit singh cheema
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Makol, Legal Representative from Maalik and Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J C Hamilton (the judge), promulgated on 4  March  2016,
    in which he dismissed the appeal.  That appeal had arisen following the
    decision of the Respondent, dated 2 February 2015, to refuse to issue a
    residence  card  to  the  Appellant  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the Regulations).  The Respondent  had
    been satisfied that the Appellant's marriage to a Romanian national was
    one of convenience only and in addition that the Romanian national  was
    not in fact a qualified person.



The judge's decision

 2. In a lengthy and detailed decision the judge sets  out  at  length  the
    documentary and oral evidence before him (see paragraphs 12 to 40).  At
    paragraph 43 he correctly  directs  himself  in  law  to  the  case  of
    Papajorgi (EEA spouse - marriage of  convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT
    00038 in respect of the marriage issue  (see  also  now  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14).

 3. The findings of fact begin at paragraph 48.   The  judge  had  concerns
    about the nature of photographs provided  by  the  Appellant.   Between
    paragraphs 50 and 52 the judge sets out concerns he had about  the  EEA
    national's employment.  Paragraphs 53 onwards address concerns relating
    to the genuineness of the relationship (more particularly the nature of
    the relationship as at the time of the marriage).  The judge finds that
    the evidence was problematic in respect of the alleged cohabitation  of
    the Appellant and his wife at a particular address, and  the  existence
    of inconsistencies relating to the names of children in respect of whom
    the couple were said to have looked after at various points.  Paragraph
    57 refers to inconsistent evidence  relating  to  tattoos  on  the  EEA
    national's  body.   Paragraph  58  concerns  matters  relating  to  the
    attendees at the wedding.  Paragraph  60  notes  the  evidence  of  two
    additional witnesses who attended the hearing, it being said that their
    evidence  was  consistent  with  the  Appellant  being  in  a   genuine
    relationship with the EEA national and that this was taken into account
    when considering the evidence as a whole.   At  paragraph  61  concerns
    were expressed about the Appellant and his wife's omission  in  respect
    of activities allegedly undertaken in the temple in which they were  at
    some point residing.

 4. Ultimately the judge finds that  the  evidence  as  a  whole  from  the
    Appellant and his wife was not credible and  that  the  Respondent  had
    shown on the balance of probabilities that the Appellant's marriage was
    one of convenience only.  In addition the  judge  finds  that  the  EEA
    national was not employed  as  claimed.   At  paragraph  72  the  judge
    purports to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. The grounds of appeal are  fairly  lengthy  and  seek  to  challenge  a
    variety of elements of the judge's decision.  It is said on  more  than
    one occasion that the judge had "gone on a  frolic  of  his  own".   In
    granting permission to appeal First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish was of
    the view that there had been a delay of  five  months  in  writing  the
    determination and that this may have led to factual errors by the judge
    when preparing his written decision.

The hearing before me

 6. At the outset Mr Makol accepted that no concession  had  in  fact  been
    made by the Respondent at any time as to  the  EEA  national's  alleged
    employment.  This much was clear from my reading of the  judge's  typed
    Record of Proceedings.  Mr Kotas noted that  the  Presenting  Officer's
    own note of the hearing was consistent with this.  Mr  Makol  certainly
    provided no evidence to the contrary.

 7. Mr Makol accepted that the judge had correctly directed himself in  law
    in respect of the marriage of  convenience  issue.   In  terms  of  the
    photographs Mr Makol submitted that the judge  had  made  an  incorrect
    assumption as to when they were taken.  However, he also  confirmed  to
    me that there was no evidence from the Appellant as to when  they  were
    in fact  supposedly  taken.   In  respect  of  the  address,  Mr  Makol
    submitted what was said in paragraph 55 was not enough.  The couple had
    been moving their things out gradually and the judge had failed to take
    account of this.  In respect of the inconsistency as to the  children's
    names Mr Makol suggested that this may have been because the names used
    by the EEA national were nicknames only, although he acknowledged  that
    there was no evidence of this  before  the  judge.   In  terms  of  the
    tattoos, Mr Makol submitted that the judge should have  considered  the
    fact of the Appellant's initials being on the EEA national as  being  a
    significant factor in favour of the genuineness of  the  marriage.   Mr
    Makol accepted that the point made at paragraph 58 about  attendees  at
    the wedding had not been challenged  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   In
    respect of the evidence on activities  undertaken  at  the  temple,  Mr
    Makol referred to and relied upon paragraph  12  of  the  grounds.   He
    accepted that the finding in paragraph  66  as  to  the  absence  of  a
    durable relationship was an alternative finding to  that  made  on  the
    marriage of convenience point in the  preceding  sentence  within  that
    paragraph.

 8. He submitted that the judge had been wrong to have dismissed the appeal
    under the Rules when  this  of  course  was  an  EEA  case.   Mr  Makol
    suggested that even on the findings made by the judge it  was  perverse
    of him to conclude that the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience  only.
    Finally, in respect of paragraph 53, Mr Makol suggested that the  judge
    was confused.  He had failed to set out the positives but had only  set
    out the negatives.  He posed the question  as  to  why  the  judge  had
    mentioned that consistency may be as a  result  of  fabrication  of  an
    account.

 9. In respect of the employment issue Mr Makol  relied  heavily  upon  the
    fact that the alleged employer was a functioning company and registered
    at Companies House.  In  addition  there  were  two  letters  from  the
    employers.  This was all sufficient evidence to conclude that  the  EEA
    national was employed as claimed.

10. Mr Kotas noted that the issue of alleged delay in writing the  decision
    was not mentioned in the grounds at all.  He submitted that this really
    was nothing more than a reasons challenge, and if one was to  read  the
    decision as a whole it was wholly sustainable.  In respect of paragraph
    53 the judge did give examples of inconsistencies that were  not  being
    held against the Appellant.  Much of the submissions from Mr Makol were
    said to be simple disagreements.  There was no perversity whatsoever in
    the judge's decision.   A  careful  analysis  has  been  undertaken  in
    respect of the EEA national's employment.

11. In reply Mr Makol submitted that the evidence of the witnesses had  not
    been considered by the judge.  He re-stated  the  significance  of  the
    fact of the tattoos on the EEA national's body.



Decision on error of law

12. As I announced to the parties at the hearing, I find that there are  no
    material errors of law in the judge's decision.  Having regard  to  the
    decision as a whole, the grounds of appeal and the submissions made  by
    Mr Makol, I find that the challenge is in reality nothing more  than  a
    series of disagreements and attempts to re-argue points made before the
    judge, and that no errors of law had been shown to exist.

13. Taking first the marriage of convenience issue, it may  be  right  that
    the judge made an assumption as to when  the  photographs  were  taken.
    However his assumption was, I  find,  based  on  evidence  before  him,
    namely that of the EEA national when she had told him that  the  couple
    had gone out for a sightseeing visit to London the weekend  before  the
    hearing.  I also note that there was  no  specific  evidence  from  the
    couple that the photographs in question had in fact been taken  on  any
    other date.  In light of this it was open to the  judge  to  reach  the
    conclusion that he did in respect of when the photographs  were  taken,
    and to reduce the weight he placed upon them  accordingly,  given  that
    they were created so soon before the appeal hearing.  I also note  that
    this was a point that the judge himself stated would not of itself lead
    to a rejection of the credibility of the Appellant but it was a  matter
    that was taken into account.  This is something that he was entitled to
    do.

14. In respect of the address at which the Appellant and his wife were said
    to have resided, I have looked through not only what the judge has said
    in his decision in respect of the evidence  before  him  but  also  the
    carefully typed Record of Proceedings.  It is quite apparent to me that
    there was confusion and inconsistency as to when one or  other  of  the
    couple moved into  the  address  and  why  the  tenancy  agreement  was
    apparently signed when it was (see paragraph 54).  I also find that the
    judge was entitled to regard the evidence offered as to  the  state  of
    the room during the home visit by the Respondent on 13 November 2014 as
    being vague and implausible.  On the evidence before the  judge,  as  I
    see it, there was an inconsistency as to how long the tenancy  was  due
    to last and in addition whose belongings had been left at the  original
    property and whose had been removed at the relevant time.

15. In respect of the children's names, there was an obvious  inconsistency
    here as between the evidence of the Appellant  and  the  EEA  national.
    Put simply, they gave different names  about  two  children  that  they
    claimed they had looked after.  Mr Makol sought to explain this away by
    suggesting that nicknames  had  been  used  by  one  or  other  of  the
    Appellant or his wife.  First, Mr  Makol  cannot  give  evidence  on  a
    relevant matter. Second, there was no evidence before  the  judge  that
    the names given were nicknames. In light of this the judge was entitled
    to find that there was an inconsistency.  In turn he  was  entitled  to
    take this into account when assessing the evidence as a whole.

16. In respect  of  the  tattoo  issue  upon  which  Mr  Makol  has  placed
    significant weight, I find that the judge  was  entirely  justified  in
    finding there to be inconsistent evidence.  Again, having looked at the
    Record of Proceedings it is clear that it was the EEA national  herself
    who mentioned having a snake tattoo (the point made in the  grounds  as
    to the absence of any such  evidence  is  therefore  misleading).   The
    evidence from the EEA national that she also apparently had a  tattooed
    R and C on her body was only provided by her in re-examination,  having
    said previously that aside from the snake tattoo  she  had  no  others.
    Again the judge was entitled to find that the evidence was  problematic
    and to place cumulative weight upon this point.

17. In respect of paragraph 58, the judge's adverse finding as to the  non-
    attendance of the EEA national's mother has not been challenged in  the
    grounds of appeal and was clearly open to the judge.

18. In respect of the witnesses' evidence, Mr Makol referred  to  paragraph
    39, wherein the judge has noted their evidence.  It is clear to me that
    the judge  has  taken  account  of  that  evidence  when  reaching  his
    findings. With reference to paragraph 60 the judge says in  terms  that
    the witnesses' evidence was consistent with the Appellant  being  in  a
    genuine  relationship  and  he  would  take  that  into  account   when
    considering the evidence as a whole.  I conclude that that  is  a  very
    strong indication that the judge was aware of the relevant evidence and
    properly took it into account.  The simple  fact  that  the  witnesses'
    evidence was consistent with the Appellant's claim  does  not  even  of
    itself lead to the conclusion that the marriage was a genuine one.  All
    matters had to be taken in the round.

19. However, that is  not  the  end  of  the  matter  in  relation  to  the
    witnesses' evidence because at paragraph 61 the judge points out what I
    regard, and importantly what  the  judge  regarded  to  be  a  material
    omission in the evidence.  The witnesses have said that  the  Appellant
    and the EEA national helped and participated in the activities  of  the
    temple.  However, the judge has found that neither  the  Appellant  nor
    his wife mentioned this whatsoever both of them saying only  that  they
    had made monetary donations to the temple.  On the evidence before  him
    the judge was entitled to regard this omission as being material and to
    take it into account.

20. The judge's  conclusions  on  the  council  tax  bills  have  not  been
    challenged in the grounds of appeal and I  find  that  the  conclusions
    reached at paragraph 63 were open to the judge.

21. Turning back to paragraph 53 I can perhaps see why  the  Appellant  has
    felt unhappy about the wording of this particular paragraph.   However,
    when seen in proper context and in light of the decision  as  a  whole,
    there is nothing problematic about it as a matter  of  substance.   The
    judge has pointed out that consistent evidence was provided in  respect
    of a number of matters, giving particular  examples  of  these  at  the
    beginning of the paragraph.  There is nothing impermissible  about  the
    judge going on to say  that  consistency  could  be  the  result  of  a
    fabricated and rehearsed  account.   In  essence  all  depends  on  the
    particular facts of the case.

22. In fairness  to  the  judge  he  then  goes  on  to  give  examples  of
    inconsistencies in the evidence which he regarded as not being  adverse
    to the overall  credibility  and  instead  being  the  result  of  poor
    recollection and/or honest misunderstandings.  It seems to me  that  in
    reality paragraph 53  was  simply  a  balanced  overall  commentary  on
    various aspects of the evidence before the judge.

23. Turning to the issue of the EEA national's employment, the existence of
    the Companies House evidence was never of itself going to be sufficient
    to prove that the EEA national was  employed  as  claimed.   It  simply
    confirmed the existence of the company (NNP).  The two letters from the
    claimed employers are  referred  to  by  the  judge  in  paragraph  50.
    However, these did not in fact assist the  Appellant's  case.   In  her
    refusal letter the Respondent had stated  that  she  had  attempted  to
    contact the employer but without success.  This  assertion  appears  to
    have been  accepted  by  the  Appellant  because  he  included  in  his
    statement an explanation for the inability to make contact, this  being
    on account of the fact that  the  business  had  been  moving  address.
    However, as the judge rightly points out, the employer's letters  dated
    September 2014 and September 2015  showed  that  their  contact  number
    remained the same notwithstanding the  change  of  address.   Thus  the
    judge was entitled to find that the Appellant's  explanation  was  less
    than credible.  Furthermore, the judge was entitled to rely on what was
    clearly an inconsistency on the employer's part as to  how  her  salary
    was paid (in cash rather than directly into  her  bank  account).   The
    judge was also entitled to have regard to the fact that this employment
    evidence was produced at the very last minute, effectively on  the  day
    of the hearing, and that there  was  no  explanation  as  to  why  this
    evidence was filed so late  notwithstanding  the  clear  terms  of  the
    Respondent's refusal letter.

24. In  paragraph  51  the  judge  was  entirely  justified  in  raising  a
    significant question mark about the EEA national's claim that  she  had
    been paid in advance when seeking to explain why a payslip  adduced  in
    evidence was dated the day after the appeal hearing.  Again  the  judge
    was also entitled to take into account the fact that this evidence  was
    also very late in the day.

25. In respect of paragraph 52 I would accept that the judge ought  not  to
    have taken into account the fact that the EEA national chose to be paid
    in cash  rather  than  straight  into  a  bank  account  (although  the
    erroneous contents of one of the employer's  letters  clearly  was  not
    going to assist the Appellant or his wife on this point: I  refer  back
    to what is said in paragraph 50 of the judge's  decision).   The  judge
    goes on to conclude that even if the EEA  national  was  receiving  her
    salary in cash she ought either to have shown that deposits were  being
    made into a bank account, or  at  the  very  least  to  have  given  an
    explanation why this was not being done.  Having looked at the evidence
    myself there was no evidence of  deposits  being  made  and  I  see  no
    evidence of any explanation having been given as to how the wages  were
    kept or spent.  In light of this the judge was entitled to  treat  this
    element of the evidence as being adverse to the Appellant and his wife.



26. Mr Makol had suggested that even on the findings made by the  judge  it
    was perverse of him to have concluded that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience only.  I conclude that this submission is way off the mark.
     On the sustainable findings made the  judge  was  wholly  entitled  to
    conclude that the marriage had been shown  to  be  one  of  convenience
    only.  Any perversity challenge (which has not even been raised in  the
    grounds of appeal) does not even begin to get off the ground.

27. The final point to address is the way in which the judge has  purported
    to have dismissed the  appeal.   At  paragraph  72  he  refers  to  the
    Immigration Rules when  of  course  he  should  have  referred  to  the
    Regulations.  This is a matter of form only and clearly has  no  effect
    on the substance of the judge's decision.

28. Finally, the judge was entirely correct to have concluded that  he  had
    no jurisdiction to consider Article 8.

29. For all the reasons stated above there are no material  errors  of  law
    and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 13 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date: 13 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
