
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06662/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 August 2014                                |On 14 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between


                              NOOR AHMAD MAJEED
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Piper, Henry Hyams
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Noor Ahmad Majeed, was born on 20 April 1983  and  is  a
    citizen of Pakistan.   He  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent made 18 September 2012 to refuse him leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom.  His application was refused on the basis the appellant
    failed to fulfil the requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of
    HC 395 (as amended).  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Hindson) which, in a determination promulgated on 15 April 2014,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. For the avoidance of doubt, I explained to the representatives that all
    the grounds of appeal may be argued.  The grant of permission of  Judge
    Dineen appeared [3] to exclude part of the grounds of appeal whilst, at
    the same time [8], providing that "such other issues as  the  appellant
    may wish to proceed with may be argued".

 3. The First-tier  Tribunal  recorded  the  following  background  to  the
    appellant's appeal:

         The appellant came to the UK on 22/01/2010 with entry clearance  as
         a student valid until 28/02/2011.  His leave has not been extended.

         In April 2010  he  entered  into  a  relationship  with  a  British
         citizen, his now wife Edith Majeed.  The couple lived together from
         June 2010 and entered into an Islamic marriage in July 2011.   They
         subsequently had a registry office ceremony in December 2011.   The
         couple have lived together since June 2010 in a  property  that  is
         owned by Mrs Majeed subject to a small mortgage.  Mrs Majeed is  in
         receipt of state pension and disability living allowance.

 4. The judge recorded that the appellant is aged 30 years old  whilst  his
    wife is aged 66 years and has a number of  "enduring  and  debilitating
    health problems sufficient for her to be entitled to disability  living
    allowance at the high rate  of  both  mobility  and  care  components".
    Whilst the substantial age difference between  the  appellant  and  his
    wife did not, in itself, indicate that the marriage was not genuine  or
    subsisting, it was a fact that  the  judge  was  "bound  to  take  into
    account".

 5.  The  judge  found  Mrs  Majeed  to  be  an  honest  witness  who  gave
    straightforward and cogent evidence.  He took a different view  of  the
    appellant's evidence.  He noted that the appellant had learned  of  the
    suspension from the respondent's  register  of  the  college  where  he
    claimed to be studying through a friend in April  2010.   He  had  done
    nothing  to  regularise  his  immigration  status  until  he  made  the
    application which is the subject of this appeal.  The judge found  [19]
    that the appellant's failure to  regularise  his  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom or to return to Pakistan undermined his credibility.  The judge
    also heard from a friend of the appellant, Mr Rasool,  whom  the  judge
    found to be "particularly unreliable" [20].  Mr Rasool had been  unable
    to say whether the appellant had been studying or working in the United
    Kingdom despite claiming to be his friend of many years standing.   The
    judge concluded that the appellant is maintaining his relationship with
    Mrs Majeed "as a device to maintain his pretence of marriage till  such
    time as he has permanent leave to be in the UK.   I  am  not  satisfied
    that this is a genuine or subsisting relationship, at least so  far  as
    the appellant is concerned".  In the circumstances, he found  that  the
    appellant could not succeed under the  Rules  and  that  "issues  under
    Article 8 do not arise" [24].

 6. The grounds at [6] simply take issue with the judge's findings of fact.
     It is asserted in the grounds that there was "considerable evidence in
    support of the appellant's case that he is in a relationship  with  his
    wife and it is genuine and subsisting ...".  The judge  is  accused  of
    having failed to consider the  evidence  "in  its  totality,  balancing
    against his overstaying and failure to regularise his stay  immediately
    following his realisation his college had brought an end to  his  leave
    ..."

 7. I  find  nothing  wrong  whatsoever  with  the  judge's  assessment  of
    credibility.  He has  acknowledged  that  Mrs  Majeed  was  a  truthful
    witness and believes that she is in a  genuine  relationship  with  the
    appellant.  The judge was entitled to take into account the appellant's
    failure to regularise his immigration status after his college  studies
    ended.  It was also clear that the evidence of the  witness  Mr  Rasool
    had a negative impact on the  judge's  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    credibility given that Mr Rasool had attended in order to  support  the
    appellant's case.

 8. The grounds go on to assert that the judge failed to deal with  Article
    8.  That is not entirely true (see above) although I  acknowledge  that
    the  judge's  handling  of  Article  8  is  brusque.   The  appellant's
    representative has submitted a skeleton argument in which it is  stated
    that, should  the  Upper  Tribunal  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings on credibility (which it does), then it should find  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law by failing to have  proper  regard  to
    the family/private life rights of Mrs Majeed.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    has, in effect,  found  that  Mrs  Majeed  has  been  deceived  by  the
    appellant and that her belief that she is in a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship  with  the   appellant   is   an   illusion.    In   those
    circumstances, it is difficult to see how family life in the context of
    Article 8 may actually be found to exist. There was also no evidence at
    all before the First-tier Tribunal that Mrs Majeed requires the care of
    the appellant as a matter of necessity or is it likely, in the light of
    the outcome of these proceedings, that the appellant will  continue  to
    provide her with that care. I have no doubt that  Mrs  Majeed  will  be
    disappointed by the outcome of the appeal  proceedings  but  it  would,
    frankly, make no sense whatsoever for the Tribunal to allow the  appeal
    of the appellant under Article 8 and permit him to remain in the United
    Kingdom when it has found that his claim to be in a  relationship  with
    Mrs Majeed  was  a  device  aimed  cynically  at  achieving  that  very
    objective.  Whilst I acknowledge that Judge Hindson  might  have  dealt
    with Article 8 at rather greater length, I cannot  see  any  reason  to
    interfere with his decision  that  the  appellant's  appeal  should  be
    dismissed both under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.



DECISION

 9. This appeal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date 13 August 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
