
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06042/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th December 2014                            |On 17th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ANUSHKA ERANDA DAMPE ARACHcILAGE
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Stedman, Counsel, instructed by VMD Solicitors,
Ilford


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  whose  date  of  birth  is
    recorded as 12th May 1985.

 2. On 11 November 2009, he arrived, lawfully, in the United Kingdom, as  a
    student. He was  joined  by  his  wife  but  unfortunately  she  became
    terminally ill and died on 3 June 2013  (not  2014  as  stated  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal). Following the death  of  his
    wife, he made application for leave to remain, outside  the  rules,  on
    compassionate grounds so as to organise his  affairs.  He  was  granted
    three months leave from 6 September 2013 to  4  October  2013.  However
    when, on 4 October 2013, he  applied  for  a  further  to  remain,  the
    application was refused.

 3. He appealed. The appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Herbert OBE on 3rd September 2014 sitting at Taylor House. Rather  than
    deciding the merits of the appeal concluded with  the  following:-   "I
    therefore allow this appeal on the limited basis that it is remitted to
    the [Secretary of State] for a fresh decision to  be  made  considering
    all the tragic circumstances outlined in  the  [Secretary  of  State's]
    case."

 4. When one reads the determination as a whole it is clear that the  judge
    appreciated that in fact there was no basis upon which the appeal could
    be allowed; that is conceded by Mr Stedman because the Respondent could
    not make a further application  whilst  on  "3C  leave"  without  more.
    Indeed  Mr  Stedman  was  surprised  that  the  determination  did  not
    "conclude" with the words, "I therefore dismiss the appeal" etc.

 5. In the event the Secretary of State by notice dated 23rd September 2014
    made application for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   On
    6th November 2014, permission was granted by Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Hollingworth. Thus the matter comes before me.

 6. Given the concession, quite properly made, by Mr Stedman  I  find  that
    there is the error of law contended for in the grounds, namely that the
    judge erred in law having regard to the case  of  Patel  and  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  57  because,
    against that guidance, and what is said with respect to s.  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971, the judge seemingly allowed  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that the Respondent should be permitted a period of  six  months'
    leave to pursue a six month student application.

 7. In remaking the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  I  dismiss  the
    appeal but still invite the Secretary of State to consider  whether  or
    not further  leave  should  be  granted  given  the  truly  exceptional
    circumstances  in  which  this  Respondent's   studies   came   to   be
    interrupted. Whilst the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  was  entitled
    to make a recommendation, it is, of course a matter for  the  Secretary
    of State whether or not she chooses to follow it.

Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed.  The
decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and remade  such  that  the
appeal to the First-tier Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed        Date 16th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
