
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/06974/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd September  2013                          |On 9th September 2013      |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                               Mr kamram khan
                         (Anonymity Order not Made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss D Ofei-Kwatia (Instructed by M-R, Larkshall Rd)

For the Respondent:  Mr T Wilding (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant against a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Widdup) promulgated  on  3rd  July  2013  by  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    him leave to remain on the basis of his long residence in the UK.   The
    application was made on 5th July 2012 and thus was made under  the  old
    14 year Rule that was deleted on 9th July 2012.

 2. The grounds seeking permission to appeal argue that the Judge erred  in
    failing to attach appropriate weight to  wage  slips  produced  by  the
    Appellant as evidence of his presence in the country and also a Tenancy
    Agreement.  Miss Ofei-Kwatia submitted that the Judge erred in  stating
    that the burden of proof rested with the Appellant as in  the  case  of
    allegations of forgery the burden of proof lay with  the  Secretary  of
    State. Further the Judge erred in failing to  take  into  account  more
    recent documents as evidence of the Appellant's continuous presence  in
    the UK. Despite what the Judge says in the  determination  he  has  not
    looked at the documents in the round.

 3. In essence Miss Ofei-Kwatia argued that the  documentary  evidence  was
    overwhelming and should have led to a successful outcome

 4. It was also argued that the Judge did not deal adequately with  Article
    8 and that he erred in failing to consider paragraph 276ADE.

 5. Dealing with the last point first, the Appellant was claiming 14  years
    residence ( not lawful) and so unless he  established  that  length  of
    residence paragraph 276ADE is irrelevant

 6. It is true that the Appellant had submitted a large number of documents
    purporting to show residence for 14 years. The criticism of  the  Judge
    refers to a payslip wit regard to which the Secretary of State noted in
    the Letter of Refusal the tax code was incorrect.  As the  Judge  noted
    at paragraph 22 of the determination, the Secretary of State adduced no
    evidence to support that assertion and so the Judge found he was unable
    to find whether the payslip was genuine or not and so indicated that he
    would assess the credibility of the evidence in the round.  There is no
    error of law disclosed there.  He has not agreed with the Secretary  of
    State's assertion but simply said that the he  will  look  at  it  when
    assessing credibility as a whole.

 7. The other criticism levelled at the Judge with regard to the  documents
    is his finding in relation to a tenancy  agreement  and  in  particular
    that the name and date were added by hand.  However at paragraph 17 the
    Judge makes clear that he is unimpressed with the Secretary of  State's
    submission.  Indeed signatures and dates on legal documents are  always
    "by hand".  However the Judge does later on  indicate  that  he  cannot
    rely on that document, not because of a problem on its face but because
    of inconsistencies and discrepancies in the Appellant's oral evidence.

 8. The Judge set out in paragraphs 20 and  25  the  numerous  difficulties
    with  the  Appellant's  credibility.  The  evidence  in   the   witness
    statements and the oral evidence were discrepant and  woefully  lacking
    in detail. For example, the Appellant claimed to have  worked  for  two
    years in Addlestone and yet was unable to say where Addlestone was. The
    appellant's credibility in this case was so bad that it  could  not  be
    rescued by documents and faced with such  a  lack  of  credibility  the
    Judge was entitled to find the documents could not be relied upon.  The
    Appellant's written and oral evidence was so lacking in credibility  it
    would have  been  astonishing  if  the  Judge  had  reached  any  other
    conclusion than he did.

 9. The Appellant not having established continuous residence in the UK for
    13 years, paragraph 276ADE has no relevance.

10. So far as Article 8 is concerned it is true that the Judge  dealt  with
    this briefly.  However there was no evidence  of  family  life  and  it
    could not be said how long the Appellant had been in the UK.  He  is  a
    national of Pakistan and still speaks the language; indeed requested an
    interpreter for the hearing. There was nothing to suggest that he could
    not enjoy a similar and comparable private life in Pakistan.

11. I can discern no error of law in the Judge's approach to Article 8  but
    even if there were this is not a case that could  possibly  succeed  on
    Article 8 grounds.

12. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made no  error  of  law  that
    could possibly have led to a different outcome and so the determination
    stands.

13. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 5th September 2013





Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

