
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06871/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th April 2015                            |On 30th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                         mr Syed Saulat Abbas naqvi
                          (ANONYMITY not RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Miss Savage

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 10th October  1983  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.
    Neither the Appellant nor his legal representatives were present.   The
    Respondent was represented by Miss Savage a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application on 26th June 2013  for  a  residence
    card as confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom.   That
    application had been refused by the  Respondent  by  a  refusal  letter
    dated 21st January 2014.  The Appellant had appealed that decision  and
    an appeal was heard on the papers before First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean
    with a decision promulgated on 23rd September 2014.  He  had  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal.  Permission to appeal had been  lodged  by  the
    Appellant's solicitors.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 23rd January 2015 on the basis  that  an
    arguable error of law had been made in this case by the refusal of  the
    judge to adjourn the matter when it appeared that  the  Respondent  had
    evidence that had not been forwarded to the Tribunal.

 3. Directions were issued for the Upper Tribunal to firstly decide whether
    or not an error of law had been made in this case and the matter  comes
    before me in accordance with those directions.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 4. There was no explanation for the absence of the Appellant or his  legal
    representatives.  There was no evidence on file to  suggest  the  legal
    representatives had  withdrawn  or  were  no  longer  representing  the
    Appellant and their failure to attend would therefore on  the  face  of
    matters require some clear explanation.

 5. Miss Savage made application to withdraw the Respondent's  decision  in
    this case and sought permission so to do in accordance with Rule 17  of
    the Upper Tribunal Procedural Rules.  Having appraised  myself  of  the
    background to this case I agreed but indicated that I would set out the
    circumstances in a written decision so that matters were clear in terms
    of any future conduct of this case.  I now provide that  decision  with
    the reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 6. I have agreed to the Respondent's withdrawal of their decision in  this
    case because it is clear that a number of procedural mistakes have been
    made in the manner in which this case has thus  far  proceeded  through
    the appeal process.

 7. The Appellant had originally entered the United Kingdom in August  2004
    with leave as a student.  He  had  been  granted  further  leave  as  a
    student but his last application in that capacity was  refused  on  9th
    January  2009  and  his  appeal  was  dismissed  on  20th  March  2009.
    Thereafter the Respondent does not appear to have removed the Appellant
    with no explanation for that failure.

 8. The Appellant had  then  made  further  applications  relating  to  his
    alleged marriage to a Latvian citizen  and  on  6th  January  2012  had
    applied for a residence card.

 9. The Respondent had refused that application made by the Appellant for a
    residence card on the basis that the  documentation  presented  by  the
    Appellant did not disclose  that  his  wife,  a  Latvian  citizen,  was
    exercising treaty rights in the UK as claimed or at  all.   There  does
    not appear to have been an appeal lodged by the Appellant in respect of
    that refusal.

10. Thereafter, again the Respondent having failed to remove the Appellant,
    the Appellant made a fresh application for  a  residence  card  as  the
    spouse of a Latvian citizen on 26th June 2013.   That  application  had
    also been refused by the Respondent and the  refusal  letter  is  dated
    21st January 2014.  On this occasion the refusal was on the basis  that
    the Respondent did not accept that the Appellant and his spouse were in
    a genuine relationship.  They had interviewed  the  Appellant  and  his
    wife on 10th December 2013, and as the refusal letter notes, the result
    of answers given by the Appellant and his wife at that interview raised
    profound and serious concerns as to the genuineness of  this  marriage.
    The Appellant had appealed that decision.

11. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant  failed  to
    appear.  There was no explanation provided for his absence.  There  was
    a letter from the Appellant's legal representatives  SAJ  Law  Chambers
    who may have recently at that stage taken conduct of the  case.   Their
    letter requested an adjournment and they included  an  email  from  the
    Home Office who had indicated that for technical reasons  a  transcript
    of the interview of 10th December 2013  was  unavailable.   Regrettably
    those solicitors did not attend at the hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The judge had refused the written request for an adjournment
    and had proceeded to deal with the  case  on  the  papers  before  him.
    Having examined the documents that were before the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge it is understandable why he refused the adjournment  request  and
    the absence of the Appellant or his solicitors at the hearing  did  not
    provide any further information that may have uncovered the  difficulty
    in this case.

12. In summary the judge only had the Respondent's bundle.  There  were  no
    documents from the Appellant.  The  Respondent's  bundle  unfortunately
    contained the original application form and documentation that  related
    to the earlier application made by the Appellant where refusal had been
    on the basis that there was  no  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  spouse
    exercising treaty rights as claimed.  On  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    before him and in the belief that that was the extant appeal the  judge
    very properly dismissed the appeal  in  accordance  with  the  evidence
    available before him.  It is clear the judge was unaware of  the  later
    application in June 2013 and the Respondent's refusal of  26th  January
    2014 which was the subject matter of the appeal that should  have  been
    heard by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He did not have  that  refusal
    letter and was  accordingly,  it  would  seem,  unaware  of  the  later
    application or the  basis  of  the  Respondent's  refusal  namely  deep
    concerns regarding the genuineness of this marriage.  The basis of  the
    Respondent's concerns were the interviews conducted  on  10th  December
    2013 with the Appellant and his wife.  In accordance with case law  the
    transcripts of those interviews needed to  be  disclosed  both  to  the
    Appellant and to the Tribunal together with any  summary  made  by  the
    interviewing officer and passed to the decision  maker.   It  is  clear
    that the email from the Respondent relating to technical problems was a
    reference to technical problems in  obtaining  a  transcript  of  those
    interviews.  I am informed that because of those difficulties it is  no
    longer possible to obtain  transcripts  of  those  interviews  and  the
    Respondent's position therefore is  a  withdrawal  of  their  decision,
    presumably so they can begin matters afresh in this case.

13. In summary therefore an  error  of  law  was  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in that he was dealing with evidence in  relation  to  a
    matter that does not appear to ever have  been  appealed  whilst  being
    unaware of  the  evidential  material  and  basis  of  refusal  of  the
    Respondent's decision that have given rise to the appeal.  It  is  with
    regret that it should be noted that at no stage was the judge  assisted
    either by the Respondent nor by the absence of both the  Appellant  and
    his legal representatives  who  absence  was  notable,  again,  at  the
    hearing before me.

14. I therefore  agree  to  the  Respondent's  request  to  withdraw  their
    decision and have set out above  the  background  to  this  matter  for
    reference purposes in the future.

Notice of Decision

It is agreed that  the  Respondent  should  be  allowed  to  withdraw  their
decision in this case.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



