
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/06278/2015
                                                               IA/06396/2015
                                                               IA/06400/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20 July 2016                        |On 17 August 2016                   |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     S K
                         (and two child dependents)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves child welfare  issues.  I  find  that  it  is  appropriate  to
continue the order. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B. Singh, Counsel instructed by MTG Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  5
    February 2015 to refuse a human rights claim. First-tier Tribunal Judge
    R.  Sullivan  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 12 November 2015.

2.    The appellant appeals against the First-tier Tribunal decision on  the
    following grounds:

       i) The judge erred in failing to  place  sufficient  weight  on  the
          difficulties the children had already faced during the  breakdown
          of their parents' marriage in the  UK  as  part  of  the  overall
          proportionality assessment. The judge failed to consider the fact
          that the children are likely to  face  hardship  if  returned  to
          India with their mother, who has no assets or home  to  live  in.
          The judge failed to conduct an adequate assessment  of  the  best
          interests of the children.

      ii) The judge erred  in  her  assessment  of  paragraph  276ADE.  The
          relevant test at the date of the appeal was  whether  there  were
          "very significant obstacles" to reintegration and not whether the
          appellant had "no ties with India".

Decision and reasons

3.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

4.    A proper reading of the decision shows that the  judge  gave  detailed
    consideration to all the circumstances and the evidence before her. The
    judge directed herself to the  correct  legal  framework  relating  the
    assessment of Article 8 claims  [8-16].  In  particular,  she  reminded
    herself  that  the  best  interests  of  the  children  are  a  primary
    consideration and must be considered first. They can be  outweighed  by
    the cumulative effect of other  considerations  such  as  the  need  to
    maintain firm and fair  immigration  control,  which  might  include  a
    parent's immigration history or the precarious nature of  the  family's
    status. She bore in mind that, as part of the assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the children, they should not be blamed for the actions of
    their parents [14].

5.    The judge quite clearly took into account the  arguments  put  forward
    by the appellant [7, 23 & 31-39]. In doing so she took into account the
    principles  outlined  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4,  EV
    (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  874  and  Azimi-Moayed  &  Others
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197.

6.    The judge considered the difficult family background  in  some  detail
    with reference to the evidence contained in the appellant's bundle [41-
    49]. It is quite clear from her consideration of the evidence that  she
    had in mind the background relating to allegations of domestic violence
    as well as the difficulties that the appellant had in  caring  for  the
    children, which led them to be taken into foster care  for  periods  of
    time. However, she also took into account the  improved  picture  since
    the appellant separated from her husband.

7.    No specific challenge has been made to the judge's findings  of  fact.
    It was open to the judge to reject the appellant's claim that  she  was
    ostracised from her parents  and  siblings  in  India  given  that  she
    visited them with the children in September 2013 [51]. The  appellant's
    claim that she would return as a  lone  woman,  and  would  face  undue
    hardship with the children as a result, amounted to little more than  a
    bare statement and did not appear to be supported by any background  or
    other evidence [55]. There was no evidence to suggest that her  in-laws
    would seek to take the children from her [56]. In view of the dearth of
    evidence relating to the conditions she might face on return  to  India
    the judge's findings could not  be  said  to  be  outside  a  range  of
    reasonable responses to the evidence.

8.    In applying the five-stage approach  in  R  v  SSHD  ex  parte  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 the judge gave specific consideration to the possibility
    of separation from their father [59]. She was aware of the fact that he
    had a separate appeal. If he chose to remain in the UK while he pursued
    that appeal then the children would be  separated  from  their  father.
    However, given that he was appealing in a temporary category  (Tier  4)
    that did not give rise to any expectation of long  term  settlement  in
    the UK it was open to the judge to conclude  that  their  father  could
    return to India if he wished to  continue  to  have  contact  with  the
    children [66].

9.    The judge made a separate assessment of  the  best  interests  of  the
    children, which was broadly consistent with the approach  suggested  by
    the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) [61-62 & 66]. It is clear  from
    her findings that she had in mind the difficult family history and took
    into  account  the  fact  that  the  children  had  already  seen  more
    disruption to their lives than was desirable. However, it was  open  to
    her to consider other  public  interest  factors  in  order  to  assess
    whether  they  cumulatively  outweighed  the  best  interests  of   the
    children. In doing so she was obliged to take into account  the  public
    interest considerations outlined in section 117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002") [63-65].

10.   I conclude that the points raised in the grounds of appeal  amount  to
    disagreements with the outcome of the  judge's  decision  but  fail  to
    identify any errors of law that would have made any material difference
    to the outcome of the appeal. It is understandable that  the  appellant
    disagrees with the decision but the  judge's  findings  were  within  a
    range of reasonable responses to the evidence.

11.   It is accepted that the judge erred in considering  the  old  test  of
    "no ties" under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). Since 28 July 2014 the private
    life test for those who are over 18 and who have not lived  in  the  UK
    for a continuous period of  20  years  is  that  there  must  be  "very
    significant obstacles" to the applicant's integration into the  country
    to which she would have to go if required to leave the UK. The test  is
    somewhat different to the previous test but still imposes a  relatively
    stringent threshold. An applicant must  not  just  face  obstacles  but
    "very significant" obstacles to integration on return.

12.   Even if the judge erred I find that the error was not likely  to  make
    any material difference to the outcome of the appeal given her findings
    of fact. The judge took into account the fact that  the  appellant  had
    only lived in the UK for a relatively short period of time. She  speaks
    little English and had struggled to integrate in the UK. The judge  did
    not accept that the appellant had been ostracised from her parents  and
    siblings in India.  No  evidence  had  been  produced  of  the  country
    conditions  in  India.  The  judge  was  satisfied   that   there   was
    insufficient evidence to show that the appellant and her children would
    be at real risk of harm if returned to India. In such circumstances  it
    is not arguable that  the  judge  would  have  come  to  any  different
    conclusion under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  if  the  "very  significant
    obstacles" test had been applied.

13.   I was informed that the  father  of  the  children  has  now  made  an
    application for an EEA residence card but no  further  information  was
    provided. The information was not before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    cannot have any bearing on this particular appeal.

14.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of an error on a point of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand

Signed   [pic]   Date 16 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan





