
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06586/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 12th January 2015                          |On 30th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                        Mr Abdulbasit Olawale Hassan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No-one attended
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant Mr Abdulbasit Olawale Hassan date of birth  5th  November
    1989 is a citizen of Nigeria.  The Appellant made application to remain
    in the United Kingdom as the spouse of a person present and settled  in
    the United Kingdom namely a British citizen called  Ms  Chloe  Delaney.
    By decision taken on 11th December  2013  the  Respondent  refused  the
    Appellant further leave to remain in the United Kingdom and also by the
    same notice gave notice that she intended to remove the Appellant  from
    the United Kingdom under Section 47 of the 2006 Act.

 2. The Appellant appealed those decisions.   By  decision  promulgated  on
    18th July 2014 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The Appellant lodged an appeal to the Upper Tribunal  against
    the decision.

 3. I have considered whether or not it is necessary to make  an  anonymity
    direction in the  present  proceedings.   Taking  account  of  all  the
    circumstances I do not consider  it  necessary  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction.

 4. No-one attended on behalf of the Appellant.  Notice of hearing had been
    sent out to the last address notified to the Tribunal  for  service  of
    documents.  That notice had gone out on 28th November  2014.  No  other
    address had been provided to the Tribunal  for  service  of  documents.
    The Appellant had no representative.  A McKenzie  friend  had  attended
    and assisted  the  Appellant  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  However such a person is not a representative for  the
    purposes of the service of documents.  The notice of hearing  had  gone
    out in accordance with the Procedure Rules.  There was  no  explanation
    for the non-attendance of the Appellant.  I therefore  determined  that
    it was just and proper to proceed with the hearing in  the  absence  of
    the Appellant.

 5. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Manuel promulgated on 18th July  2014.   Permission
    to appeal was granted on 1st October 2014.   The  permission  indicates
    that all the Grounds of Appeal are arguable.

 6. The Grounds of Appeal extend to some four pages.  The first  Ground  of
    Appeal indicates that the judge  erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the
    Appellant was not in a genuine and subsisting relationship as  required
    by E-LTRP.1.7 and that the parties did not have the intention  to  live
    together permanently in the UK as required by
    E-LTRP.1.10.

 7. There is then a recitation of the evidence  that  was  put  before  the
    Tribunal and the fact that there is Home Office guidance as to  how  to
    approach the issue with regard to proof of  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  It is suggested that bills, bank statements and the like
    are sufficient for the purposes of the Home Office  guidance  and  that
    accordingly there was evidence before the judge upon  which  the  judge
    should have found that there was a genuine relationship.   Reliance  is
    also placed upon the case of  GA  (subsisting  marriage)  Ghana  [2006]
    UKAIT 46.  It is suggested that that is authority  for  the  fact  that
    subsisting marriage is one which does not merely formally continue.  It
    is  suggested  that  the  judge's  conclusions  in  paragraph  25   are
    inconsistent with the case of GA.  The matter is pursued further and it
    is alleged that the judge has failed to take account  of  the  evidence
    that was presented before her.  It is  suggested  that  the  judge  has
    failed to take account of the fact that the parties  intended  to  live
    together in accommodation owned by a Mr Bredu.  It  is  suggested  that
    there was a valid explanation as  to  why  Miss  Delaney  continued  to
    attend at surgeries in  Runcorn  when  she  was  supposedly  living  in
    Salford.

 8. In essence the Ground of Appeal is nothing  more  than  a  disagreement
    with the findings of fact made by the judge.  The judge  has  carefully
    considered all of the evidence that was put  forward.   The  judge  has
    carefully analysed the evidence presented  and  in  her  findings  from
    paragraph 7 onwards has given valid reasons for finding that  this  was
    not a genuine and subsisting relationship.  In paragraph 20  the  judge
    noted that there were no joint bills or bank statements and the  latest
    payslips for the sponsor gave an address for the sponsor in Runcorn.

 9. The ground is nothing more than a disagreement  with  the  findings  of
    fact made.  The judge was entitled to make the findings on the basis of
    the evidence presented  and  has  given  justifiable  reasons  for  the
    conclusion that this was not a genuine and subsisting marriage.

10. The second Ground of Appeal alleges that the judge did not give reasons
    for the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  did  not  satisfy  paragraph
    EX.1(b).  The judge clearly at paragraph 30 points out  that  paragraph
    EX.1(b) requires also that the parties be in a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  The judge had already found that there  was  no  genuine
    and subsisting relationship and accordingly found that because of  that
    EX 1(b) did not apply. That was a finding of fact that  the  judge  was
    entitled to make on the evidence presented.

11. The Appellant had come to the United Kingdom as a student in 2007.  The
    only time that he had left the United Kingdom  is  for  three  days  in
    December 2010 to go to the Netherlands.  The judge  from  paragraph  41
    considered very carefully whether or not  the  Appellant  continued  to
    have ties with Nigeria.  The judge concluded  that  the  Appellant  did
    continue to have ties.  The Appellant had produced email correspondence
    to show that he had family members in Nigeria and that he continued  to
    be in contact with  those  family  members.   The  judge  was  entitled
    therefore to conclude as she did  in  paragraphs  41  to  45  that  the
    Appellant continued to have family and other ties.

12. Those were findings of fact that the judge was entitled to  make.   The
    judge having made those findings of fact concluded that  the  Appellant
    did not meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).   Again  the
    judge has fully justified the decision on the evidence presented.

13. The final ground which  has  been  asserted  suggests  that  the  judge
    disclosed bias in  dealing  with  the  case.   The  Appellant  has  not
    attended to substantiate those allegations.  The allegations  are  such
    that they are very serious and  have  to  be  taken  seriously  by  the
    Tribunal.  However it is suggested that the judge did  make  the  point
    that the Appellant could have gone back to his home country to make  an
    application for entry clearance as he had no leave.   It  is  suggested
    that that is an insinuation that an in-country application was in  some
    way wrong.  I do not accept that at all.

14. The Appellant has not attended to substantiate the allegation of  bias.
    The allegation is merely that  the  judge  is  pointing  out  that  the
    Appellant had no leave and was entitled to point out that the Appellant
    had no leave and that it would be possible for the Appellant to go back
    to his home country to make application to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully.  The Appellant could have returned  home;  made  application;
    and substantiated his relationship had he sought to do so  but  he  had
    not.  The judge  was  entitled  to  take  that  fact  into  account  in
    assessing  the  circumstances.   The  allegation  of  bias  is  in  the
    circumstances not made out  and  is  totally  unwarranted  in  all  the
    circumstances.

15. The Grounds of Appeal are nothing more than  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings of fact.  They seek to re-argue issues raised before the judge
    which the judge has dealt with. The judge has  clearly  considered  all
    the evidence.  The judge has given valid  reasons  for  coming  to  the
    conclusions that she did.  The judge was entitled to make the  findings
    that she did on the facts as presented.  In the circumstances there  is
    no arguable error of law within the determination.


Notice of Decision

I uphold the decision to dismiss this appeal on all grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure




