
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06912/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 April 2016                              |On 3rd June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)

                                   Between

                                Deepa Gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nepal,  born  on  28  August  1985.   She
    appeals against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  her
    appeal against the respondent's  decision  made  on  10  February  2015
    refusing her further leave to remain on the basis of  her  private  and
    family life in the UK.

2.   There was no appearance by  or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   I  am
    satisfied that the notice of decision has been properly served  and  in
    the absence of any explanation for  her  failure  to  attend  that  the
    proper course is to proceed with this hearing.

Background

3.   The background to this appeal can briefly  be  summarised  as  follows.
    The appellant first entered the UK on 21 September 2012  on  a  Tier  4
    Student visa valid until 17 January 2014 and was then granted  further
    leave to remain until 30 November 2014.  On 6 November 2014 she applied
    for leave to remain on the basis of her private and family life but her
    application was refused for the reasons set out in the decision  letter
    dated 10 February 2015.  The respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant could meet the  requirements  of  para  276ADE(1).   She  was
    unable to show that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  her
    reintegration into Nepal if required to leave the UK.   She  had  spent
    all her formative years there and had been in the  UK  studying.   This
    was not a direct path to settlement  and  the  ties  developed  in  two
    years' residence would not outweigh those she had established in Nepal.



4.   The respondent went  on  to  consider  whether  there  were  particular
    circumstances  constituting  exceptional  circumstances  justifying   a
    consideration of article 8 outside the  rules.   The  respondent  noted
    that the appellant's mother and father resided in the UK but she was an
    independent adult.  She had maintained a relationship with her  parents
    prior to entering the UK in 2012 and had received financial  assistance
    from them.  That arrangement  could  continue  as  it  did  before  her
    arrival in the UK.  She had produced  a  regular  army  certificate  of
    service which showed that her father had served  in  the  armed  forces
    until 1993 but this was not regarded as a  determining  factor  in  her
    application.  The respondent  found  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances and the application did not fall for  a  grant  of  leave
    outside the rules.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the judge accepted  that
    the appellant's father had served in the Brigade of Gurkhas  from  1976
    to 1992.  He was granted indefinite leave to remain in  the  UK  on  12
    September 2007 and on 19 March 2008 his  wife, the appellant's  mother,
    was also granted indefinite leave and she moved to the UK in 2009.  The
    appellant had lived with her mother until she left for the UK and  also
    with her brother in the family home in Pokahara.  His brother  had  now
    married and was living in the home with his wife  who  is  expecting  a
    child.  The appellant had also lived independently in  Nepal  when  she
    was a university student.

6.   The appellant is 30 years of age and has completed a BSc in  Nepal  and
    an MSc whilst in the UK and is currently working in a care  home.   The
    judge accepted that she was living with  her  parents  in  the  UK  and
    relied on them for financial support as she had  when  in  Nepal.   The
    appellant said that she could  not  return  to  Nepal  because  it  was
    culturally unacceptable for single women to live alone  and  she  could
    not live with her brother.  Her parents would be unable to provide  her
    with any financial support and it will be difficult  for  her  to  find
    employment.  Her mother had a bad back and she was helping  her  around
    the home.

7.   The judge was not satisfied that the appellant would  face  significant
    obstacles integrating into Nepal as she  had  only  spent  three  years
    living outside Nepal compared to 27 years living there.  She had a home
    to which she could return.  The judge was not persuaded there  was  any
    reason why her parents could not continue to provide her with financial
    support as they had for many years.  She was also not  satisfied  there
    was any evidence beyond the appellant's assertion, that a  person  with
    her qualifications and UK work experience would not be able  to  obtain
    employment in Nepal.

8.   The appellant had also relied  on  the  fact  that  it  was  culturally
    unacceptable for her to live alone.  There was  no  country  background
    evidence to support this claim and was at odds with the appellant's own
    evidence that she had lived  alone  during  her  university  course  in
    Kathmandu.  The judge also found that she would not have to live  alone
    because she could return to the family home to live  with  her  brother
    and his family.

9.   The judge was therefore not satisfied that  the  appellant  could  meet
    the requirements of para 276ADE(1)(vi).  She went on  to  consider  the
    appeal under article 8 on the basis of the appellant's family  life  in
    the UK.  The judge was satisfied that, although the appellant had lived
    for  several  years  apart  from  her  parents,  they  had  financially
    supported her both then and since her arrival in the UK  providing  her
    with accommodation and day-to-day attention.   In  these  circumstances
    family life was established.  The judge accepted that removal would  be
    an interference of such gravity as to engage the operation  of  article
    8.  It was in accordance with the law and for  a  legitimate  interest.
    The  issue  for  her  was  whether  the   respondent's   decision   was
    proportionate to a legitimate public aim.

10.  The judge referred to s.117A and B of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  She was satisfied that the  appellant  spoke  English
    and was financially supported by her parents,  but  was  not  persuaded
    that this diluted the public interest in firm immigration control.  The
    appellant could and should not have had any expectation that she  would
    be able to remain in the UK given that she was here as a student.  When
    considering proportionality the judge placed weight on  the  fact  that
    her parents had chosen to leave Nepal and  settle  in  the  UK  leaving
    their two children behind and that for several years she had managed to
    live there without  her  parents.   She  was  also  not  persuaded  the
    appellant would face financial hardship on return or that she would  be
    without support.  She said that the appellant did not meet s.117B(6) or
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules and these were factors  which
    weighed heavily in favour of the public interest in her  removal.   She
    therefore found  that  removal  would  not  be  disproportionate  to  a
    legitimate aim within article 8.

The Grounds and Submissions

11.  The grounds argue that a proportionality  assessment  under  article  8
    cannot be dealt with in a perfunctory or formulaic way but  requires  a
    structured decision, that the decision is not in  accordance  with  the
    law or the decision in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and  that  it  was
    necessary for the respondent to make an assessment of article 8 and  as
    it had not been given independent consideration the First-tier Tribunal
    should have allowed the appeal on that basis.   Finally  it  is  argued
    that all relevant matters were not taken  into  account  and  that  the
    appellant's private life included the pursuit of a business career.

12.  Mr Tufan submitted that there had been no  justification  or  necessity
    for the judge to consider article 8 in a freestanding way  but  in  any
    event her decision on proportionality was properly open to her.

Assessment of Whether the First-tier Tribunal Erred in Law

13.  I am not satisfied that there  is  any  substance  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  The first ground  argues  that  the  question  of  determining
    proportionality should not be determined by reference to a threshold of
    some exceptionally grave interference with private or family  life  but
    should have proper and visible regard to relevant principles in  making
    a structured decision and that article 8 proportionality could  not  be
    dealt with in a perfunctory or formulaic way.  I am not satisfied  that
    the judge did so.  There is no reason to believe that she did not  take
    all relevant matters into account.  She considered  the  provisions  of
    s.117B of the 2002 Act.  She was right to note that the appellant could
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and that this was an
    important factor when considering  proportionality.   Her  decision  on
    that issue was properly open to her for the reason she gave.

14.  The second issue in the grounds  relies  heavily  on  the  decision  in
    Nagre but fails to refer to the subsequent jurisprudence of  the  Court
    of Appeal which has confirmed that it is  only  necessary  to  consider
    article 8 outside the rules in circumstances where there is  reason  to
    believe that there are  further  matters  properly  to  be  taken  into
    account not covered by the rules.  The assertion made in the grounds is
    that the respondent had not acted in accordance  with  the  law  as  no
    independent consideration was given to article 8 and  that  the  appeal
    should have been allowed on that basis.  There is no substance in  this
    assertion as the decision letter properly considered whether there were
    particular circumstances warranting a grant of leave to remain  outside
    the requirements of the rules.  The respondent  had  been  entitled  to
    reach the conclusion that there were no  such  circumstances.   In  any
    event, once the matter was before the First-tier Tribunal on appeal  it
    was for that Tribunal to make a decision on article 8.  The  judge  did
    so reaching a decision properly open to her.  The judge  therefore  did
    give independent consideration to the private life claim under  article
    8.

15.  The grounds further argue that all relevant matters must be taken  into
    account and that the judge had failed to do so and  in  particular  the
    grounds argue that the appellant's private life included the pursuit of
    a career in business  and  that  the  decision  to  remove  her  was  a
    sufficiently serious interference with that right.  The evidence before
    the judge was that the appellant was working in a care  home  and  that
    she would have difficulty in obtaining employment on  return  but  that
    evidence was not accepted, the judge not being persuaded that a  person
    with the appellant's qualifications and UK work experience would not be
    able to obtain employment.  There is no  reason  to  believe  that  the
    judge left any relevant matters out of account.

16.  The judge assessed the appellant's claim based on  private  life  under
    the provisions of the rules, finding that she had failed to  show  that
    she would face significant obstacles integrating in  Nepal  on  return.
    There were no further issues relating to private life which would  have
    justified further consideration outside the rules.  In the light of the
    fact the appellant had been granted leave to enter as a student in 2012
    and had previously lived for several years in Nepal without her parents
    and was clearly unable to meet the requirements of the rules  based  on
    family life, there is some force in  Mr  Tufan's  submission  that  the
    judge need not have considered the matter further  outside  the  rules.
    However, the judge cannot be faulted for erring on the side of  caution
    by doing  so.   The  decision  turned  on  the  judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality and as I have already indicated I am satisfied that she
    reached a decision properly open to her, having taken all the  relevant
    matters into account.  I am not satisfied that the judge erred in law.

Decision

17.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  it  follows  that  its
    decision stands.





Signed   H J E Latter                            Dated: 1 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter



