



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06384/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th June 2014                               |On 16 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                            Mr tanzeel ur rehman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss H Aspinall of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant a  citizen  of  Pakistan  born  7th  September  1982  has
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal against the determination of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Kelly) promulgated on 16th April 2014,  dismissing
    his appeal against the Respondent's refusal of  21st  January  2014  to
    grant him further leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant under the Points Based System.

 2. The Appellant's application was refused on  what  was  essentially  one
    substantive issue. The Respondent  concluded  that  the  Appellant  had
    submitted false documents in support of his Tier 1 application and thus
    it fell to be refused under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.
    The Appellant denies that the documents in question are false.

History

 3. On 28th October 2011 the Appellant made application for  further  leave
    to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  Migrant.  The  Respondent  considered  that
    application and in doing so said the following:

         "In your application,  you  submitted  a  Standard  Chartered  Bank
         account balance & maintenance certificate,  a  declaration  of  3rd
         party funding and a legal letter of authentication all relating  to
         Mrs Yasmeen  Akber.  The  same  documentation  was  also  submitted
         relating to a Mr Amjad Mehmood in support of your application.

         I am satisfied that the documents are  false  because  Mrs  Yasmeen
         Akber has been contacted through Standard Chartered  bank  and  she
         has stated that she does not know Mr Tanzeel Ur  Rehman  (yourself)
         and that she has not provided you with any supporting documentation
         for your Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) application  and  does  not  support
         this application.

         I am satisfied also that the documents relating to Mr Amjad Mehmood
         are also false because Mr Amjad Mehmood has been contacted  through
         Standard Chartered bank and he has stated that he does not know  Mr
         Tanzeel Ur Rehman (yourself) and that the  document  is  false  and
         does not bear his signature.

         As false representations have been made  and  documents  have  been
         submitted in relation to  your  application  it  is  refused  under
         paragraph 322(1A), of the Immigration Rules.

         In addition to the above, you have applied for leave to  remain  in
         the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant but you  have
         made false representations for the purpose  of  obtaining  previous
         variation of leave.

         On 29 September 2008 you applied for Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  and
         submitted a Post Graduate Diploma in  Information  Technology  from
         Cambridge College of Learning. I am satisfied  that  the  documents
         submitted from Cambridge College of Learning were false because the
         information obtained by UK  Border  Agency  showed  that  Cambridge
         College  of  Learning  never  issued  Post  Graduate  Diplomas   in
         Information Technology".

 4. When the hearing came before Judge Kelly he set out clearly  the  issue
    before him and the evidence put before him. He directed himself on  the
    law saying at paragraph 3,

         "Where  it  is  proved   that   an   applicant   has   made   false
         representations or submitted  false  documents  in  support  of  an
         application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom, the decision-
         maker must refuse the application under paragraph  322(1A)  of  the
         Immigration Rules. The burden of  proof  is  upon  the  respondent.
         Whilst the standard of proof is  a  balance  of  probabilities,  it
         generally  requires  particularly  cogent  evidence  to  meet  this
         standard in cases where the allegation is one of fraud".

 5. The grounds seeking permission comprise three components.

      i) The first component which encompasses grounds  one  two  and  three
         seeks to advance  that  the  Judge  failed  to  apply  the  correct
         standard of proof and that  he  made  no  findings  in  respect  of
         dishonesty/deception on the part of the Appellant.

     ii) The Judge's findings of  fact  at  paragraphs  12  and  13  of  his
         determination are erroneous and amount to perversity  because  they
         are not supported by evidence.

    iii) The Judge failed to consider the Appellant's Article 8 private life
         either inside or outside the Immigration Rules.

The Hearing

 6. Miss Aspinall's submissions relied on the grounds  seeking  permission.
    She emphasised that in paragraph 13  of  the  determination  the  Judge
    records an incorrect standard of proof and that the Judge has  made  no
    findings  of  dishonesty  or  deception.   She   submitted   that   the
    determination should be set aside on that  ground  alone.  She  further
    said that the evidence of  fraud  was  insufficient  in  that  what  it
    amounted to was a report of two  people  stating  they  "disowned"  the
    Appellant.  She  referred  to  the  Appellant's  Article  8  claim  and
    submitted that this had been raised in the grounds of appeal.

 7. Mr Diwnycz served a Rule 24 response which he relied up.

 8. At the end of the hearing I informed the parties  that  I  reserved  my
    decision and I now give my decision with reasons.

Considerations and Findings

 9. I am satisfied that the  determination  of  Judge  Kelly  discloses  no
    material error requiring it to be set aside.

10. Contrary to the assertions made in the grounds of appeal I am satisfied
    that the Judge's decision is based on a careful and rounded  assessment
    of the evidence put before him. It was supported by clear and  cogently
    reasoned findings.

11. What I term the main set of grounds seeking permission assert that  the
    Judge has fallen into error by misdirecting  himself  on  what  is  the
    correct standard of proof. A reading of the  determination  with  care,
    reveals that this is not so. First it must be borne in mind  that  this
    appeal is a refusal against the application of paragraph 322(1A) of the
    Immigration Rules, by the Respondent. It is common ground in a  322(1A)
    application that the burden of proof is initially upon the Respondent.

         "***Insert 322(1A) Here...........

12. The Court of Appeal guidance informs us that the  correct  approach  in
    cases such as these (where the burden of proof falls on the Respondent)
    is that reflected in R (AN and Another) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1605 Richards LJ stated at [62]:

         "Although there is a single civil standard of proof on the  balance
         of probabilities, it is flexible in its application. In particular,
         the  more  serious  the  allegation  or  the   more   serious   the
         consequences if the allegation is proven, the stronger must be  the
         evidence before a Court will find  the  allegation  proved  on  the
         balance of probabilities".

13.  In essence this is precisely the approach which the Judge has directed
    himself to follow in paragraph 3 of his determination where he says,

         "The burden of proof is upon the Respondent. Whilst the standard of
         proof  is  a  balance  of  probabilities,  it  generally   requires
         particularly cogent evidence to meet this standard in  cases  where
         the allegation is one of fraud".

14. The contention seems to be that the Judge has  misdirected  himself  in
    paragraph 13. I disagree. Paragraph 13 begins with the phrase  "In  the
    light of the above ..." that  phrase  clearly  directs  the  reader  to
    return to "the above" and that can  only  mean  paragraph  12.  Reading
    paragraph 12 in conjunction with paragraph 13 shows that what the Judge
    is saying is in effect that the  Respondent  has  proved  to  a  higher
    standard even than that outlined that the  documents  produced  by  the
    Appellant are false.  Whilst  the  Judge  may  have  expressed  himself
    differently the substance of what he says is correct, because it stands
    to reason that a greater burden of proof must encompass a lesser one.

15. That being  so  I  agree  with  Mr  Diwnycz's  submission  outlined  in
    paragraph 3 of the response,

         "The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  been  dishonest  and
         submitted false documents and this had  been  proven  by  the  SSHD
         beyond all reasonable doubt. There  can  be  no  complaint  by  the
         appellant in this regard, it  seems  the  judge  applied  a  higher
         standard  of  proof  against  the  SSHD  and  the  SSHD  was  still
         successful, the appellant can only complain if the judge found  the
         deception and false documents had been proven to a standard  lesser
         (not higher) than a balance of probabilities. For that  reason  the
         error is not material".

16.  So far as it is asserted that  the  Judge  has  made  no  findings  in
    respect of the Appellant's dishonesty/deception this ground in my  view
    also encompasses the ground that the Judge's decision was  perverse.  I
    find  there  is  nothing  perverse  or  irrational  about  the  Judge's
    findings. He has examined the evidence before  him  and  found  himself
    satisfied on the higher end of the balance  of  probabilities  spectrum
    that the documents produced in support of the  application  are  false.
    The grounds  assert  that  there  are  no  findings  of  dishonesty  or
    deception. I am surprised at this ground. It  is  self-evident  from  a
    reading of the determination that if the  Judge  is  satisfied  at  the
    higher end of the balance of probabilities spectrum that the  Appellant
    has produced false  documents  and  has  given  reasons  for  being  so
    satisfied, then the Appellant  fails  to  fulfil  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 322(1A).

17. The last challenge to the Judge's determination is based on  Article  8
    ECHR private life. I did raise this with Miss Aspinall at the  hearing.
    It is said that the Judge has failed to make a full  consideration  and
    assessment of the Appellant's Article 8 private life. I see nowhere  in
    the determination that any substantial  evidence  has  been  raised  to
    enable the Appellant to succeed on an Article 8 claim. I accept that it
    was put in the grounds of appeal but only in the barest of terms. Those
    bear terms were repeated at paragraph 20  of  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement and what it amounts to is,

         "I am in the UK since April 2004 and will have resided here for ten
         years on 1st April 2014. I have therefore developed a private  life
         in the UK and the Respondent's decision infringes my  rights  under
         the European Convention on Human Rights".

    There was nothing more substantial than that put forward.  If  that  is
    the extent of what was put before the Judge, it is hard to see how  the
    Judge can be said to have erred  because  he  failed  to  embark  on  a
    freewheeling Article 8 exercise. There was simply no evidence  advanced
    before him to do so.

DECISION

18. For the foregoing reasons there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


