



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06221/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th August 2013                              |On 20th August 2013        |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                             Mr Syed emad ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Noor of Noor Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of Syed Emad  Ahmed  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Devittie promulgated on 17th June 2013 following  a
    hearing at Taylor House on 31st May 2013.

 2. In his  determination,  the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse his application for further
    leave to remain in the UK as the spouse of a woman settled here. One of
    the main reasons why the Respondent refused the application was because
    the Respondent had noted that the Appellant was granted leave to  enter
    and remain in the United Kingdom until 21st December 2014  but  on  6th
    October 2011 the Respondent curtailed that leave.

 3. Permission to appeal against the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne and thus the matter  comes
    before me to establish whether Judge Devittie's determination  contains
    an error of law requiring the decision to be remade.

Submissions

 4. At the hearing before me Ms Ong asked to address me first.  She  handed
    me the Tribunal decision Syed (Curtailment of leave  -  notice)  [2013]
    UKUT 00144 IAC. Ms Ong conceded that following a reading  of  Syed,  it
    was clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination  contained
    an error of law; albeit not one referred  to  in  the  grounds  seeking
    permission.

 5. Her submissions ran thus. The original grounds of  appeal  stated  that
    one of the Appellant's contention was that he  had  never  been  served
    with notice IS151A and thus he was not aware of the curtailment of  his
    leave until he received the refusal notice in the present appeal.

 6. That point had never been  adequately  dealt  with  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge. In addition looking at the case of Syed, it is apparent
    that the Respondent  has  no  real  foundation  for  stating  that  the
    Appellant's leave is properly curtailed. That being so, the whole basis
    of the refusal notice needs to be reassessed and looked at again.

 7. Ms Ong asked therefore  that  the  whole  matter  be  remitted  to  the
    Secretary of State for a proper assessment of the facts and for a fresh
    decision to be made.

 8. Mr Noor on behalf of the Appellant  accepted  Ms  Ong's  reasoning  and
    indicated that he was content that matters should be  returned  to  the
    Secretary of State for a review and fresh decision.

 9. I am satisfied that Ms Ong's submissions present the appropriate course
    in this Appellant's appeal. The Appellant's spouse has  recently  given
    birth to a child and in  these  circumstances  it  is  urged  that  the
    Respondent make a fresh decision sooner rather than later.









DECISION

10. The matter of Syed Emad Ahmed's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent to refuse him leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  be
    remitted to the Respondent for the Respondent  to  review  and  make  a
    fresh decision.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

