
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/06221/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 November 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                         WILLIAM CHARLES ANTI-TAYLOR
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W. Akahu of BWI Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  11  January
    2014 to refuse to issue him  with  a  residence  card  recognising  his
    claimed right of residence as the family member of an EEA national.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 27 January 2015.  The  judge  heard  evidence
    from the appellant and his partner but did not find them to be reliable
    witnesses because they gave conflicting accounts  of  events.  He  gave
    reasons for  concluding  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  produce
    sufficiently reliable evidence to show that the customary marriage that
    took place by proxy in Ghana was a valid marriage for  the  purpose  of
    The Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA
    Regulations 2006").  In the alternative, he also gave  reasons  why  he
    concluded that there was insufficiently reliable evidence to show  that
    the appellant was in a  durable  relationship  with  the  EEA  national
    sponsor.

3.    The original  grounds  of  appeal  were  settled  by  the  appellant's
    previous legal representatives. It is fair to describe them  as  rather
    rambling and confused.  The  main  errors  alleged  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision are not particularised in a clear or coherent manner.
    At the hearing Mr Akahu extracted the following grounds of appeal:

    (i)    The First-tier  Tribunal  misapplied  the  law  in  relation  to
         Ghanaian customary  marriage  (including  the  application  of  the
         principles outlined in Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU  law)  Nigeria
         [2014] UKUT 00024).

    (ii)   The First-tier Tribunal erred in suggesting that  documents  may
         have  been  fraudulently  obtained  in  the  absence  of  any  such
         allegation made by the respondent [31].

    (iii)  The First-tier Tribunal erred in apparently requiring a two year
         period of residence in order to establish a 'durable  relationship'
         for the purpose of the  EEA  Regulations  2006  [37]:  Dauhoo  (EEA
         Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79 and  YB  (EEA  reg  17(4)  -
         proper approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062 referred.

    (iv)   The First-tier Tribunal erred in taking into  account  the  fact
         that the appellant had overstayed [51].

Decision and reasons

4.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and oral arguments I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

5.    I shall deal with the third ground first. No  specific  challenge  was
    raised in those terms in  the  original  grounds  of  appeal  save  for
    general assertions made at paragraph 50  of  the  original  grounds  of
    appeal that there was "overwhelming  evidence  pointing  to  a  durable
    relationship". The grounds did not particularise any  meaningful  error
    of law and amounted to no more than a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
    adverse credibility findings.

6.    Mr Akahu did his best to formulate a legal  challenge  with  reference
    to the decisions in Dauhoo and YB (Ivory  Coast).  In  light  of  those
    decisions he is correct to point out that there is no requirement under
    EU law for a couple to co-habit for a period of two years before  their
    relationship is  considered  'durable'  for  the  purpose  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006. However, a proper reading of the impugned part of the
    decision shows  that  the  judge  was  simply  referring  to  what  the
    respondent had said in her reasons for refusal letter  [37].  There  is
    nothing to indicate that the judge applied this as  a  requirement.  He
    gave clear and adequate reasons for rejecting the  credibility  of  the
    evidence given by the witnesses [39-49] and concluded  that  there  was
    very little other evidence produced to show to the required standard of
    proof that they were likely to be in a genuine and durable relationship
    [54-60]. No meaningful challenge has been made to those findings, which
    were open to the judge to make after having  considered  the  oral  and
    documentary evidence.

7.    In view of the fact that there  is  no  successful  challenge  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal's findings relating to the genuine  nature  of  the
    relationship it is difficult to see how  any  criticism  of  his  other
    findings, even if correct, could be material to the overall outcome  of
    the appeal. I will  nevertheless  briefly  address  the  arguments  put
    forward.

8.    It is quite clear that the  judge  dealt  with  the  further  evidence
    produced by the appellant from the Belgian embassy in Ivory Coast  with
    reference to the principles outlined by the  Tribunal  in  Kareem.  The
    judge outlined the extent of the evidence produced by the appellant and
    noted that the original document was not produced and the signature not
    certified. He noted that the letter stated that "this legalisation does
    not certify the content of the document" [38]. The  judge  went  on  to
    observe that there was nothing from the Belgian embassy  to  show  that
    they had seen the original documents relating to the marriage [53].  In
    view of the very limited  nature  of  the  evidence  from  the  Belgian
    embassy in Abidjan it was open to the judge to conclude that there  was
    insufficient evidence to show that Belgian  law  recognised  the  proxy
    marriage as a valid marriage for the purpose  of  the  EEA  Regulations
    2006 [51].

9.    In light of those  findings  it  is  immaterial  whether  the  judge's
    findings relating to the requirements of  Ghanaian  customary  law  had
    been met were correct or not because the appellant  failed  to  produce
    sufficient evidence to show that the marriage was also recognised under
    Belgian law. The judge did not make  any  clear  findings  relating  to
    forgery but merely took into account background evidence referred to in
    the Country of Origin Information report  for  Ghana,  which  indicated
    that forged and fraudulent documents could be obtained in  Ghana  [31].
    He took that evidence into account as part of his overall assessment of
    the reliability of the documents produced in support of the appellant's
    claim to have contracted a  valid  customary  marriage  in  Ghana.  The
    judge's other findings  relating  to  those  documents  have  not  been
    challenged in any serious way and were open  to  him  to  make  on  the
    evidence.

10.   In  assessing  the  appellant's  credibility  and  whether  there  was
    sufficient evidence to show that he was likely to be in a  genuine  and
    durable relationship it was also open to the judge to take into account
    the appellant's immigration history, which indicated that he  may  have
    contracted the marriage in an attempt to remain in the UK. This  was  a
    material consideration that he  was  entitled  to  take  into  account.
    Although Mr Akahu mentioned it at the beginning of his submissions  the
    point was not developed in any meaningful way and does not disclose  an
    error of law.

11.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of a material error on a  point  of
    law. The decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed      [pic]      Date  22 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

