
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06136/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 December 2014                         |On 12 December 2014            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                     mrs Roseline Amaka Obiajulum Uwaeme
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Vanas, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are cross-appeals by the appellant, a Nigerian citizen,  and  the
    respondent against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Thanki (promulgated on 19 September 2014) who dismissed the appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules but allowed her appeal under Article
    8 ECHR.  The appellant entered the UK in 2008 with entry  clearance  as
    the dependent wife of her husband who at that time had limited leave to
    remain.  Her husband, who is also a citizen  of  Nigeria,  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on 11 September 2013 on  the  basis  of  his
    lawful residence in the UK for more than ten  years.   The  genuineness
    and subsistence of the marriage is not in issue.

2.   In his determination, the judge found  that  the  appellant  could  not
    meet the provisions of paragraph 319E of the Immigration Rules  because
    the appellant's husband was no longer a points-based system migrant (as
    he was when she entered the UK in 2008).  Nor could she meet the  human
    rights provisions of the Immigration Rules under paragraph 276ADE.   He
    found, however, that the appellant must succeed under Article 8 outside
    the Rules for the reasons  set  out  at  paragraphs  21  -  29  of  his
    determination.  He found that it would be disproportionate in  all  the
    circumstances of her case for her to be required to leave the  UK  when
    her husband had been granted indefinite leave.   The  judge  noted,  at
    paragraph 27, that:

         "The appellant and her husband are both lawfully  employed  in  the
         National Health Service and have an impeccable immigration history.
          The appellant and her husband pay national  insurance  and  income
         tax and add to the economic well being of the country".

3.   The grounds submitted by the Secretary of State refer to the  cases  of
    Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and  argued
    that there are no insurmountable obstacles to both  the  appellant  and
    her husband  relocating  to  Nigeria  to  continue  their  family  life
    together.  Nor were there any exceptional circumstances which warranted
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge considering the Article 8  claim  outside
    the Rules.

4.   At the commencement of the  appeal  hearing  before  me  Mr  Vanas,  on
    behalf of the appellant, confirmed his instructions that if I  were  to
    uphold the decision of the judge under  Article  8,  his  client  would
    withdraw her cross-appeal which argued that she would, in any event, be
    entitled to remain  as  a  spouse/partner  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

5.   In making his submissions, Mr Avery  acknowledged  that  case  law  had
    moved on since the Secretary of State's grounds were submitted  and  he
    noted, in particular, the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Gill in  the
    case of Oludoyi [2014] UKUT 00539 which had  been  handed  down  on  29
    October 2014.  He acknowledged that there is  no  longer  any  test  or
    hurdle which the appellant must go through before an Article  8  claim,
    outside the Rules, is considered but that an appellant must still  show
    special  circumstances  before  an  Article  8  claim  can  succeed  on
    proportionality.

6.   In reply, Mr Vanas argued that the  judge  had  correctly  applied  the
    proportionality test.  He noted that the appellant had  obtained  entry
    clearance and has been in the UK entirely lawfully for some  six  years
    as her husband's dependant.  The House of Lords decision  in  Chikwamba
    applies: there is no purpose in her going  back  to  Nigeria  to  claim
    entry clearance just because her husband's status in the  UK  has  been
    upgraded  to  ILR.   Neither  she  nor  her  husband  has  any  adverse
    immigration history.  They are both working in the UK and  contributing
    to the society here.

7.   Having reviewed in its entirety the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal I am satisfied that there was no error of law in  relation  to
    Article 8 outside the Rules such that the determination should  be  set
    aside.  Although the judge gave only brief reasons in  connection  with
    proportionality I am entirely satisfied that there would be no  purpose
    in a rehearing of the Article 8 claims because, having  regard  to  the
    personal circumstances of both the appellant and her husband, the  fact
    that he now has ILR and they have both been in the UK together for more
    than 6 years (the appellant's husband for more than 10 years) any fresh
    Article 8 claim is bound to succeed.  Following Chikwamba, there can be
    no justification in the appellant being required to return  to  Nigeria
    to make a new application for entry clearance.

8.   The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is accordingly upheld.   I
    record that the appellant has withdrawn her cross-appeal.

Notice of Decision

There was no error of law in the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
and that determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction has been requested and none is made.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
11 December 2014
