

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06109/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd January 2015                          |On 29th January 2015         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                              MRS MARIAM AKTHER
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Hussain (Trent Chambers)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Parker promulgated  on  18th  July  2014  by  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    her leave to remain.  Permission was granted by an Upper Tribunal Judge
    on the basis that the Judge may have made an error of law  in  that  he
    may have failed to take into account the fact that the other members of
    the family unit had been granted Indefinite Leave  to  Remain  and  the
    youngest child was only 2 years of age.   He  had  concluded  that  the
    Appellant mother could return to Bangladesh until she  qualified  under
    the Rules.

2.   Judge Parker considered the appeal on the basis that the Appellant  had
    applied for Indefinite Leave to Remain, which she could not  obtain  as
    she had failed to pass the "Life in the UK" test.  However  before  me,
    on closer examination it  became  clear  that  he  had  considered  the
    application on entirely the wrong basis and  indeed  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was unclear and appeared to have also failed to engage
    with the nature of the application.

3.   The Appellant had leave as the spouse of a work permit holder when  she
    made her application to remain. Her  husband  had  entered  the  UK  in
    December 2012 on his own.  His  wife,  the  Appellant  and  the  eldest
    child, now aged 7 entered as his dependants  in  September  2011.   The
    youngest child was born in the UK and  is  a  British  citizen  as  her
    father now has Indefinite Leave to Remain.

4.   The Appellant could not qualify for Indefinite Leave to Remain  without
    the "Life in  the  UK  "test  but  her  application  should  have  been
    considered on the basis that it was an application for further leave to
    remain as a spouse.  She had passed, and submitted to the Secretary  of
    State, a certificate that she had passed an English  language  test  to
    the required level for leave to remain on that  basis.   That  was  the
    only issue in the case. All of the other requirements were met.

5.   Mr McVeety asked for time to check  the  situation  and  then  conceded
    that the Appellant met all of the requirements of Appendix FM for leave
    to remain as a partner and was  thus  entitled  to  succeed  under  the
    Rules.

6.   Accordingly I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error  of
    law in deciding the appeal  on  the  wrong  basis  and  in  failing  to
    consider whether the Appellant met the requirements of the  Rules.   He
    may also have erred in his consideration of Article 8  but  given  that
    the Appellant succeeds under the Rules I need not consider that.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal having made a  material  error  of  law  I  set
    aside the decision and in re-deciding the appeal I allow it  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

8.   The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.



Signed        Dated 27th January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
