

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/06990/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  25 October 2013 and                       |On 14 April 2014             |
|11 March 2014                                 |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                               ASHFAQ ALI SHAH


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Aslam (11 March 2014) and Ms C Hulse (25
October 2013)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards (11 March 2014) and Mr K Hibbs (25
October 2013),   Home Office Presenting Officers

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Background

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 12 April  1978.
      He arrived in the United Kingdom  on  28  November  2000  and  claimed
      asylum.  His application was refused and subsequent appeal  dismissed.
      On 29 May 2007, he applied for a residence card under the  Immigration
      (EEA  Regulations)  2006  (SI  2006/1003)  (hereafter  the  "2006  EEA
      Regulations") which was granted for a period of 5 years valid until 28
      June 2012.  That was granted on the basis  that  he  was  an  extended
      family  member  under  reg  8(5)  because  he  was   in   a   "durable
      relationship" with an EEA national, namely Yoanna  Ivanova  Neykova  a
      national of Bulgaria.

   2. On 18 June 2012, the appellant applied for  further  leave  to  remain
      outside the Rules.  By this time his relationship with Ms Neykova  had
      broken down.  That application was refused by the Secretary  of  State
      on 24 September 2012 and a decision to remove him under  s.47  of  the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006  was  made  on  the  same
      date.  The appellant's subsequent appeal against the decision refusing
      to extend his leave was dismissed in reliance upon Article 8  but  the
      Judge allowed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  removal  decision
      under s.47 of the 2006 Act on the basis that it was not in  accordance
      with the law.  Thereafter, on 19 February 2013, the Secretary of State
      made a decision to remove the appellant as an overstayer under s.10 of
      the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

   3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
      heard by Judge Troup on 12 June 2013.  At that hearing, the  appellant
      no longer relied upon Article 8 or the Immigration Rules.  Instead, he
      relied upon the 2006 EEA  Regulations.   He  claimed  that  he  had  a
      permanent right of residence under reg 15 of the 2006 EEA  Regulations
      by virtue of his relationship with Ms Neykova for five  years  between
      2005 and 2010 when it broke down.

   4. Judge Troup found that the appellant could not establish that he had a
      permanent right of residence.  The  Judge  did  not  accept  that  the
      appellant had retained a right  of  residence  as  the  former  family
      member of an EEA national following the breakdown of his  relationship
      with Ms Neykova in 2010 because their Islamic marriage  in  2005  (and
      Islamic divorce on 13 September 2010) was not a marriage recognised by
      English law falling  within  reg  10  of  the  2006  EEA  Regulations.
      Further, looking at their relationship on the  basis  that  it  was  a
      "durable" one, Judge Troup concluded  that  the  appellant  could  not
      succeed in showing that he had been a family member of an EEA national
      for a continuous period of 5 years within reg 15(1)(b) of the 2006 EEA
      Regulations because he had ceased to be a "family member"  when  their
      relationship had broken down prior to making the application  for  the
      residence card.

   5. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  again  relying  upon  the
      appellant having retained a right of  residence  which,  applying  reg
      15(1)(f), resulted in him having resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
      accordance with the Regulations for a continuous period of five  years
      at the end of which he was a family member with a  retained  right  of
      residence.

   6. On 22 July 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (DJ  Woodcraft)  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal on that ground.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   7. The appeal first came before me on 25 October 2013.  At that  hearing,
      both of the (then) representatives made a number of submissions to me.
       The focus of the appellant's case changed during the  course  of  the
      hearing back to rely upon the five year period between  February  2005
      (when the appellant claims his relationship began) and June 2010  when
      the relationship broke down.

   8. The appellant's case was that that represented a five year  period  of
      continuous residence in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  the  2006  EEA
      Regulations as a family member of an EEA national.  During the  course
      of his submissions, the (then)  representative  of  the  Secretary  of
      State raised for the first time the issue of whether the Tribunal  had
      jurisdiction  to  consider  the  appellant's  claim  under   the   EEA
      Regulations.  Given that the matter was raised so late in  the  appeal
      process, I  adjourned  the  hearing  in  order  that  the  appellant's
      representative should have a proper opportunity to consider the issue.
        The date for the resumed hearing on 19 December 2013 was vacated.

   9. However, the respondent's (then) representative submitted  a  skeleton
      argument to the Upper  Tribunal  indicating  that  the  respondent  no
      longer sought to argue that the Tribunal had no  jurisdiction  on  the
      basis that there was no in-country  right  of  appeal.   Instead,  the
      respondent's submission was that the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
      requirements of reg 15(1)(b) because he could not demonstrate that  he
      had been living in the UK  for  five  years  in  accordance  with  the
      Regulations since his partner was a Bulgarian  national  and  Bulgaria
      had not joined the EU until January 2007.  He could,  therefore,  only
      show a period of some three years and five months between January 2007
      and June 2010 which was less then the required five  years'  residence
      in accordance with the Regulations in reg 15(1)(b).

  10. In response  to  those  submissions,  which  were  also  sent  to  the
      appellant's representatives, I sent the  parties  notification  on  15
      January 2014 that, in the light of those submissions, subject  to  any
      further written representation by the parties, I proposed to determine
      the appeal without a hearing under Rule 24 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and to dismiss the appeal.

  11. In response, the appellant's  representatives,  Qualified  Immigration
      Services wrote to the Tribunal on 27 January  2014  arguing  that  the
      respondent's submissions were wrong.  Relying  on  the  Grand  Chamber
      decision of the CJEC in Ziolkowski (C-424/10) and Szeja (C-425/10) (21
      December 2011),  it  was  submitted  that  pre-succession  periods  of
      residence could be taken into account providing that  that  period  of
      residence was in accordance with  the  requirements  of  the  Citizens
      Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC).  Accumulating the periods of
      residence in the UK with the  appellant's  partner  before  and  after
      January 2007,  it  was  submitted  that  the  appellant  could  indeed
      demonstrate a period of residence of five years in accordance with the
      Directive.

  12. As a result of those further submissions, I concluded that it was  not
      appropriate to determine the appeal without a hearing and  the  appeal
      was subsequently listed before me on 11 March 2014.  At that  hearing,
      Mr Richards, who now represented the Secretary of State confirmed that
      he did not rely upon any jurisdictional point.  He  also  acknowledged
      the effect of Ziolkowski and Szeja that the appellant could accumulate
      a  period  of  residence  with  his  partner  from  before  Bulgaria's
      accession to the EU in January 2007 with periods  of  residence  after
      that date.

  13. The substance of the submissions by both representatives  was  whether
      that five year period of residence satisfied the requirements  in  reg
      15(1)(b).  Putting the issue in a nutshell, that provision applies  to
      a "family member" of an  EEA  national.   The  appellant's  basis  for
      remaining in the UK was as a "extended family member" under  reg  8(5)
      on the basis of his "durable relationship".  Only when he  was  issued
      with a residence card in June 2007 did he become a "family member"  by
      virtue of reg 7(3).  Ms Aslam, who represented the appellant submitted
      that reg 15(1)(b) should be applied to residence  by  both  a  "family
      member" and also an "extended  family  member".   She  submitted  that
      otherwise there  would  be  discrimination  against  "extended  family
      members" in their acquisition of a permanent right of  residence.   In
      support of her submission that  a  distinction  should  not  be  drawn
      between married and unmarried couples Ms Aslam referred me to the  ECJ
      cases of Reed v The Netherlands (Case 59/85) [1986] ECR 1283 and Kus v
       Landeshauptsadt (Case C-327/91)  [1992]  ECR  I-6781.   She  did  not
      elaborate further on those cases.

  14.  On  behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr  Richards  indicated  that   his
      instructions were that the five year period of continuous residence in
      accordance with the 2006 EEA Regulations could only apply to residence
      as a  "family  member"  falling  within  reg  7  and,  therefore,  the
      appellant could only establish that from June  2007  until  June  2010
      when the relationship broke down.  However,  Mr  Richards  tentatively
      submitted that it might be possible to construe  reg  15(1)(b)  so  it
      applied providing that at the end of the five year period (though  not
      necessarily throughout  the  period)  the  individual  was  a  "family
      member" and that his total period of residence was "in accordance" the
      2006 EEA Regulations.

  15. Before turning to the relevant legislative provision,  there  are  two
      matters that I should mention.  First, on 17 April 2013 the  appellant
      made a separate application for a permanent residence card  under  the
      2006 EEA Regulations.  At the time of the initial hearing  before  me,
      that application was outstanding.  However, on 14 November  2013,  the
      respondent  refused  the  appellant's  application  for  a   permanent
      residence card and I was told by Ms Aslam that he has appealed against
      that decision which  is  listed  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
      Newport on 15 July 2014.   That appeal will, in  substance,  determine
      the very same issues that I have to decide in  this  appeal.   Neither
      party, however, indicated that  they  did  not  wish  this  appeal  to
      continue.  Secondly, both representatives accepted that if I found  in
      favour of the appellant on the interpretation  of  reg15(1)(b),  Judge
      Troup had not made any findings as to whether the appellant's  partner
      was, in fact, exercising Treaty  rights  over  the  five  year  period
      relied upon.  It was accepted that an evidential hearing was necessary
      and that, as a  matter  of  practical  sense,  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  together  with  the
      appellant's appeal listed before the First-tier Tribunal  on  15  July
      2014.

Discussion

  16. Article  16.1  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  (the  "Citizens  Directive")
      provides for the permanent right of residence of EU citizens.  Article
      16.2 provides for a permanent right of residence for "family  members"
      in the following circumstances:

           "Paragraph 1 shall apply also to  family  members  who  are  not
           nationals of a Member State and have legally  resided  with  the
           Union Citizen in the host Member State for a  continuous  period
           of five years."

  17. That provision is transposed into UK law in reg 15(1)(b) of  the  2006
      EEA Regulations which provides as follows:

           "15(1)      The following persons shall  acquire  the  right  to
                 reside in the United Kingdom permanently -

                 ...(b)      a family member of an EEA national who  is  not
                       himself an EEA national but who has  resided  in  the
                       United Kingdom with the EEA  national  in  accordance
                       with these Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of
                       five years".

  18. The definition of family member is set  out  in  Article  2.2  of  the
      Citizens Directive and in reg 7 of the 2006 EEA  Regulations.   It  is
      not necessary to set out the general definition of "family members" as
      it is not suggested that the  appellant  falls  within  one  of  these
      categories, such as a spouse or civil partner.

  19. Instead, the appellant rested his right to remain in  the  UK  on  the
      basis that he was a person who fell with Article 3.2 of  the  Citizens
      Directive and reg 8(5) of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

  20. Article 3.2 of the Citizens Directive states that:

           "Without prejudice to any right to free movement  and  residence
           the persons concerned may have in  their  own  right,  the  host
           Member State shall, in  accordance  with  national  legislation,
           facilitate entry and residence for the following persons:

                 (a)  any  other  family  members,  irrespective  of   their
                 nationality, not falling under the definition in point 2 of
                 Article 2 who, in the country from which  they  have  come,
                 are dependants or members of the  household  of  the  Union
                 citizen having the primary right  of  residence,  or  where
                 serious health grounds strictly require the  personal  care
                 of the family member by the Union citizen;

                 (b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has  a  durable
                 relationship, duly attested.
                 The host Member State shall undertake an extensive
                 examination of the personal circumstances and shall justify
                 any denial of entry or residence to these people."

  21. Reg 8(5) provides that an "extended family member" for the purposes of
      the 2006 Regulations includes:

           "A person [who] is the partner of an EEA national (other than  a
           civil partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he is in
           a durable relationship with the EEA national."

  22. On that basis, the appellant was not a "family member" of his  partner
      at least until he was issued with a residence card in June 2007.   The
      latter is because of the effect of reg 7(3) which provides that:

           "Subject to paragraph (4), a person who is  an  extended  family
           member and  has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  family  permit,  a
           registration certificate or a residence card shall be treated as
           the family member of the relevant EEA national for as long as he
           continues to satisfy the conditions in Regulation 8(2), (3), (4)
           or (5)  in  relation  to  that  EEA  national  and  the  permit,
           certificate or card does not cease to be valid or be revoked."

  23. It follows that when the appellant was issued with a residence card in
      June 2007, the effect of reg 7(3) was that he was "treated as a family
      member" of his partner.  Prior to that, however, he was not a  "family
      member" but rather was only an "extended family member".

  24. As I have said, it  is  accepted  by  both  representatives  that  the
      decisions of the CJEC in Ziolkowski and Szeja require that periods  of
      residence  before  January  2007  when  Bulgaria   (the   country   of
      nationality of the appellant's partner) became part of the  EU  should
      be treated in the same manner as periods of residence thereafter.

  25. The issue in  this  appeal  is,  therefore,  whether  the  appellant's
      residence between June 2005 and  June  2007  as  an  "extended  family
      member" of his partner was residence "in accordance with" the 2006 EEA
      Regulations?

  26. The difficulty with that submission for the appellant is that the 2006
      EEA Regulations do not  provide  for  a  right  of  residence  for  an
      extended family member.  Whilst reg 8 defines  what  is  an  "extended
      family member", the  only  rights  of  residence  are  conferred  upon
      "family members" under reg 13(2) (the initial right of residence)  and
      reg 14(2) (the extended right of residence).  The 2006 EEA Regulations
      do not confer upon an extended family member  a  right  of  residence.
      The Regulations do provide for the issue of an EEA family permit to an
      extended family member in certain circumstances so as to  allow  entry
      to the UK, but by virtue of reg 7(3) once that family permit is issued
      to that individual he is then treated as a "family member" of the  EEA
      national in any event.  All that the Regulations appear to  permit  in
      relation to extended family members is that they have  an  opportunity
      to apply for a residence  card  under  reg  17(4)  which  provides  as
      follows:

           "The Secretary of  State  may  issue  a  residence  card  to  an
           extended family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who is
           not an EEA national on application if -

                  a) the relevant EEA national in relation to the  extended
                     family  member  is  a  qualified  person  or  an   EEA
                     national with a permanent  right  of  residence  under
                     regulation 15; and

                  b) in all the circumstances it appears to  the  Secretary
                     of State appropriate to issue the residence card."

  27. Regulation 17(5) goes on to provide that:

           "Where the Secretary of  State  receives  an  application  under
           paragraph (4) he shall undertake an extensive examination of the
           personal circumstances of the applicant and if  he  refuses  the
           application shall give reasons  justifying  the  refusal  unless
           this is contrary to the interests of national security."

  28. Consequently, the scheme of the 2006 EEA Regulations  is  that  whilst
      recognising  categories  of  individuals  who  are  "extended   family
      members",  the  Regulations  give  no  rights  of  residence  to  such
      individuals unless and until they make an  application  for,  and  are
      granted, a family permit (if seeking to enter the UK) or  a  residence
      card (if already in the UK).  Only, therefore, after an individual has
      established that they  fall  within  the  relevant  definition  of  an
      "extended family  member"  and  has  been  issued  with  the  relevant
      documentation do they acquire a right of residence under the 2006  EEA
      Regulations because they are then treated as a "family member" of  the
      EEA national and their rights of residence are indistinguishable  from
      individuals who fall within the defined categories of "family members"
      such as spouses.

  29. Ms Aslam referred me to the cases of Reed and Kus.  She did so for the
      general proposition  that  the  CJEC  did  not  permit  discrimination
      between the rights of spouses and cohabiting partners.  I did not have
      the advantage of  any  submissions  on  the  substance  of  these  two
      decisions.  In Reed, the ECJ rejected the  argument  put  to  it  that
      unmarried cohabiting partners should be treated as within the scope of
      the term "spouse" in EU law.  Likewise, the Court held that  it  would
      be discriminatory to allow a Member State's own  national's  residence
      permits for their cohabiting partners but to refuse to grant the  same
      advantage to EU nationals exercising Treaty rights.  In large measure,
      the position of unmarried partners has been rectified by the  Citizens
      Directive.  In the absence of any submission to the contrary, I do not
      see how the Directive and the 2006 EEA  Regulations  are  inconsistent
      with EU law as recognised by the Court in  Reed.   Kus  concerned  the
      Ankara Agreement.  In  the  absence  of  supporting  submissions,  its
      immediate relevance is not readily apparent.

  30. Can the appellant rely upon the  Citizens  Directive  to  establish  a
      right of residence under Art 3.2?

  31. The scheme of the 2006 EEA Regulations is entirely consistent with the
      Citizens Directive.  The Citizens Directive  only  confers  rights  of
      residence upon "family members" as defined in Article 2.2.  As regards
      "other family members" (Art 3.2(a))  and  those  in  a  duly  attested
      durable relationship (Art 3.2(b)), Article 3.2 only requires that host
      Member States shall "in  accordance  with  its  national  legislation,
      facilitate entry and residence" for those individuals, for  example  a
      partner of a  EU citizen in  a  durable  relationship  (my  emphasis).
      Further, nothing in the Citizens Directive  allows  for  anyone  other
      than a "family member" to acquire a permanent right of residence under
      Article 16.2.

  32. Thus, both the 2006 EEA Regulations and the Citizens Directive draw  a
      clear distinction between  "'extended  family  members'/'other  family
      members' + 'durable relationships'" and "family members".   Rights  of
      entry and residence are only directly conferred upon the latter.

  33. The distinction between the two categories of individual is  reflected
      in the CJEC's case law.  The CJEC considered the  respective  position
      of "family members" and "other family members" in SSHD v Rahman  (Case
      C-83/11) [2013] QB 249.  The pertinent part is  contained  within  the
      CJEC's answer to the first two questions posed to it, namely:



         (1)     Does Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38  require  a  Member
             State to make legislative provision  to  facilitate  entry  to
             and/or residence in a Member  State  to  the  class  of  other
             family members who are not nationals of the European Union who
             can meet the requirements of Article 10(2) of that directive?

         (2)      Can such other family member referred to  in  Question  1
             rely on the direct applicability of Article 3(2) of  Directive
             2004/38  in  the  event  that  he  cannot  comply   with   any
             requirements imposed by national legislative provisions?


  34. At [18]-[26], the CJEC said this:

           "18      With regard to the first and second questions, which it
           is appropriate to examine together, it should be pointed out  at
           the outset that Directive 2004/38 does  not  oblige  the  Member
           States  to  grant  every  application  for  entry  or  residence
           submitted by persons who show that they are family  members  who
           are 'dependants' of a  Union  citizen,  within  the  meaning  of
           Article 3(2)(a) of that directive.

           19      As contended by the governments  which  have  submitted
           observations to the Court and by  the  European  Commission,  it
           follows both from the  wording  of  Article 3(2)  of  Directive
           2004/38 and from the general system of the  directive  that  the
           European legislature has drawn a  distinction  between  a  Union
           citizen's family members as defined in Article 2(2) of Directive
           2004/38, who enjoy, as provided for in the directive, a right of
           entry into and residence in that citizen's  host  Member  State,
           and the other family members envisaged in Article  3(2)  of  the
           directive, whose entry and residence has only to be  facilitated
           by that Member State.

           20      That interpretation is borne out by recital  6  in  the
           preamble to Directive 2004/38, which states that, 'in  order  to
           maintain the unity of the family in a  broader  sense  ...,  the
           situation  of  those  persons  who  are  not  included  in   the
           definition of family  members  under  this  Directive,  and  who
           therefore do not enjoy an automatic right of entry and residence
           in the host Member State, should be examined by the host  Member
           State on the basis of its own national legislation, in order  to
           decide whether entry and residence  could  be  granted  to  such
           persons, taking into consideration their relationship  with  the
           Union  citizen  or  any  other  circumstances,  such  as   their
           financial or physical dependence on the Union citizen'.

           21      Whilst it is therefore apparent that  Article  3(2)  of
           Directive 2004/38 does not oblige the Member States to accord  a
           right of entry and residence to persons who are family  members,
           in the broad sense, dependent  on  a  Union  citizen,  the  fact
           remains,  as  is  clear  from  the  use  of  the  words   'shall
           facilitate' in Article 3(2),  that  that  provision  imposes  an
           obligation on the Member States to confer a  certain  advantage,
           compared with applications for  entry  and  residence  of  other
           nationals of third States, on applications submitted by  persons
           who have a relationship of particular dependence  with  a  Union
           citizen.

           22      In order to meet that  obligation,  the  Member  States
           must, in accordance with the second subparagraph of Article 3(2)
           of Directive 2004/38, make it possible for persons envisaged  in
           the first subparagraph of Article 3(2) to obtain a  decision  on
           their application that is founded on an extensive examination of
           their personal circumstances and, in the event  of  refusal,  is
           justified by reasons.

           23      As is clear from recital 6 in the preamble to Directive
           2004/38, it is incumbent  upon  the  competent  authority,  when
           undertaking  that  examination  of  the   applicant's   personal
           circumstances, to take account of the various factors  that  may
           be relevant in the  particular  case,  such  as  the  extent  of
           economic or physical dependence and the degree  of  relationship
           between the family member and the Union citizen whom  he  wishes
           to accompany or join.

           24      In the light both of the absence of more specific rules
           in Directive 2004/38 and of the use of the words 'in  accordance
           with its national legislation' in Article 3(2) of the directive,
           each Member State has a wide discretion as regards the selection
           of the factors to be taken into account. None the less, the host
           Member State must ensure that its legislation contains  criteria
           which are  consistent  with  the  normal  meaning  of  the  term
           'facilitate' and of the words relating  to  dependence  used  in
           Article 3(2), and which do not deprive  that  provision  of  its
           effectiveness.

           25      Finally, even though, as  the  governments  which  have
           submitted observations have correctly observed, the wording used
           in Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38 is not sufficiently precise
           to enable an applicant for entry or residence to  rely  directly
           on that provision in order to invoke criteria  which  should  in
           his view be applied when assessing  his  application,  the  fact
           remains that such an applicant is entitled to a judicial  review
           of whether the national legislation  and  its  application  have
           remained within  the  limits  of  the  discretion  set  by  that
           directive (see, by analogy, Case C-72/95 Kraaijeveld and  Others
           [1996] ECR I-5403, paragraph 56; Case C-127/02  Waddenvereniging
           and Vogelbeschermingsvereniging [2004] ECR I-7405, paragraph 66;
           and Joined Cases C-165/09 to C-167/09 Stichting Natuur en Milieu
           and Others [2011] ECR I-0000, paragraphs 100 to 103).

           26      In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the  first
           and  the  second  question  referred  is  that,  on   a   proper
           construction of Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38:

           -        the Member States are  not  required  to  grant  every
           application for entry or residence submitted by  family  members
           of a Union citizen who do  not  fall  under  the  definition  in
           Article 2(2) of that directive, even if they show, in accordance
           with Article 10(2) thereof, that they  are  dependants  of  that
           citizen;

           -        it is, however, incumbent upon the  Member  States  to
           ensure that their legislation  contains  criteria  which  enable
           those persons to obtain a  decision  on  their  application  for
           entry and residence that is founded on an extensive  examination
           of their personal circumstances and, in the event of refusal, is
           justified by reasons;

           -      the Member States have a wide discretion when  selecting
           those criteria, but the criteria must  be  consistent  with  the
           normal meaning  of  the  term  'facilitate'  and  of  the  words
           relating to dependence used in Article 3(2) and must not deprive
           that provision of its effectiveness; and

           -      every applicant is entitled  to  a  judicial  review  of
           whether the national legislation  and  its  application  satisfy
           those conditions.

  35. Thus, the CJEC acknowledges  that  the  Citizens  Directive  does  not
      create any automatic right of entry or residence  for  "'other  family
      members' + those in 'durable relationships'" unlike the position under
      the Directive for "family  members".   The  Citizens  Directive  does,
      however, place those "other" individuals in an  "advantaged"  position
      requiring the Member States to "facilitate" their entry and  residence
      and in consider any applications for entry of residence  to  undertake
      an "extensive  examination  of  the  personal  circumstances"  of  the
      individual.   The  Member  States  have  wide  discretion  in  setting
      criteria etc providing they do so consistent with  the  obligation  to
      "facilitate" entry and residence.

  36. Much the same approach was taken by the Court of Appeal in Oboh v SSHD
      [2013] EWCA Civ 1525.  The precise issue raised in that  case  is  not
      relevant in this appeal.  The approach of the Court to the  scope  and
      effect of Art 3.2 of the Citizens Directive is, however,  instructive.
      In that case it was argued that under the Citizens  Directive  (unlike
      the 2006 EEA  Regulations)  "extended  family  members"  only  had  to
      establish dependency in the UK and not also in the country from  which
      they had come contrary, on the face of it, to the plain wording of Art
      3.2(a) of the Directive.  Rejecting that argument, the Court of Appeal
      applied the ordinary meaning of the Citizens  Directive.   The  Court,
      citing Rahman, acknowledged the differences between the categories  of
      "'other family  members'  +  those  in  'durable  relationships'"  and
      "family members".  Beatson LJ (delivering the judgment of  the  Court)
      said this at [49]:

           "The protection conferred on other family  members  who  qualify
           under Article 3 is clearly much more restricted than the  rights
           conferred  on  family  members  under  Article  2.  Whereas  the
           Directive requires that the primary and individual right enjoyed
           by EU citizens to move and reside freely within the territory of
           Member States shall also be granted to family members as defined
           within Article 2(2), by contrast, in the case  of  other  family
           members who fall within the scope of Article 3(2), the Directive
           imposes an obligation on Member  States  to  "facilitate"  their
           "entry and residence". This obligation is then elaborated by the
           statement that the host Member State is  required  to  undertake
           "an extensive examination of the personal circumstances" and  to
           "justify any denial of entry  or  residence  to  these  people".
           While falling considerably short  of  the  automatic  rights  of
           entry and residence conferred on family  members,  these  rights
           are far from negligible and  confer  a  privileged  status  over
           other applicants for rights of entry and residence."

  37. At [56] Beatson LJ returned to the scope of Art  3.2.  and  reiterated
      the "advantage" that individuals falling within Art 3.2 had over other
      applicants but also that  the  latter  might  have  claims  to  reside
      outside the EU legislation:

           "....it is important not to lose sight of the nature of  Article
           3(2)  which  is  intended  to  lay  down  a  rule   of   general
           application. In our view it was not intended  to  make  detailed
           provision for individual cases. Furthermore, it  is  significant
           that  it  confers  on  persons  falling  within  the  identified
           category certain advantages in the pursuit of rights of entry or
           residence. Its application does not result  in  the  refusal  of
           such rights  to  individuals  who  fall  outside  the  preferred
           category. They are  able  to  make  their  applications  in  the
           ordinary course. In the  exceptional  cases  postulated  by  the
           appellants other legal principles will  come  into  play,  among
           them Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.
           Accordingly, we consider that  we  would  not  be  justified  in
           permitting such exceptional cases to set the limits  of  general
           application of Article 3(2)."

  38. The distinction between the rights of "extended  family  members"  and
      "family  members"  was  recognised  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Rose
      (Automatic Deportation - Exception 3) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00276 (IAC).
       That case concerned the automatic deportation provisions  of  the  UK
      Borders Act 2007 and, in particular, the application of "exception  3"
      in s.33(4) that:

           "The removal of a foreign criminal from the  United  Kingdom  in
           pursuance of a deportation order would breach the rights of  the
           foreign criminal under the EU treaties."

  39. That case, like this appeal, concerned an individual who claimed to be
      a "extended family member" on the basis of a durable relationship with
      an EEA national.  He had not been issued with a residence  card.   The
      Upper Tribunal concluded that exception 3 in s.33(5) did not apply  to
      the appellant as he did not fall within Article 27(1) of the  Citizens
      Directive which permitted the deportation of Union citizens and  their
      family members only on grounds of public policy,  public  security  or
      public health.  The Upper Tribunal rejected the argument that  Article
      27(1) reference to "family  members"  was  intended  to  cover  "other
      family members" falling within Article 3.2 of the Citizens  Directive.
      At [14]-[17] the Upper Tribunal said this:

           "14.  ...Does this exception apply to the appellant?  By  virtue
                 of s.2(1) of the European Communities Act 1972  as  amended
                 by the European Union (Amendment) Act 2008, the  expression
                 "Community treaties" [now amended to  read  "EU  treaties"]
                 encompasses  secondary  EU  legislation  which  of   course
                 includes 2004/38/EC (the "Citizens Directive").   In  turn,
                 Article 27(1) of the Directive, read  in  conjunction  with
                 recital 23 affords safeguards  against  expulsion  to  both
                 Union citizens and their  family  members.   Article  27(1)
                 states that "Subject to the  provisions  of  this  Chapter,
                 Member States may restrict  the  freedom  of  movement  and
                 residence of  Union  citizens  and  their  family  members,
                 irrespective of nationality, on grounds of  public  policy,
                 public security or public health..."Recital 23 states that:


                       "Expulsion of Union citizens and their family members
                       on grounds of public policy or public security  is  a
                       measure that can seriously harm persons  who,  having
                       availed  themselves  of  the  rights   and   freedoms
                       conferred  on  them  by  the  Treaty,   have   become
                       genuinely integrated into the host Member State.  The
                       scope for such measures should therefore  be  limited
                       in accordance with the principle  of  proportionality
                       to take account of the degree of integration  of  the
                       persons concerned, the length of their  residence  in
                       the host Member State, their age,  state  of  health,
                       family and economic  situation  and  the  links  with
                       their country of origin."

             15. But for the appellant to be able to avail himself  of  such
                 EU safeguards against expulsion he would need to show  that
                 he  qualified  as  a  "family  member"  for  Article   27.1
                 purposes.  In our view he cannot for two main reasons.

             16. As to the first reason we would accept that there  are  two
                 possible views.  It is at least arguable that  the  Article
                 27(1) safeguard against  expulsion  is  intended  to  cover
                 family members of all kinds including OFMs.  Whilst Article
                 2.2 would appear to specify that for the  purposes  of  the
                 Directive  generally  'family  member'  means  only   those
                 persons who come within Article 2.2 (and so not to  include
                 OFMs under Article 3.2(a)) there are other provisions which
                 appear to apply the term 'family member'  to  include  both
                 Article 2.2 family members  and  OFMs:  see  in  particular
                 Article  8(5),  which  concerns   issue   of   registration
                 certificates to family members and which at  8(5)(e)  deals
                 with "cases falling under Article 3(2)(a)); and  Article  8
                 (which deals with the issue of residence  cards  to  family
                 members and includes at  Article  10(2)(e)  provisions  for
                 cases falling under Article 3(2)(a)").

             17. The alternative view, which is the one we take, is that the
                 definition given of family member  in  Article  2.2  (which
                 does not extend to OFMs) is intended to  be  Directive-wide
                 since the definition set out in Article 2(2) is preceded by
                 the opening words "for the  purposes  of  this  Directive".
                 Recital 6 likewise refers to OFMs as "those persons who are
                 not included in the definition of family members under this
                 Directive".

  40. At [19], the Upper Tribunal concluded that the  2006  EEA  Regulations
      only provided the  same  level  of  protection  for  "extended  family
      members" when  they  had  been  issued  with  the  relevant  residence
      documentation and continued to satisfy the conditions under which that
      documentation had been issued.  That, of course, is the  provision  to
      which I have already  referred  in  reg  7(3).   At  [25],  the  Upper
      Tribunal acknowledged that:

           "The fact that the appellant is accordingly an "extended  family
           member" for the purposes of the 2006  Regulations  does  not  of
           itself alter his status in the UK.  That is because  in  respect
           of such persons the 2006 Regulations do not impose an obligation
           on the respondent to confirm that they are in the UK lawfully by
           means of issuing them with residence documentation."

  41. The Upper Tribunal went on to recognise that the  Secretary  of  State
      has a discretion under reg 17(4) whether to issue a residence document
      to an extended family member.

  42. The approach of the Upper Tribunal in Rose is entirely consistent with
      the view I have taken that under the 2006  EEA  Regulations  "extended
      family members" only acquire rights when  they  are  issued  with  the
      relevant documentation and then, by  virtue  of  reg  7(3),  they  are
      treated as if they were "family members".

  43. Consequently, the appellant only became a "family member" when he  was
      issued with a residence card in June 2007 and prior to that he was  as
      "extended family member".  I see nothing inconsistent with this scheme
      of the 2006 EEA Regulations and the Member  State's  obligation  under
      Art 3.2 to "facilitate" entry and residence.  The distinction  between
      the automatic rights of entry and residence for  "family  members"  is
      highlighted by the  "extensive  examination"  obligation  for  "'other
      family members' + those in 'durable relationships'"  set  out  in  Art
      3.2.  Art 3.2 invites, in effect, the scheme contemplated by the  2006
      EEA Regulations, namely  that  "'other  family  members'  +  those  in
      'durable  relationships'"  only  acquire  rights  if,   following   an
      "extensive examination", they establish they  satisfy  the  qualifying
      criteria.  Consequently, until such an individual does establish  that
      he or she meets the criteria in Art 3.2 (and the 2006 EEA Regulations)
      and is issued with a residence card (or family permit prior to entry),
      they remain 'extended family members' with, as yet, no right of  entry
      or residence.  Consequently, they would not be residing in the UK  "in
      accordance" with the  2006  EEA  Regulations  or  under  the  Citizens
      Directive

  44. It follows that the appellant cannot establish between June  2005  and
      June 2010 that he was resident in the UK "in accordance with [the 2006
      EEA]  Regulations  for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years".   His
      residence in accordance with the 2006 EEA Regulations  only  began  in
      June 2007 when he became a family member of an EEA national  following
      the issue of a  residence  card  to  him.   Even  if,  therefore,  the
      appellant could establish that his partner was  throughout  that  time
      exercising Treaty rights (or before  January  2007  was  doing  so  in
      effect before Bulgaria's accession), he cannot establish  a  permanent
      right of residence under reg 15(1)(b) of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

  45. That is sufficient  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's  claim  to  a
      permanent right of residence under EU law cannot succeed.

  46. Even if the appellant had been able to establish that he had  a  right
      of residence simply on the basis of being an  extended  family  member
      prior to June 2007, I do  not  accept  that  the  requirement  in  reg
      15(1)(b) would have been satisfied because, in  my  judgment,  because
      that requires that  he  was  at  all  times  residing  in  the  UK  in
      accordance with the 2006 EEA Regulations as a "family  member".  I  do
      not accept Mr Richards' cautious suggestion that reg  15(1)(b)  should
      be interpreted as applying to a person who at the end of the five year
      period is resident in accordance with the 2006 EEA  Regulations  as  a
      "family member" but has at other times during  the  five  year  period
      been resident in accordance with the Regulations on some other  basis.
      Regulation 15(1)(b) transposes Article 16.2 of the Citizens  Directive
      which  only  confers  rights  of  residence   on   "family   members".
      Regulation 15(1)(b) is,  in  my  judgment,  only  concerned  with  the
      acquisition of a permanent right of residence by a "family member" who
      has resided on that basis for five continuous years in accordance with
      the Regulations.  It is perhaps illuminating to contrast reg  15(1)(f)
      which appears expressly to contemplate the acquisition of a  permanent
      right of residence based upon  five  years'  continuous  residence  in
      accordance with  the  Regulations  where  the  legal  basis  for  that
      residence changed during the course of  the  five  years  because  the
      individual ceased to be a family member of a person through  death  or
      divorce but has "retained" that right under reg 10.

The Judge's Decision

  47. Turning now to the Judge's  decision  in  this  appeal.   The  Judge's
      conclusion in respect of reg 15(1)(b) is expressed at para 13  of  his
      determination as follows:

           "On the appellant's case the relationship with  Yoana  ended  in
           June 2010.  I note that  under  Regulation  7(3)  the  Appellant
           could only be treated as a Family Member for so long as  he  was
           "in a durable relationship with Yoana but, on his  evidence,  he
           ceased to be a Family Member three years ago in June  2010.   In
           those circumstances he is not a "Family Member" for the purposes
           of Regulation 15(i)(b).  Indeed, even if he had  been  a  Family
           Member of an EEA National as the  Regulation  requires,  he  had
           ceased to be so when he made his applications on  18  June  2012
           and on 17 April 2013, and thus did not qualify for  a  permanent
           right of residence."

  48. Whilst the Judge reached the right conclusion, his reasoning  was  not
      correct.  The appellant did not fail to  establish  that  he  met  the
      requirements of reg 15(1)(b) because he was not a "family member" when
      he made his application in June 2012  and  April  2013.   The  correct
      question was whether the appellant had shown between February 2005 and
      June 2010 (when his relationship  broke  down)  that  he  had  been  a
      "family member" for a continuous period of five years residing in  the
      UK as such in accordance with the  2006  EEA  Regulations.   That  the
      appellant could not do as he had  only  resided  in  the  UK  in  that
      capacity between June 2007 and June 2010 -  a  period  of  only  three
      years.

  49. Consequently, the Judge  erred  in  law  in  his  application  of  reg
      15(1)(b).  His decision is set aside.

  50. For the reasons I have given, I remake  the  decision  dismissing  the
      appellant's appeal.  The appellant has failed to establish that he has
      a permanent right of residence under the 2006 EEA Regulations  and  is
      entitled to a residence card confirming that right.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















