
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/06515/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 October 2016                        |On 17 October 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              TANVIR KHAN OMAR
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
                   Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Aslam, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 History of Appeal


   1. The Respondent, who was born  on  8  April  1989,  is  a  national  of
      Bangladesh. He entered the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
      Migrant on 2 September 2009 with leave  to  remain  until  31  January
      2013. His leave was subsequently extended in this same capacity  until
      24 June 2014.

   2. He married a British national on 2  September  2013  and  applied  for
      leave to remain as her spouse on 15  May  2014.  His  application  was
      refused on 30 January 2015 on the basis that he had used deception  to
      obtain leave to remain in the past. In  particular,  it  was  asserted
      that the test results for an English  test  organised  by  ETS  on  12
      December 2012 could not be authenticated. As a consequence,  he  could
      not meet all of the suitability requirements contained in Appendix  FM
      to the Immigration Rules and in particular, S.LTR.2.2((a).

   3. He appealed against this decision on 12 February 2015 and  his  appeal
      was allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Eldridge  in  a  decision
      promulgated on 28 April 2016 on the basis that the decision  taken  by
      the Appellant was not in  accordance  with  the  law.   The  Appellant
      applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on 12 May  2016
      and First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson granted her  permission
      to appeal on 14 September 2016.

Error of Law Hearing

   4. The preliminary point was raised in relation to  the  reason  for  the
      appeal before the First-tier Tribunal being initially adjourned  on  5
      January 2016. The notice of proceedings on my file, completed by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Keane stated that the Respondent had requested  an
      adjournment as the Appellant had served witness statements on  him  on
      the morning of the hearing and  that  this  was  the  reason  for  the
      adjournment. It was accepted that these witness  statements  were  the
      generic ones provided by the Appellant in relation to the  methodology
      used by ETS.


   5. I heard oral submissions by Ms Brocklesby-Weller,  on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant.  She  took  me  through  the  relevant  provisions  of  The
      Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement  NO.  3,  Transitional  and  Saving
      Provisions) Order 2014 ("the Commencement Order"). She also  submitted
      that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  also  failed  to  reach  any
      decision on the issues of deception and suitability.  She  noted  that
      this was because the First-tier Tribunal Judge took a point about  the
      legality of the decision to remove the Respondent which had  not  been
      raised by or with the parties at the appeal hearing.


   6. Ms Brocklesby-Weller also submitted that, if the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge decided that an issue arose about the lawfulness of the decision
      to remove the Respondent from the United Kingdom, the  hearing  should
      have been reconvened and the parties invited to address  him  on  this
      issue.


   7. In his oral submissions counsel for the Respondent submitted that  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge should have considered the substance of  the
      appeal and asserted that there was insufficient evidence to  establish
      that the Respondent had  used  deception.   He  also  agreed  with  Ms
      Brocklesby-Weller that  procedural  unfairness  had  occurred  in  the
      manner in  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  introduced  a  new
      argument relating to the  legality  of  the  decision  to  remove  the
      Respondent.

Decision

   8. I turn first to the substantive decision by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      Eldridge that there was no power in law to remove the Respondent  from
      the United Kingdom as a person  who  was  "unlawfully  in  the  United
      Kingdom".


   9. For the purposes article 1(1) of the Commencement Order, section 10 of
      the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 is a "saved provision". Article  9
      of the  Commencement  Order  then  states  that  "notwithstanding  the
      commencement of the relevant provisions, the saved provisions continue
      to have effect, and the relevant provisions do not have effect,  other
      than so far as they relate to the  persons  set  out  respectively  in
      articles 10 and 11, unless article 11(2) or (3)  applies.  Article  10
      refers to foreign national criminals  and  their  family  members  and
      article 11 refers to Tier 4 migrants and their dependents.


  10. As a consequence, at the date of decision the Appellant did  have  the
      power to decide to remove the Respondent under section 10(1)(b) of the
      Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999  on  the  basis  that  he  had  used
      deception in seeking (whether successfully or not)  leave  to  remain.
      This was the basis on which the IS.151A was served on the  Respondent.
      It was not the case that the removal had to be based  on  the  amended
      version of section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999,  which
      was not in force for the type of application made by  the  Respondent.
      In his oral submissions counsel for the Respondent  did  not  disagree
      with this analysis.


  11. I also note that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  concluded  that  the
      decision on removal was not in accordance with the law without  giving
      the parties the  opportunity  to  address  him  on  this  point.  This
      amounted to a procedural error which  deprived  both  parties  of  the
      ability of putting the legal arguments which flowed from the  approach
      being adopted by the Judge.

  12. For both of these reasons I  find  that  the  decision  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Eldridge did include material errors of law.

Decision

  13. The Appellant's appeal is allowed.


  14. The case remitted to be heard at Taylor House by a First-tier Tribunal
      Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Eldridge on a de novo basis









Date:  10 October 2016


    Nadine Finch
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
