
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06546/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 November 2013                         |On 14 November 2013        |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR SUMER SINGH
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation
                            For the appellant: Mr E Tufan a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
          For the respondent: Ms J Simcock as a Mackenzie friend

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department I will
      refer to her as the Secretary of State. The respondent is a citizen of
      India who was born on 1 January 1984. I  will  refer  to  him  as  the
      claimant. The Secretary of State has been given permission  to  appeal
      the determination of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Cohen ("the FTTJ")  who
      allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision of 12 February 2013 to refuse to vary his leave to remain  in
      the UK and to grant him indefinite leave to remain as  a  Work  Permit
      Holder.


   2. The claimant first entered the UK on 3 July 2007 with leave  to  enter
      as a work permit holder until 27 November 2007. There was an error  in
      the decision which was subsequently amended to grant him  leave  until
      27 May 2012. He submitted the  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
      remain on 11 June 2012. The application was refused on the basis  that
      it had been made after his leave to remain expired  and  he  had  only
      been legally resident in the UK as a work permit holder for four years
      and 10 months rather than  the  required  five  years.  Because  of  a
      discrepancy in the documents submitted the  Secretary  of  State  took
      issue with the claimant's  income and also concluded that he  had  not
      satisfied the  English  language  requirements.  The  application  was
      refused under the provisions of paragraph 134 of the Immigration Rules
      and on human rights grounds.


   3. The appellant appealed. At the hearing before the FTTJ  the  Secretary
      of State was not represented. The appellant,  who  works  in  a  horse
      racing stables David Simcock  Racing  Limited,  was  assisted  by  the
      representative of his employer Ms Simcock. The  FTTJ  allowed  her  to
      assist the appellant as a Mackenzie friend as I do.


   4. The FTTJ found the claimant and Ms Simcock to be  credible  witnesses.
      He gave detailed reasons for concluding that the appellant was paid at
      or above the appropriate rate for the job and met the English language
      requirements.  These  conclusions  have  not  been  appealed  by   the
      Secretary of State. In short, the FTTJ found that the only outstanding
      issues related to whether the claimant had made his application before
      his leave expired and whether he had achieved the necessary five years
      in the UK.  He  accepted  Ms  Simcock's  evidence  that  she  had  had
      telephone conversations with the Home Office seeking advice as to  how
      to proceed where, if he made his application before his leave  expired
      he would not have achieved five years in this  country  whilst  if  he
      applied shortly after his leave expired he would  have  achieved  five
      years. She asked whether the claimant should apply for a further  one-
      year work permit, apply before the expiry of  leave  or  apply  on  or
      after 6 June 2010. The FTTJ also accepted that Ms  Simcock  was  given
      conflicting advice, on one occasion that the claimant should make  his
      application after he had been here for five years; on another that the
      Secretary of State had a  discretion  to  grant  indefinite  leave  to
      remain if the application was made within three months  of  the  five-
      year period and thirdly that there was  no  such  discretion.  In  the
      light of this advice the claimant followed the course of waiting until
      the permit had expired without realising that the advice was incorrect
      and had led to the claimant becoming an overstayer.


   5. The FTTJ found that "she only following (sic) this  course  of  action
      following receiving advice from the Home Office. I therefore find that
      the respondent cannot hold this against the appellant and  nor  do  I.
      Whilst the appellant did not have excellent (sic - presumably  extant)
      leave at the time that he applied for indefinite leave to  remain  due
      to these problems, I  find  that  the  respondent  had  discretion  to
      consider  the  appellant's  application  exceptionally.....   As   the
      appellant's application was submitted whilst he had no valid leave  to
      remain in the UK, I cannot allow the appellant's appeal outright under
      the Immigration Rules  but noting that the respondent did not exercise
      discretion appropriately I remit the application to the respondent for
      full  and  detailed  consideration.  I  allow  the  appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules on this limited basis."


   6. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal in relation to this part of
      the decision are that the FTTJ erred in law by failing to give any  or
      adequate reasons and that there is a lack of clarity because  he  both
      allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  also  remitted  it
      back to the Secretary of State. I find  no  merit  in  these  grounds.
      Whilst at the very end of the determination the FTTJ said; "the appeal
      is allowed under the Immigration Rules" it is clear by reference  back
      to paragraph 13 that what the  judge  was  doing  was;  "I  remit  the
      application to the respondent for full and detailed  consideration.  I
      allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules on this limited basis." I
      also find that the FTTJ gave clear and  sufficient  reasons  for  this
      decision which was open to him on all the  evidence.  If  any  further
      support is needed for the FTTJ's acceptance of the  evidence  that  Ms
      Simcock was told  by  the  Home  Office  that  there  was  a  relevant
      discretion it may be gleaned from the Home Office guidance produced by
      Mr Tufan at the hearing before me entitled "Indefinite leave to remain
      - calculating continuous period in UK."  This  includes  the  passage;
      "the period between entry clearance being  issued  and  the  applicant
      entering the UK may be counted towards the qualifying period, as  long
      as it does not exceed 90 days. This can  occur  if  the  applicant  is
      delayed travelling to the UK. Provided the period of  delay  does  not
      exceed 90 days, it will not be counted  as  an  absence."  Whilst  the
      guidance I have been shown is said to be valid from 28 August 2013  Mr
      Tufan thought that there might  be  an  earlier  guidance  in  similar
      terms, although he had not been able to  find  it.  I  find  that  the
      Secretary of State's first ground of appeal discloses no error of law.


   7. The FTTJ also allow the appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.  The
      Secretary of State argues that he erred in law in doing so because the
      claimant's private life ties could  be  replicated  in  India  through
      visits and modern means of  communication  and  that  his  skills  are
      transferable. The  FTTJ  should  have  applied  CDS  (PBS  "available"
      Article 8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 305 (IAC) (25 August 2010). Having heard
      Mr Tufan's submissions I understand that  the  passage  on  which  the
      Secretary of State relies is encapsulated in the part of the head note
      which states; "Article 8 does not give an Immigration  Judge  a  free-
      standing liberty to depart from  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  it  is
      unlikely that a person will be able to show  an  Article  8  right  by
      coming to the UK for temporary purposes.  But a person who is admitted
      to follow a course that has not yet ended may build up a private  life
      that deserves respect, and the public interest in removal  before  the
      end of the course may be  reduced  where  there  are  ample  financial
      resources available."


   8. Mr Tufan also argued that the claimant was not entitled to succeed  on
      Article 8 human rights grounds on the basis of a "near miss". The near
      miss was that he did not submit his application until  some  ten  days
      after his leave expired. I accept that this near miss element was  one
      of the factors relied on by the FTTJ in his reasoning. However, it was
      not the only reason. The FTTJ took into account and  was  entitled  to
      take into account that some of the responsibility for this  should  be
      laid at the door of the Secretary of State. Unlike  CDS,  whilst  this
      claimant had come to the UK for temporary  purposes  his  application,
      which would otherwise have succeeded, was for indefinite leave. It was
      open to the FTTJ to find that the claimant had  established  a  strong
      private  life  in  this  country.  At  first  sight  it  might  appear
      surprising that the FTTJ found that the claimant's work colleagues  in
      this country were tantamount to his family but not when this is  taken
      in the context of the fact that they are  a  group  of  racing  stable
      workers who have worked together in Bangalore and  Dubai  even  before
      they came to the UK. The FTTJ did not suggest that the claimant had  a
      conventional family life in the UK. It is relevant that the claimant's
      income in this country  is  sufficient  for  him  to  remit  funds  to
      maintain his wife and both his parents and to contribute to supporting
      his brother's family. He would not be able to do if he was employed in
      similar  work  in  India.  His  skills  are  transferable,  but  at  a
      considerably lower rate of pay. The FTTJ's conclusion that the  appeal
      should be allowed on Article 8 human rights grounds  is  generous  but
      was open to him on all the evidence. The  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
      disclose an error of law.


   9. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and see  no  good
      reason to do so


  10. I find that the FTTJ did not err in law and I uphold his decision.














      .............................................
            Signed                                                Date 8
      November 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

