

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number:  IA/06112/2014

                                                        IA /06115/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1st July 2014                              |8th September 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                              Mrs Linda agyekum
                          master brian a n agyekum
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Miss G Tetteh ( counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy ( Home office presenting officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of Ghana  and  are  mother  and  son  whose
    dates of birth are 10.1.1976 and 12.7.2011 respectively.

2.      This matter comes before me for consideration as to whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the  determination  by  First  Tier
    Judge Crawford (FTJ) promulgated on 29.4.2014 in which he dismissed the
    appeals under the immigration rules.


Background

3.   The first appellant entered the UK on 12.12.2008  with  a  valid  visit
    visa until 26.5.2009. The  second  appellant  was  born  in  London  on
    12.7.2011. The first appellant entered into a marriage by proxy on 22nd
    December 2012 in Ghana and the certificate was registered on 21st March
    2013. On 29th April 2013 she applied for a residence card as the spouse
    /family member of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in  the  UK.
    Her spouse is a Dutch  citizen  and  the  step  father  of  the  second
    appellant. The respondent refused the  applications  on  21st  November
    2013 because the appellants failed to produce  evidence  to  show  that
    they were family members with reference to Regulations 7(1)(a),  8  and
    17 Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The  refusal
    letter  set  out  the  detailed  requirements  under  Ghanaian  law  to
    establish a valid customary marriage and cited NA  (Customary  marriage
    and divorce - evidence ) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009 which held that  both
    parties were required to have Ghanaian citizenship. As evidence of  her
    Ghanaian nationality the appellant produced her Ghanaian  passport.  An
    EEA ID card was produced by her spouse N.Diawou  stating  that  he  was
    born in Accra. The respondent rejected this as evidence of nationality.
    The respondent found no reliable evidence to show that the  appellant's
    spouse was a Ghanaian citizen or able to demonstrate that  his  parents
    were Ghanaian citizens for the customary marriage to be valid according
    to Ghanaian law.  Further, the respondent considered that the appellant
    failed to show that the marriage was validly registered  in  accordance
    with the law. The statutory declaration failed to  establish  that  the
    declarants were related to the parties to the marriage and there was no
    evidence in support such as birth certificates.  Further the respondent
    considered that the further evidence of a letter from the Ghanaian High
    Commission simply confirmed the  genuineness  of  the  signatures.  The
    respondent found no  evidence  to  meet  Regulation  8  for  a  durable
    relationship to be established.

4.  In grounds of appeal the appellant argued  that  a  marriage  between  a
    Ghanaian national and a  non  Ghanaian  was  permissible  according  to
    Ghanaian law and cited IA/23315/2012 UT (an  unreported  UT  case)  and
    McCabe v McCabe( full citation at 6 below).

5.    The FJT determined  the  appeals  on  the  papers  agreeing  with  the
    reasons given by the respondent as to the lack of evidence to show that
    both parties were of Ghanaian nationality and the lack of  evidence  to
    show their relationship with the declarants. The  FTJ  found  that  the
    appellants  were  living  with  the  sponsor  N.   Diawuo.   He   found
    insufficient evidence to show  that  the  parties  were  in  a  durable
    relationship.

Grounds of appeal

6. The appellants appealed on the grounds that the FTJ failed to  take  into
    account the detailed written submissions arguing that a valid customary
    marriage  where  only  one  party  has  shown  evidence   of   Ghanaian
    nationality and the other was a non Ghanaian  was  sufficient  to  meet
    Ghanaian law. ( Unreported case IA/23315/2012  UT  &  McCabe  v  McCabe
    [1994]1FCR 257.)

7.  The FTJ failed to consider the evidence of the EU ID  card  showing  the
    spouse was born in Accra. A birth certificate at  page  95  showed  the
    sponsor was of Ghanaian descent.[This latter documentary  evidence  has
    not been produced.]

8.  The FTJ was wrong to  reject  the  evidence  of  confirmation  of  valid
    signatures by the Ghanaian High Commission. There was  no  evidence  to
    show that the Ghanaian authorities lacked the  competence  to  issue  a
    customary registration certificate.

9.  The final ground related to Regulation 8 and was confusing and  unclear.



Permission to appeal

10.  In reasons dated 22.5.2014 FTJ Hodgkinson  found it arguable  that  the
    FTJ did not engage adequately with the totality of the evidence as  set
    out in the written submissions, as argued in grounds 1-4  and  that  he
    erred by not considering the appeal with reference to Regulation 8.

Response under rule 24

11. The respondent opposed the appeal arguing that the FTJ directed  himself
    appropriately in concluding that the marriage was not  valid  according
    to Ghanian law. In the alternative, if the FTJ was wrong, there was  no
    evidence to show that the marriage was valid according to Dutch law and
    the appeal was bound to fail. (  Kareem  (proxy  marriages  -  EU  law)
    Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24 ( IAC)).

Error of law hearing

12.  Mr Duffy made an application to admit  new  evidence;   a  Home  Office
    response to IA/23315/2012 and the expert opinion of ML Akman  given  in
    that case.  Miss Tetteh did not object to the evidence being  admitted.
    I formally admitted the evidence in accordance with paragraph 15(2)  of
    The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Miss  Tetteh
    confirmed that she did not have a birth  certificate  of  the  spouse's
    father Dominic , referred to in the grounds of appeal as  appearing  at
    page 95 of the bundle and neither did she have copies  of  two  expired
    Ghanian passports forwarded by the appellants solicitors with a  letter
    dated 14.5.14.

13.  Miss Tetteh pursued grounds 1-4  and relied on the written  submissions
    put before the First-tier Tribunal that the Judge failed to engage with
    the argument supported by case law that  a  valid  marriage  between  a
    Ghanian and a non  Ghanaian was  permissible  according  to  expert  ML
    Akman. Further, there was no need for the appellant to show evidence of
    the spouse's Ghanian descent  because the registration  made  reference
    to his parents.  All the requirements were met for a valid registration
    .  The FTJ took into account matters that were not requirements such as
    evidence of birth certificates which went beyond what was  required  by
    the Ghanian authorities.  The letter from the Ghanian  High  Commission
    confirmed the signatures and was sufficient  to  show  a  validly  made
    registration.

14.  Mr Duffy submitted that the lack of evidence  of  a  birth  certificate
    was relevant to the issue of Ghanaian descent.  There was  no  reliable
    evidence to establish the spouse's Ghanaian nationality.  The  ID  card
    stating that he  was  born  in  Accra  was  not  evidence  of  Ghanaian
    nationality. Reliance could not be placed on an unreported case and  in
    any event the RANLON report (contradicting NA) had been  withdrawn  and
    the expert opinion given little weight. At the  date  of  decision  the
    policy was that a non Ghanaian national could not enter  into  a  valid
    customary marriage.

15.   In the alternative, Mr Duffy relied on Kareem (  cited  above).  There
    was no evidence to show the  validity  of  the  marriage  according  to
    EEA/Dutch law; the starting point in cases where there was doubt as  to
    the the validity  of  a  marriage.   Kareem  was  referred  to  in  the
    appellants' written submissions and  ought to have been  considered  by
    the FTJ.  It was relevant to consideration of materiality. There was  a
    high evidential burden to establish the legal requirements  to  be  met
    for a valid marriage from a particular country. Mr Duffy accepted  that
    there was sufficient  evidence  available  to  show  what  is  required
    according to Ghanaian law, but there was no evidence as to  Dutch  law.
    He argued that even of the FTJ erred in law, it was not material as the
    appeal  could not succeed under Kareem.

16.  Miss Tetteh agreed that the FTJ ought to have looked at Kareem and  his
    failure to do so was an error of law.  However, she argued against  the
    position taken by the Secretary of State. The decision in Kareem should
    not be adversely held against the appellant. The withdrawal of the UKBA
    report was not relevant.

17. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Discussion and decision

18.  This appeal was determined by the FTJ on the papers.   The  documentary
    evidence included documents of dissolution of the previous marriages of
    both the appellant and her spouse and  the  birth  certificate  of  the
    second appellant.  The letter dated  14.5.  2014  from  the  appellants
    solicitors was sent to the respondent post hearing and was not evidence
    before the Tribunal.  There is no evidence in the bundle of  any  birth
    certificate for the spouse's father.

19.  At [8] the  determination  set  out  the  requirements  to  be  met  in
    Ghanaian law for a customary marriage by proxy and the requirements for
    a valid registration. The FTJ found that the appellant failed  to  show
    evidence that her spouse Nicholas Diawuo, was a  Ghanian  national  and
    further that the statutory declaration did not specify that the parties
    were Ghanian citizens.  At [9] the FTJ found that the letter  from  the
    High Commission  confirming  the  genuineness  of  the  signatures  was
    insufficient to establish the  validity  of  the  registration  of  the
    marriage.  The FTJ concluded that there was no evidence  of  two  years
    cohabitation, to show a durable relationship.  The  written  submission
    at [16 ] submitted that Regulation 8(5)  was  not  applicable  and  the
    appellant relied on Regulation 7.

20.  In essence I find that the FTJ adopted the  respondent's   reasons  for
    the refusal having regard to the appellant's  failure  to  address  the
    concerns raised by the Respondent as to the validity  of  the  marriage
    and the registration.  Such findings  were  open  to  the  FTJ  on  the
    evidence before him. What the FTJ did not consider was the point raised
    that a customary marriage between a Ghanaian  and  a  non  Ghanaian  is
    valid and further he failed to consider the guidance in Kareem. I  find
    that these are errors of law because  there was  a  failure  to  engage
    with the evidence and submissions relied on.  However, I find that  the
    errors were not material for the following reasons.

21.  The appellants needed to show firstly, that  the  parties  could  enter
    into a valid customary marriage by proxy according to Ghanaian law  and
    having voluntarily registered that marriage,  they  further  needed  to
    show the registration was validly registered  in  accordance  with  the
    1985 law. The FTJ's error is that he failed to engage with the marriage
    issue or the alternative position  taken  by  the  appellant.  However,
    given that the FTJ correctly found no reliable evidence  to  show  that
    the  statutory  declaration  met  with  the  requirements  of   section
    3(1)(a)(b) & (c) of the PNDC law  112,  Customary  Marriage  &  Divorce
    (Registration ) Law 1985, specifically that the relationship stated was
    father and son, I find that the error was  not  material.  It  was  not
    accepted that the representation at  the  proxy  ceremony  was  validly
    established.  I am further satisfied that it was open  to  the  FTJ  to
    find that the further evidence, a letter dated 12.4.2013 from the  High
    Commission, was limited to confirming the genuineness of the signatures
    in the various documents.  It failed to confirm that the  marriage  was
    either registered or correctly registered in accordance with  the  law.
    Accordingly I find that the error was not a material error of law.

22.   I should add that although Mr Duffy relied on Kareen arguing that  the
    appeal would fail in any event because there was  no  evidence  of  the
    Dutch legal requirements for a valid marriage. This was not a point  or
    issue specifically raised before the FTJ. He clearly made no  reference
    to the guidance in Kareem, but his failure to do so in  my  view  makes
    little difference to the outcome and was not therefore material. As  to
    Regulation 8 ( durable relationship) I am satisfied that the FTJ  dealt
    with the issue in the determination.  The appellant's position was that
    there was no reliance on this regulation only on Regulation 7.

Decision

23.  I find no material error of law  in  the  Judge's  determination  which
    shall stand.
     The appeal is dismissed.

Signed
                           Dated 9.7.2014

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


No anonymity order
No fee repayment award



Signed                                             Dated 9.7.2014
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
