

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: IA/06827/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
          Determination promulgated
On 21 January 2015
    On 30 January 2015



                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY

                                   Between

                             ISHRAT PARVEEN (MRS)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the respondent: Ms Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the appellant: Ms Heybroek

                               DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. On 23 August 2013 the appellant, a citizen of  Pakistan,  applied  for
      indefinite leave to remain in this country as the spouse of  a  person
      present and settled here  and  that  application  was  refused  on  16
      January 2014.  An appeal  against  the  decision  was    heard  on  30
      September  2014    and  the  appeal  was  dismissed  both  under   the
      Immigration Rules and the ECHR.

   2. Permission to appeal was sought. The grant of permission contains  the
      following (these are the only points at issue):

             2. The grounds on which permission to appeal is sought  submit
             that the judge erred in  law  in  that  she  followed  Gulshan
             notwithstanding that the "intermediary test"  was  disapproved
             in MM and it was held  that  where  the  appellant  could  not
             satisfy the Immigration Rules   it  was  necessary  to  decide
             whether there is or is not a further article 8 claim. This  is
             arguable.  The  judge  stated   at   paragraph   23   of   the
             determination that the appellant had not shown  arguably  good
             grounds for granting leave to remain  outside  the  rules  and
             therefore "I do not  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are
             compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under
             them". It is arguable that it was  essential  that  the  judge
             should decide whether  there were such circumstances.


             3. The grounds make further submissions concerning the  burden
             of proof on the issue of whether the appellant's  sponsor  was
             present and settled in the UK.  These  submissions  appear  to
             have no merit but permission to argue them is not refused.


   3. Assuming that "not refused" is to be interpreted as meaning  "granted"
      I deal with the second point first. Ms Heybroek's first point is  that
      the sponsor is to stand trial for fraudulently  obtaining  a  passport
      later this year. The conclusion, by the respondent, that  the  sponsor
      was not present and settled here  was  based  on  the  fact  that  his
      passport, the only evidence that he was present and settled here,  had
      been fraudulently obtained.  She argued that this  hearing  should  be
      adjourned until that trial has taken place when  the  matter  will  be
      clarified. As I said at the hearing, that is not the  case.  The  fact
      that there has been a prosecution suggests that there is a prima facie
      case that the passport was fraudulently obtained. If  the  sponsor  is
      convicted the fact will not be in doubt. If, however, he is  acquitted
      that simply means that the criminal standard has not  been  satisfied,
      not that he is innocent. It follows that an adjournment will not  help
      the  appellant's  case  in  any  way  and  I  therefore  refused   the
      adjournment.


   4. The way the point is put in the skeleton  argument  is  that,  as  the
      question of the revocation of the sponsor's passport has not  formally
      happened, it is in existence and the sponsor should be  treated  as  a
      United Kingdom citizen.  That begs a number of questions.  A  passport
      is not proof of citizenship, though it may be evidence. Furthermore if
      a passport is fraudulently obtained, it does not necessarily  have  to
      be revoked. That would depend on the circumstances of  the  obtaining.
      The legal position is that it is for the appellant to prove  that  the
      sponsor was present and settled in this country. Once doubts as to the
      authenticity of the passport have been raised it is for the  appellant
      to  prove  that  the  passport  can  be  relied  on  as   evidence  of
      citizenship. The case is either a classic example of the principle  of
      Tanveer Ahmed, as I believe it to be as the genuineness or reliability
      of a document is at issue, or it is covered  by  a  closely  analogous
      principle. The judge approached the question of the burden of proof on
      this issue in a totally proper way and her approach is not vitiated by
      any error of law.


   5. The skeleton argument states that the approach taken by the respondent
      was conspicuously unfair but I can  see  nothing  affair  in  strictly
      applying the relevant legal principles.


   6. The first ground, on which permission was  granted  with  rather  more
      enthusiasm, was that the judge was wrong to  approach  article  8   as
      suggested by the case of Gulhshan.  The cases of MM v SSHD [2014] EWCA
      Civ 985 is relied on:  this  states:

             If the applicant cannot satisfy the rules  then  there  either
             is, or there is not a further Article 8 claim. That will  have
             to be determined by the relevant  decision-maker.

   7. The case of   R (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2104] EWHC 2712 (Admin) is  also
      relied on;  there Michael Fordham QC sitting as  a  High  Court  Judge
      states at paragraph 21 that there  does not need  to  be  a  threshold
      before article 8 can be considered.


   8. These cases throw doubts on the principle set out in Gulshan  (Article
      8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640  (IAC),  that  there
      must be some sort of a threshold before article 8  is  considered.  My
      preference is for the approach set out in  MM,  and I  shall  for  the
      purpose of this decision assume, without deciding, that  that  is  the
      correct approach.


   9. If, however, this is an error of law, it will be  rare  that  such  an
      error  will be material.  That is because the procedure that the judge
      will carry out in deciding whether the threshold to consider article 8
      has been crossed will, in most cases, be entirely the same as will  be
      the exercise that has to  be  carried  out  when  the  proportionality
      exercise were reached, had there  been  an  article  8  consideration.
      There may be cases (I suspect that they will  be rare) where a  factor
      was not before the judge when the threshold exercise was carried  out,
      that might  have  led  to  a  different   conclusion  with  regard  to
      proportionality. Here all the relevant facts were before the judge and
      an article 8 (family life) claim would have had no chance  of  success
      based on the simple reason that the sponsor has no right to remain  in
      this country. There is no evidence to  suggest  that  the  appellant's
      private life in this country would engage article 8.


  10. It follows that if there were here an error of law it is  not  in  any
      way material.


  11. Ms Heybroek made a number of hypothetical  submissions  based  on  the
      fact that the sponsor was a United  Kingdom  citizen,  but  they  were
      that, and no more. Should it become apparent that  that  is  the  case
      different considerations may well apply, but at the present time  they
      clearly do not.


  12.  It follows that the original determination did not contain  an  error
      of law and   the original decision shall stand.

The appeal is accordingly dismissed


Designated Judge Digney
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                 23 January 2015


