
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06249/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 May 2015                       |On 1 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ms natalia zafar
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the First-tier Tribunal with the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and Ms Zafar as "the
    appellant".

 2. No application for anonymity has been made in these proceedings and  no
    grounds for such an order were put before me today.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 2 October 1989.

 4. She applied for a residence card as confirmation of the right to reside
    in the United Kingdom as the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national  exercising
    Community Law rights.  That application was refused and  the  appellant
    appealed.

 5. Following a hearing at Taylor House Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Russell, in a decision promulgated on 11 September  2014,  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal.  At that hearing evidence was heard from  both  the
    appellant and sponsor, a Russian speaking Lithuanian.

 6. The respondent sought permission to appeal.  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Cruthers granted permission on 21 October 2014.   His  reasons
    for so doing are:

         "1.  By a determination promulgated on 11  September  2014,  First-
             tier Tribunal  Judge  Russell  allowed  this  appeal.   Having
             assessed the evidence, the judge  concluded  that  the  appeal
             succeeded through the  application  of  Regulation  8  of  the
             Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the
             EEA Regulations").

          2.  The grounds on which the respondent seeks permission to appeal
             complain, in summary that: (1) once it was apparent  that  the
             Lithuanian  "sponsor"  was  having  difficulty  in  using  the
             English language for his evidence  ,  the  judge  should  have
             adjourned the hearing so that a  court  interpreter  could  be
             arranged.  It is suggested that it was inappropriate  for  the
             judge to use his own Russian language ability in the course of
             the sponsor's evidence (see paragraph 3 of  the  determination
             and paragraphs 1 to 3 of the grounds); and (2) that in  itself
             a finding of a "durable relationship"  was  not  a  sufficient
             basis  to  establish  entitlement  to  a  residence  permit  -
             reference is made to YB (EEA  reg  17(4)  -  proper  approach)
             Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062, circulated on 13 August 2008.

          3.  The grounds are arguable."

 7. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 8. Mr Avery referred me to a note signed by the Presenting Officer in  the
    First-tier hearing where it states,  amongst  other  things,  that  the
    judge acted as interpreter in a language which was unclear to the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer by reason of being uncertain as to whether it
    was Russian or Lithuanian.  This was  in  the  course  of  the  sponsor
    giving his evidence and happened on at least five occasions.

 9. It was asserted by Mr Avery that in so doing the judge erred in law  by
    conducting the appeal in a procedurally unfair manner.  I was  directed
    to paragraph 3 of the judge's decision where it states:

         "The appellant gave evidence in English throughout and her  partner
         gave evidence in English and,  with  my  assistance,  sometimes  in
         Russian, a language I speak."

10. Mr Avery contended that the  Secretary  of  State  is  unaware  of  the
    judge's qualifications as a court  interpreter  or  the  level  of  his
    proficiency so that there can be any certainty as to the accuracy.   He
    argued the judge ought to have adjourned the hearing  as  soon  as  the
    sponsor had difficulty understanding or responding to questions  rather
    than take the role of an interpreter himself.

11. There is a second ground of appeal which is that the judge  misdirected
    himself in law by  finding  that  the  appellant  is  "entitled"  to  a
    residence card.  However, in light of my findings in  relation  to  the
    first ground any consideration  of  this  latter  one  is  a  redundant
    exercise.

12. I emphasised to the appellant, as  she  was  unrepresented,  that  this
    procedural unfairness was not of her making.  The judge was undoubtedly
    using his best endeavours to assist an unrepresented party.

13. However, whilst I fully accept that the judge acted with  the  best  of
    intentions he has nonetheless fallen into error.  I am  satisfied  that
    the correct procedure in these circumstances was for the judge, of  his
    own motion, to have adjourned the hearing and secured the assistance of
    a Russian interpreter so that the evidence  could  be  properly  taken.
    The answers, in all  the  circumstances,  of  the  sponsor  are,  as  a
    consequence, unsafe rendering likewise the findings of the judge.  This
    infects the whole decision rendering any further consideration by me of
    the second ground, as I say, redundant.

14. For these reasons I  find  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains errors of law and has to be set aside  in  its  entirety.   Mr
    Avery urged me to remit the appeal back to the First-tier  Tribunal  as
    in all the circumstances one party, the respondent, had  been  deprived
    of a fair hearing within the First-tier Tribunal.  I agreed  with  that
    submission.

Decision

I therefore set aside the decision.  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal to be dealt with afresh, pursuant to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of
the Tribunal,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and  Practice  Statement
7.2.(b) before any other judge aside from Judge Russell.

An anonymity order is not made.



Signed   Date 28 May 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
