
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06804/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5 November 2013                              |On 25 November 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                        Mr cleveland george marshall
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Rooney, Legal Representative of Walthamstow Cab
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who  was  born  on  21  September
    1942.  He is now therefore 71 years of age.  He applied on 2 March 2006
    for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of his length of  residence
    in the United Kingdom.  His application  was  refused  under  paragraph
    276D with reference to paragraphs  276B(i)(a)  and  276B(i)(b)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The decision to refuse his application was made  on
    19 February 2013.   He  appealed  that  decision  but  the  appeal  was
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules and under Article  8  ECHR.   The
    removal directions were upheld also.

 2. Having been granted permission to appeal that decision the matter  came
    before me on 4 September 2013 and I found  that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge disclosed an error on a  point  of  law  such
    that the decision to dismiss the appeal would be set aside and  remade.
    I gave directions allowing the appellant to  file  an  updated  witness
    statement and any further evidence, which he  did  and  served  on  the
    respondent also.

The Documents Before Me

 3. The documents before me were those  that  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  In addition I had  before  me  a  second  bundle  (not
    permitted to be lodged at the error of law hearing) and a third  bundle
    which came to the Tribunal under cover of a  letter  dated  21  October
    2013, both filed on behalf of the appellant.

The Appellant's Claimed Immigration History

 4. Mr Marshall claims that he arrived in the United Kingdom in  1959  when
    he was 17 years old.  He came to join his mother.  He married Sigourney
    Newman in September 1966.  They had three children together, all girls,
    and all were born in the United Kingdom.  His three children  all  have
    children of their own.  His marriage to Sigourney ended in  divorce  in
    1982 and she died in 1993.

 5. The appellant has lived with his present  partner  Hyacinth  D'Aguilar,
    since about 1983.  She is a British citizen by birth.   They  have  two
    children, Clay who was born in February 1980 and Nathan who was born in
    1991.  Nathan still lives with the appellant and Mrs D'Aguilar.  Nathan
    is the father of one child and his partner is expecting another soon.

 6. Ms D'Aguilar is a book-keeper by profession but is now unable  to  work
    due to her disability as a result of two  hip  replacement  operations.
    She is also is waiting for knee replacement operations.  The  appellant
    receives a carer's allowance for looking after her and he  is  also  in
    receipt of pension credits since 2005.  His mother is still alive.  She
    is more than 90 years old.  She had a fall in May 2013 and as a  result
    he spends every night at her home looking after her  as  well  as  some
    time during the day.  The appellant has a sister called  Claudette  who
    is a British citizen who also looks after their mother.  The  appellant
    had a brother who was a British citizen but he died  some  three  years
    ago.

 7. Since arriving in the United Kingdom the appellant has  never  left  it
    and he receives  a  partial  state  pension  because  of  the  national
    insurance contributions that he made during his working life here.





Oral Evidence Before Me

 8. The appellant gave evidence and confirmed his (filed) statements to  be
    true.  He was then cross-examined by Mr Saunders.  The  appellant  said
    that the list of firms that he worked for  which  are  referred  to  in
    paragraph 2 of his statement of 11 June 2013 mostly  no  longer  exist.
    While he was self-employed as a panel beater he used  to  buy  National
    Insurance stamps weekly but he only used  to  do  this  sometimes.   At
    other times he just did not pay.  From 2002 he started to get more work
    so he paid contributions.  He did not sign on and he did  not  want  to
    work and claim benefits.  From 1983 to 2002 he was  not  making  enough
    money  to  make  it  worthwhile  spending  the  money  on  making   the
    contributions.

 9. The appellant went on to explain that when he  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom his mother was already here, having arrived in 1950.

10. I then referred to  a  letter  dated  17  August  2011  signed  by  the
    appellant  to  the  respondent  complaining  about  the  delay  in  the
    processing of his application from 2006.  The letter  referred  to  the
    appellant's lifestyle having been limited for a number of years as  the
    respondent is still holding  onto  the  passport  'which  has  affected
    family holidays'.  I asked why it  would  matter  that  the  respondent
    still held his passport if he himself had no intention of  leaving  the
    United Kingdom.  The appellant responded that  his  partner  must  have
    written that letter because he has never been away and  commented  that
    the furthest he has travelled in  the  United  Kingdom  is  to  Clacton
    although he had been to Wales once but he  thought  that  was  part  of
    England!

11. There were no questions arising out of that matter.

Ms D'Aguilar's Oral Evidence

12. I then heard from Ms Hyacinth D'Aguilar who confirmed that she was born
    in Islington in 1955 and is a  book-keeper.   She  was  made  redundant
    about five years ago and her health has deteriorated.   She  first  met
    the appellant in 1974 and they started going out about one  year  later
    and they have been in a relationship ever  since.   They  began  living
    together as a couple in 1983 after their first child was born in  1980.
    The appellant has lived with her at  her  address  ever  since.   Their
    second child was born in 1991  and  he  still  lives  with  them.   She
    confirmed that the appellant has  always  been  involved  with  'fixing
    cars, panel beating, etc.'  The appellant has cared  for  her  more  or
    less on a full-time basis since 2009  and  he  spends  a  lot  of  time
    looking after his own mother.  Ms D'Aguilar confirmed that  during  the
    time she has known the appellant he has never left the United Kingdom.

13. Cross-examined by Mr Saunders Ms D'Aguilar said that when she first met
    the appellant he was doing crash repairs.  When asked if he was  making
    a living doing that she responded that he was able to put money towards
    housekeeping and keep their child at nursery.  Ms  D'Aguilar  was  also
    working at the time.  She could not recall now how much he was  earning
    then nor indeed what she herself was earning.  The appellant carried on
    doing crash repairs until well into the 90s and it might have  been  as
    late as 2003.

14. As to Ms D'Aguilar's health she has suffered from deep vein thrombosis.
     She takes Warfarin and will always be on that drug.

15. Re-examined by Mr Rooney Ms D'Aguilar said that  the  appellant  worked
    six days a week when he was a crash repairer.

16. Asked a few questions by me Ms D'Aguilar said that initially she rented
    a home and then went for the right to buy.  The  appellant  contributed
    to payments for the home.  They never discussed pensions  and  national
    insurance contributions.  She knew that he was freelance and they  have
    always  been  together.   As  to  the  letter  signed  by  Mr  Marshall
    complaining about the fact that  the  respondent  had  the  appellant's
    passport as a fact the government was limiting their plans but they had
    no intention to go away.

17. In submissions Mr Saunders simply requested that I determine the appeal
    on the evidence before me.  Although Mr Rooney began to  address  me  I
    informed him that he did not need to do so.  I announced at the hearing
    that I was satisfied that the  appeal would be allowed.

Burden and Standard of Proof

18. It is for the appellant to prove that he meets the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules and the standard of proof is the  civil  one  of  the
    balance of probabilities.

My Findings

19. I found both the appellant and Ms D'Aguilar to be witnesses  of  truth.
    They gave their replies to questions in a  straightforward  manner  and
    did not seek to embellish  their  stories.   There  is  a  considerable
    amount of supporting written evidence and  the  oral  evidence  tallied
    with that written evidence.  It is also fair to say that there is  much
    missing evidence which had it been provided would  have  proved  beyond
    doubt the appellant's immigration history in  the  United  Kingdom  but
    that is not the standard of proof that applies.

20. As it is, the evidence that I have before me is far more  comprehensive
    than that which was before the First-tier Judge.  It is  apparent,  and
    accepted by the respondent,  that  the  appellant  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 1990 and has been also from 2005.  What  has  been  produced
    since are national  insurance  records  that  show  that  contributions
    recorded prior to 6 April 1975 were transferred 'from clerical records'
    and that the total number  of  eligible  contributions  and/or  credits
    recorded  on  the  appellant's  account  is  783.   This  is   strongly
    suggestive therefore that the appellant was  working  and  paying  some
    contributions prior to 1975.  Some further  contribution  credits  were
    then recorded - those contributions being by stamped card  -  up  until
    1982/1983 but thereafter there was  a  gap  until  2002/2003  tax  year
    during which time no contributions were made, the reason for which  the
    appellant explained in his evidence.

21. Although it does not prove that the appellant was here for any  lengthy
    period of time and he could have returned to Jamaica in the interim  he
    would have had to be in the United Kingdom at the time of conception of
    his children who were born in 1964, 1965 and 1967.  His other  children
    were born in 1980 and  1991.   Ms  D'Aguilar  gave  evidence  that  she
    commenced her relationship with the appellant in 1974.   Proof  of  the
    births of the children has been provided by birth certificates.

22. In addition to the above there are a few  statement  of  accounts  that
    appear to be from credit card companies showing activity on accounts in
    1996, 1997, 2000 and a bill in respect of  a  'Motorola  flip'  (mobile
    phone) from 1994 and mobile phone bills  from  the  same  period.   The
    address given for Mr Marshall is that at which he currently lives  with
    Ms D'Aguilar.

23. One matter that concerned the First-tier Judge was a Jamaican  passport
    said to have been issued in the appellant's name in Kingston  (Jamaica)
    in 2005. This is strongly suggestive of  the  appellant's  presence  in
    Jamaica for it to have been issued. However, their is a letter from the
    Jamaican High Commission in London dated 14 August 2013 which  confirms
    that Mr Marshall's (current) passport was issued on 16 June 2005  'when
    he applied through the High Commission to replace a previous  passport,
    which was reportedly lost'. I conclude therefore that  he  was  not  in
    Jamaica at the time the new passport was issued and applied for  it  in
    London.

24. The lost passport was the one that he says he  came  into  the  country
    with in 1959 and would of course have long ago expired. It appears that
    to obtain another one he had to report his old passport as lost but  he
    only needed to do this in 2005 when he was applying for  a  Certificate
    of Approval to enable him and Ms D'Aguilar to marry.

25. Cumulatively and applying the standard  of  proof  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  produced  sufficient
    evidence to show that he arrived in the United Kingdom in 1959 but if I
    am wrong about that he had certainly arrived towards the end of 1963 or
    early 1964 which must have been the time at which  his  daughter  Janet
    was conceived, since she was born on 5 September  1964.   Additionally,
    on the evidence that I have heard there is no good  reason  to  suppose
    that the appellant has left the United Kingdom at any time between  his
    date of arrival and now.  There is no evidence to this effect  and  the
    evidence that there is, points in the other direction.

26. Although I was not addressed on the point and I do not make  a  finding
    about it, it seems likely that the appellant would have had a right  of
    abode in the United Kingdom as a Citizen  of  the  United  Kingdom  and
    Colonies (CUKC) under the British Nationality Act  1948.   Although  as
    colonies  gained  independence  people  from  the   newly   independent
    countries would normally lose CUKC status and gain citizenship  of  the
    new commonwealth country the development did not affect  the  right  to
    enter the UK as all commonwealth citizens, as well as  CUKCs  continued
    to be classed as British  subjects.   British  subject  status  was  an
    overarching status carrying with it the right of abode in the  UK.   As
    such a person  with  that  right  of  abode  was  generally  free  from
    immigration control and had a right to enter, live and work in the UK.

27. Although the legislation of the 1960s restricted the general  right  of
    abode for British subjects beginning with the  Commonwealth  Immigrants
    Act 1962 I note that Jamaica achieved complete independence within  the
    Commonwealth on 6 August 1962.  Although the respondent in  the  notice
    of refusal concludes that the  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally and that he has remained in the UK without leave  ever  since
    on my findings this is not the case at all.

Conclusions

28. I conclude that for the above reasons the appellant is  able  to  bring
    himself firmly within paragraphs 276A-D of the Immigration Rules.   The
    facts as found show that he has had  at  least  ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence in the United Kingdom. If I am  wrong  about  that  he
    meets the requirements of paragraph 276B (i)(b) and (ii).  There are no
    public interest considerations that it would be undesirable for him  to
    be given indefinite leave to remain on the ground  of  long  residence.
    He is now 71 and has strong  connections  to  the  UK.   There  was  no
    evidence that he has any criminal record  or  that  his  character  and
    conduct is such that it tells against him.  Although he is not able  to
    produce a full employment record the mere fact that he receives half  a
    pension as a result of contributions made by  him  shows  that  he  was
    employed or self-employed  for  a  period  and  paid  contributions  as
    evidenced in the documentation produced recently.  He  has  lived  with
    his partner for some 30 years, one of their children still  lives  with
    them and the appellant's now very aging mother is in the United Kingdom
    still living here.  On any view this  is  in  any  event  an  extremely
    strong Article 8 ECHR claim should I be wrong in  concluding  that  the
    appellant meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

Decision

29. The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred for the reasons that are set out in
    the error of law decision  and  the  determination  is  set  aside.   I
    substitute for that decision that  the  appellant  succeeds  under  the
    Immigration Rules for the reasons given above.

30. This appeal is allowed.

31.  An  anonymity  direction  was  not  sought  and  in   the   particular
    circumstances of this appeal I see no need to make one.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

