
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/06174/2014
                                                               IA/02005/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 December 2014                          |On 6 January 2015             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE CARR DBE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                              Mrs Jenisha Bhau
                             Mr Santosh Shrestha
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Jaisri, Counsel instructed by Sam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an adjourned hearing of an appeal against a decision  dated  28
    March 2014 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge whereby he refused to allow
    the appeals of both applicants against the refusal of the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department ("the SoS") to grant the first  applicant
    Tier 4 student leave and  the  second  applicant  leave  as  a  Tier  4
    dependent.  Permission to appeal has been granted.

2.   At the outset of the hearing we drew to the attention  of  the  parties
    our  concern  that  the  original  decision  taken  by  the  SoS  under
    Immigration Rule 245ZX(ha) was in fact a decision taken by reference to
    the wrong Immigration Rule.

3.   In our judgment Immigration Rules 245ZX (ha) was  not  the  appropriate
    Rule for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to consider any more than it was
    the correct Rule for the SoS to consider, for the  simple  reason  that
    the appellants' application for leave to study was made by reference to
    an application to  study  here  for  an  ACCA  course.   Following  the
    authority of Adeem Rasool Mirza v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] UKUT 0041 (IAC) (approved subsequently by  the  Court
    of Appeal in R (on the application of Syed and another) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 196), it  is  clear  that
    the ACCA does not have degree-awarding powers  and  the  qualifications
    which it awards are not UK-recognised degrees.

   4. Having raised the matter with the parties, there seems to be a general
      consensus between both representatives both for the appellants and for
      the SoS that that was in fact the case.

   5. It appears to us that the correct Rule to have been  applied  and  for
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge to have considered was Immigration  Rule
      245ZX(h) which provides as follows:

         "If the course is below degree level the grant of leave  to  remain
         the applicant is seeking must not  lead  to  the  applicant  having
         spent more than three years in the UK as a Tier 4 Migrant since the
         age of 18 studying courses that did not  consist  of  degree  level
         study."


6.   For this reason and in the light of the effective concessions  made  by
    the parties before us we are satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge materially erred in law below because he proceeded  to  determine
    the appeal by reference to the wrong Immigration Rule.

7.   In those circumstances we set aside the decision below.  We  do  so  in
    order for there to be a fresh decision by the SoS by reference  to  the
    appropriate Rule and any other matters or  submissions  which  are  put
    before her on behalf of the appellants.

8.   No anonymity order is sought nor is one granted. None was made below.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the limited extent of requiring  the  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department to make a fresh and lawful decision.



Signed                                  Date


Mrs Justice Carr


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As we have allowed the appeal  and  because  a  fee  has  been  paid  or  is
payable, we have decided to make a fee award of any fee which has been  paid
or which may be payable.






Signed                                  Date


Mrs Justice Carr
