
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: IA/07017/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 February 2016                           |On 29 March 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                          AYODELE EMMANUEL EHIMHEN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant: Mr Anyene, instructed by Forward & Yussuf Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mrs S Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of the First-
   Tier Tribunal ("FtT") to dismiss his appeal against the decision of the
   respondent to refuse his application for leave to remain in the UK on the
   basis of his private and family life.


2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 22 May 1977 who entered
   the UK on 8 November 2006 on a student visa and thereafter was granted
   five further periods of leave to remain as a student, the final grant
   expiring on 30 October 2014.


3. Whilst in the UK he commenced a relationship with his current partner, a
   citizen of Nigeria, who entered the UK in 2004 on a visitor visa and
   remained after her visa expired. The appellant and his partner have three
   children, all of whom were born in the UK. Their dates of birth are: [ ]
   2007, [ ] 2010 and [ ] 2013.


4. On 28 October 2014 the appellant applied for leave to remain on the
   basis of his private and family life. In a letter dated 27 January 2015,
   the respondent refused the appellant's application on the basis that he
   did not satisfy either Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE(1) of the
   Immigration Rules and that there were no exceptional circumstances to
   warrant granting him leave to remain under Article 8 ECHR outside the
   Rules.


5. The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by FtT Judge Maxwell
   who, in a decision promulgated on 1 September 2015, dismissed the appeal.
   The FtT firstly found that the Immigration Rules could not be satisfied.
   It then considered the appeal outside the Rules following the well
   established structured approach set out in Razgar.  Having found that
   Article 8 was engaged it turned to the question of whether the
   respondent's decision to refuse the appellant's application was
   proportionate.


6. The FtT directed itself to consider Section 117B of the Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") including Section
   117B(6) which stipulates that the public interest does not require the
   removal of a person where (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting
   relationship with a qualifying child and (b) it would not be reasonable
   to expect the child to leave the UK.



7. The FtT found that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting
   relationship with a qualifying child given that his oldest child was
   seven years old and born in the UK. However, it did not accept that it
   would unreasonable to expect this child to leave the UK. The FtT's
   reasons for so finding are set out at paragraph [29]. In sum, the FtT
   found that is in the best interests of the appellant's children, who are
   all still young, to remain with the family unit and that, although it is
   in their interests to continue their education in the UK, if they went to
   Nigeria with their parents they would be with their family and educated
   locally. The FtT also found that the appellant is well qualified and
   resourceful and would be able to integrate into life in Nigeria where his
   mother and six siblings live.


   Grounds of appeal and submissions


8. The grounds of appeal argue that the FtT failed to properly take into
   account the best interests of the appellant's children and did not give
   sufficient consideration to the time the eldest child has resided, and
   been educated, in the UK and the difficulties he would face in being
   removed to Nigeria. The grounds state that the FtT did not take into
   account the emotional and psychological effects of his removal.


9. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Hollingworth. In granting
   permission, Judge Hollingworth stated that it was arguable that relevant
   factors in the social, educational and cultural spectrum in respect of
   the eldest child had not been adequately considered.


10. In his submissions before me, Mr Anyene argued that the FtT had failed
   to fully consider the eldest child's private life including in particular
   his educational and social life in the UK. He submitted that Zoumbas
   [2013] UKSC 74, which had been cited by the FtT, could be distinguished
   from the present appeal because the appellant had been in the UK
   lawfully. He also argued that the FtT had failed to differentiate between
   the children as there is no analysis in the decision of the specific
   interests of the eldest child as opposed to consideration of the
   interests of the children as a whole.


11. Mrs Sreeraman submitted that that the FtT had engaged fully with the
   relevant evidence that was before it about the appellant's children and
   reached a decision that was consistent with the case law including EV
   (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions
   affecting children; onward appeals)[2013] UKUT 00197(IAC). She argued
   Zoumbas could not be distinguished. That decision, like this appeal,
   turned on an assessment of the best interests of the children. She
   submitted that the FtT's decision was not flawed in any material way.


   Consideration


12. Where removal of a child from the UK is contemplated there must be a
   fact specific assessment of his or her best interests. A wide range of
   factors should be considered. As explained in EV (Philippines):


    A decision as to what is in the best interests of children will depend
    on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length of time
    that they have been here; (c) how long they have been in education; (c)
    what stage their education has reached; (d) to what extent they have
    become distanced from the country to which it is proposed that they
    return; (e) how renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what
    extent they will have linguistic, medical or other difficulties in
    adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to which the
    course proposed will interfere with their family life or their rights
    (if they have any) as British citizens.


13. The FtT has not undertaken a separate or distinct analysis in respect
   of each of the appellant's three children. Its consideration of why it
   would be reasonable for the appellant's children to leave the UK is set
   out in paragraphs [28] - [30]. These paragraphs refers to "the interests
   of the appellant's children" rather than to each child separately.


14. However, whilst it would have been preferable - and would have added to
   the decision's clarity - had the FtT made separate findings about each
   child, when the decision is read as a whole and considered in the context
   of the evidence that was before the FtT, it is apparent that the FtT has
   considered the evidence before it relevant to the interests of each of
   the children.

15. The evidence before the FtT was that the appellant's oldest child (born
   in October 2007)  speaks only English, is well integrated into society in
   the UK and is progressing well in (and benefiting from) his education in
   the UK. The evidence concerning the middle child (born in February 2010)
   was similar. The youngest child is under three and as such is at an age
   where his focus is still very much on his parents. There was no evidence
   before the FtT that would support a finding that the appellant's children
   would suffer emotional or psychological damage by moving to Nigeria. Nor
   was there evidence to indicate any special medical or other reason that
   would make it unreasonable or particularly challenging for any of the
   children to relocate.


16. In considering whether it would be reasonable to expect the appellant's
   children to leave the UK, the FtT took into account a wide range of
   factors including: (a) their ages; (b) the time they had been in the UK;
   (c) their education (including the appellant's educational preferences
   and the provision that would be available to them in Nigeria); (d) that
   they have spent their entire lives in the UK and only speak English; (e)
   that in Nigeria they would be with their parents; and (f) that the
   appellant is qualified and resourceful and has ties in Nigeria including
   a mother and siblings.


17. I am satisfied that by setting out and examining the factors listed
   above, the FtT has undertaken an assessment of the best interests of the
   appellant's children that is consistent with  the approach taken in
   Zoumbas and  EV (Philippines). Based on the evidence before it, and for
   the reasons it gave, the FtT was entitled to find that it would be
   reasonable to expect the appellant's children to move to Nigeria with
   their parents and that the removal of the appellant is a proportionate
   interference with his (and his family's) rights under Article 8 ECHR.




    Decision

    a. The appeal is dismissed.

    b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of a material error of law and shall stand.


   |                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 11 March 2016                 |

