
[pic]
IAC-AH-co-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/07330/2014
     ia/01993/2014
     ia/01998/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th October 2014                       |On 6th November 2014            |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                mr Omotayo Festus Igwebueze (first appellant)
           Ms Olanike Faith Okanlawon Igwebueze (second appellant)
          mr Temiloluw Daniel Igwebueze (a minor) (THIRD APPELLANT)
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T Ojo
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Appellants  are  citizens  of  Nigeria.   The  first  and  second
    Appellants are husband and wife and the third Appellant is one of three
    children born to the Appellants having  been  born  on  19th  September
    2006.  The first Appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom in  2003
    on a visit visa and was later granted a multiple  entry  visa  in  2005
    valid until 20th June 2010.  The second Appellant arrived in the UK  in
    2005 on a visit visa with her oldest child Melodey born  on  19th  July
    2001.  She has resided in this country since  arriving  on  that  visit
    visa.  The third Appellant was born on  19th  September  2006  and  the
    first and second Appellants have a further child Iyadunni Faith born on
    29th July 2009.  The Appellants  have  made  several  applications  and
    representations to the Secretary of State on the basis of their private
    and  family  life  for  the  grant  of  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  The last representation was made in October 2013 on
    the ground that the third Appellant was born in the UK over seven years
    ago  and  has  resided  here  without  any  absence.   The  Appellants'
    applications which included two children who are not parties  seemingly
    to this appeal were refused by the Secretary of State on 12th  December
    2013.  At paragraph 3 of the Notice of Refusal sets out in considerable
    detail the immigration history of the Appellants.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Oakley  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  15th  July  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 22nd July  2014  the  Appellants'  appeals
    were allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 22nd July 2014.  Those Grounds of Appeal note  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found that it would be unreasonable to expect the  third
    Appellant to leave the United Kingdom and allow the Appellants' appeals
    under the Immigration Rules.  The grounds contend that there  has  been
    a material misdirection in law in making such a finding.  The Secretary
    of State accepted that the third  Appellant  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for over seven years and that  one  of  the  first  and  second
    Appellants' other children Melodey had been in the United  Kingdom  for
    ten years but submitted that it was reasonable for them  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom with their parents and younger siblings as a family unit
    and to continue their lives in that country.  The  Secretary  of  State
    noted that the judge had placed a great amount of weight on  the  third
    Appellant's and Melodey's education in the United Kingdom  but  pointed
    out that the children are not British citizens and  have  never  had  a
    legitimate expectation of being allowed to remain in this country.   It
    was contended that it was therefore not unreasonable for  the  children
    to return to Nigeria with their parents and that the children could  be
    educated in Nigeria which did not need to be  comparable  to  education
    that they would receive in the United Kingdom.  The  grounds  contended
    that the judge had placed undue weight on the apparent lack of  support
    in Nigeria and that the judge had found that if it  were  not  for  the
    children the first and second Appellant would  be  able  to  reasonably
    return to Nigeria.  On the basis of this finding the Secretary of State
    contended that the children would have clear support for their  parents
    to help them assimilate to life in Nigeria and that the judge has erred
    in placing  weight  on  the  lack  of  further  support.   The  grounds
    stipulate that the Appellants would be able to  establish  their  lives
    together in Nigeria in the same  manner  as  they  did  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that it was  respectfully  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    materially  misdirected  himself  in  finding  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom and  that
    the decision to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules was not in
    accordance with the law.

 4. On 19th August 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Renton granted  permission  to
    appeal  finding  that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  had   given
    insufficient reasons for his decision to find  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for the third Appellant to leave the  UK.   It  is  on  that
    basis that the appeal comes before me to determine whether or not there
    is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  This is an appeal by the Secretary of State but for the purpose
    of continuity throughout the appeal process Mr Igwebueze and his family
    are referred to as the Appellants and the Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.   The  Appellants  appear   by   their   instructed   legal
    representative Mr Ojo.  Mr Ojo is  familiar  with  this  matter  having
    appeared before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Shilliday.



Submissions/Discussions

 5. Mr Shilliday starts by pointing out that the approach  adopted  by  the
    judge to best interests is wrong and  refers  me  to  paragraph  24  of
    Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74.

        "24. There is no irrationality in the conclusion that it was in the
             children's best interests to  go  with  their  parents  to  the
             Republic of Congo. No doubt it would have been possible to have
             stated that, other things being  equal,  it  was  in  the  best
             interests of the children that they and their parents stayed in
             the United Kingdom so that they could obtain such  benefits  as
             health care and education which the  decision-maker  recognised
             might be of a higher standard than would be  available  in  the
             Congo. But other things were not equal. They were  not  British
             citizens. They had no right to future education and health care
             in this country. They were part of  a  close-knit  family  with
             highly educated parents and were of an age when their emotional
             needs could only be  fully  met  within  the  immediate  family
             unit."

 6. He further refers me to paragraphs 58 and 61 of  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in EV (Philippines) & Others v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 pointing out that the assessment of  the
    best interests of children must be made on the basis that the facts are
    as they are in the real world and that if neither parent has the  right
    to remain then that is the background against which the  assessment  is
    conducted.  Thus the ultimate question will be:  is  it  reasonable  to
    expect the child to follow the parent with no right to  remain  to  the
    country of origin.

 7. Mr Shilliday submits that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has not made an
    assessment in this particular appeal of the facts in the real world  as
    set out in EV (Philippines) and that he has consequently erred in  law.
    He submits that this is a very different case from  ZH  (Tanzania)  and
    that this would be a Nigerian family being returned to Nigeria together
    and consequently it would be an artificial exercise  to  hive  off  the
    interests of the children and that the approach adopted by the judge is
    the wrong approach.

 8. He takes me to paragraphs 32 to 34 of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    determination.  He submits that there is no reason for  these  findings
    to appear in the determination and that the entire approach adopted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge is wrong to concentrate on  the  position
    of one of the children and thereafter to expect the  family  to  follow
    the outcome for that child.  He  asks  me  to  find  that  there  is  a
    substantial material error of law in the determination  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and to remit the matter back for rehearing.

 9. Mr Ojo in response points out that the judge has made findings of  fact
    which he was entitled to and that there was no support for  the  family
    available in Nigeria and that it was accepted by the Secretary of State
    that they were ostracised and would become destitute.  He  contends  as
    the findings of fact are  not  challenged  and  this  appeal  has  been
    allowed on the best interests of the children that there is no material
    error of law.  He submits that Rule 276 is a stand alone Rule and  that
    the best interests of the children have been properly considered by the
    judge and that he used this as a central factor.  Consequently there is
    no material error of law and  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal
    should be dismissed.



The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.



Findings of Error of Law

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  started  by  making  a  finding  at
    paragraph 27 that there is no  reason  whatsoever  why  the  first  and
    second Appellants if they were on  their  own  would  not  be  able  to
    reasonably return to Nigeria.  The judge has then gone on  to  consider
    the position of the third Appellant and that other children need to  be
    considered under the same Rule.  He has taken the view the children are
    being educated in the United Kingdom and have received their  education
    here, that the third Appellant has been in the UK for over seven  years
    and that whilst accepting that all the family constitute a family  unit
    that the third Appellant along with Melodey would  qualify  under  Rule
    276ADE(vi) and that it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  them  to
    return.

13. I agree with the Secretary of State that  the  judge  has  adopted  the
    wrong approach.  Whether ultimately any other Tribunal would  make  the
    same decision is a matter for rehearing.  I emphasise  that  I  do  not
    within this determination make any finding one way or the other  as  to
    whether the ultimate decision should or should  not  be  to  allow  the
    appeal.  The correct approach to be adopted in cases of this nature  is
    to follow the approach firstly set out in Zoumbas at  paragraph  24  as
    set out above and indeed within the Grounds of Appeal.   I  acknowledge
    that a Tribunal is concerned with how emphatic an answer  falls  to  be
    given to the question: is it in the best  interests  of  the  child  to
    remain?  The longer a child has been here and  the  more  advanced  the
    stage of his or her education the looser  his  or  her  ties  with  the
    country in question will be and the more deleterious  the  consequences
    of his return the greater that weight that falls into one side  of  the
    scales.  However it has to be balanced  against  strong  weight  to  be
    given to the need to maintain immigration control  in  pursuit  of  the
    economic wellbeing of the country and the fact that the Appellants have
    no entitlement to remain.  It is necessary to consider  paragraph  117B
    of the Immigration Act 2014 and also  to  bear  in  mind  the  approach
    adopted by the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines)  in  particular  the
    approach set out at paragraphs 58, 60 and 61.   These  are  key  facts.
    The Appellants are not British citizens and the judge has not addressed
    this issue.  The emphasis placed on cases of this nature by  the  Court
    of Appeal at paragraphs 60 and 61 have not been considered by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  It is important that they  should  be  considered
    and to that extent there is a material error of  law  in  the  approach
    that the judge has made to this particular case.  The correct  approach
    in such circumstances it to remit the matter  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard at Hatton Cross before any Immigration Judge other
    than Immigration Judge Oakley.  The decision paragraph herein sets  out
    the directions for the rehearing of this matter.



Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material error
    of law and is set aside.

15. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard at Hatton
    Cross on the first available date  42  days  hence  with  an  estimated
    length of hearing of two hours.   The  hearing  is  to  be  before  any
    Immigration Judge other than Immigration Judge Oakley.  Leave is  given
    to either party to file additional evidence upon  which  they  seek  to
    rely at least seven days prehearing copies of which evidence is  to  be
    served upon the other party and lodged at the Tribunal.   None  of  the
    findings of fact are  to  stand.   Should  the  Appellants  require  an
    interpreter then their instructed solicitors should notify the Tribunal
    at least fourteen days prior to the restored hearing date.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 3rd November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


