
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC/DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07658/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 April 2016                              |On 11 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                        mr Naeem Noormohamed Ughradar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl, Counsel instructed by M A Consultants
(Blackburn)
For the Respondent:    Mr Geoff Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Dickson sitting  at  Bradford  on  6  August
    2015) whereby he dismissed under the Rules and on human rights  grounds
    (Article 8 ECHR) outside the Rules the appellant's appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of  State  to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  as  an
    overstayer whose human rights claim had been refused.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not  consider
    that  the  appellant  or  his  family  require  anonymity   for   these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 5  January  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osborne  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         1.   The grounds seek permission to appeal a Decision  and  reasons
             of First-tier Tribunal Judge N P Dickson who in a Decision and
             reasons promulgated 21 August 2015 dismissed  the  Appellant's
             appeal against the Respondent's Decision to  refuse  leave  to
             remain on the basis of his family and private life pursuant to
             the Immigration Rules and Article 8, ECHR.

         2.   The grounds assert that the Judge erred in  his  consideration
             by failing to have any or any proper  regard  to  Section  55,
             Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  (BCIA)  2009  which
             amounts to a material error of law.  What is determined to  be
             in a child's best interests  should  customarily  dictate  the
             outcome of the appeal.  The best interests of any child should
             have been addressed.  Despite its having been  raised  at  the
             hearing the Judge failed to have any or any proper  regard  to
             Section 55, 2009 Act.  The best interests of  the  child  were
             not addressed.  The Judge  failed  to  properly  identify  and
             evaluate the best interests of the  child.   The  Judge  found
             that it is reasonable to expect a child of this  age  to  live
             with her parents if the Sponsor decides to join the  Appellant
             in India.  The Appellant's daughter is not referred  to  again
             in relation to the Article  8  claim.   The  Judge  failed  to
             consider the effect of  the  severance  of  the  relationships
             between the  Appellant's  daughter  and  her  extended  family
             living in Britain in determining her best interests and failed
             to consider what accommodation and support will  be  available
             for the Appellant's daughter  in  India  and  how  that  might
             differ from her quality of living in the UK in determining her
             best interests.  It is submitted that the  best  interests  of
             the Appellant's daughter can only be served by  her  remaining
             in the UK with both her parents.

         3.   In an otherwise focused Decision and reasons it is nonetheless
             arguable that the Judge has arguably  failed  to  specifically
             consider the best interests of the child.  It is arguable that
             the Judge should not have done so and that not to have done so
             amounts to an arguable error of law.

Relevant Background Facts

 3. The appellant is a national of India, whose date of  birth  3  December
    1988.  He first entered the United Kingdom  on  30  October  2008  with
    valid entry clearance as a working holidaymaker.  His  entry  clearance
    in this capacity was valid until 8 October 2010.  On 1 October 2010  he
    applied for leave to remain  under  Article  8.   The  application  was
    refused on 8 November 2010, and his subsequent appeal was dismissed  by
    Judge Ghaffar in a decision promulgated on 19 January 2011.  Permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kekic on 9 February 2011.

 4. The appellant did not leave the country after his appeal rights  became
    exhausted, but entered into  a  relationship  with  Ms  Feraz  Atha,  a
    British national whose date of birth is 27 August 1988.  The  appellant
    was encountered by Immigration Officers at Bolton Registry Office on 29
    January 2014.  He was arrested and served papers as an overstayer.

 5. The appellant made a further application for leave to remain  on  human
    rights grounds.  His appeal against the refusal was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal in a decision  promulgated  on  13  May
    2014.  Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  refused  on  18  June
    2014.

 6. Notwithstanding the negative outcome of his two appeals, the  appellant
    entered an Islamic marriage with Ms Atha in  the  summer  of  2014  and
    subsequently entered into a civil marriage with her on 9 December 2014.
     From the time of their religious marriage, the appellant and  Ms  Atha
    cohabited, and on 27 May  2015  Ms  Atha  gave  birth  to  a  daughter,
    Khadija, who is a British citizen through her mother.

 7. On 6 October 2014 the appellant submitted  a  further  application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his family  and  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom, and this was refused by the respondent with no right of
    appeal on 4 December 2014.  The appellant made further  representations
    in the same month, and the  respondent  refused  the  application  upon
    reconsideration on 5 February 2015. The  appellant  was  given  an  in-
    country right of appeal.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 8. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Dickson.   Ms  Alton
    of Counsel appeared on behalf of the  appellant.   The  judge  received
    oral evidence from the appellant and his wife.

 9. The appellant's evidence was that while  he  was  living  in  India  he
    worked as a supervisor with Shital Developments.  His family  in  India
    included his parents and two sisters.

10. The sponsor gave evidence that she worked as a teacher at the  Daubhill
    Mosque where she taught young children.  Her earnings were some  �79  a
    week, and so she would not be able to  demonstrate  an  income  of  the
    level required under the Rules.  She was aware the appellant  had  come
    to the United Kingdom as a working holidaymaker, but she was not  aware
    that he had lost his final appeal in Birmingham and she  believed  that
    an appeal was in progress.  She had never lived in  or  visited  India,
    and she only had limited knowledge of Gujarati.  She had spoken to  the
    appellant's parents on  the  telephone,  but  she  claimed  there  were
    communication problems because of her lack of fluency in Gujarati.

11. In her closing  submissions  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  Ms  Alton
    submitted that his  relationship  with  the  sponsor  was  genuine  and
    subsisting and  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  family
    returning to India.  She relied on the House of Lords  judgment  in  ZH
    (Tanzania).  She submitted it was not in the child's interest  for  her
    to live in India with her parents, citing VW (Uganda) and Others [2009]
    EWCA Civ 5.

12. In his subsequent decision, Judge Dickson found that the appellant  was
    well-aware that he had no leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  after
    his appeal rights were extinguished in February  2011.   The  appellant
    originally said he would give evidence in  English.   However  it  soon
    became apparent that his English was not sufficient to answer questions
    from his Counsel, and the services of the court interpreter were  used.
    He was  not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  had  limited  knowledge  of
    Gujarati.  It was reasonable to assume  that  the  sponsor  would  have
    needed to know Gujarati to speak to the appellant when they met. He was
    also not satisfied that  the  sponsor  believed  that  the  appellant's
    appeal was outstanding at the time they met, or at the time  that  they
    formed an intention to marry.

13. The sponsor had recently taken a masters degree, and had said that  she
    had finished her training for counselling.  The judge observed that the
    sponsor would have the support of her family in the United Kingdom, and
    he was not satisfied that in the  future  she  would  not  be  able  to
    satisfy the financial requirements of  Appendix  FM  by  generating  an
    income of the requisite amount through working.

14. The judge went on to give his reasons for finding  that  the  appellant
    did not qualify for leave to remain under the Rules.   There  were  not
    insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  the  sponsor  and  their
    daughter continuing outside the United  Kingdom.   The  appellant  also
    could not succeed under paragraph 276ADE as he would have no difficulty
    in reintegrating into Indian society.

15. Having stated his conclusions under the  Rules,  the  judge  turned  at
    paragraph [56] to consider  an  Article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules.
    Paragraphs [55] to [57] of the judge's decision are set out below:

         "55. With regard to the claim under paragraph EX.1 and EX.2  it  is
             reasonable to expect a child of this  age  to  live  with  her
             parents if the Sponsor decides to join the Appellant in India.
              There are in my view no insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
             life with the Sponsor and their  daughter  continuing  outside
             the United Kingdom.  The Sponsor will have the support of  the
             Appellant and his family.  There is no reason  why  she  could
             not obtain employment in say a mosque in India as she does  in
             the United Kingdom.  She also has other  qualifications  which
             would be of  assistance.   As  I  have  previously  said,  the
             Appellant's time in the United  Kingdom  and  his  ability  to
             speak some English will assist him in obtaining employment  in
             India again.  While they would face some time to reacclimatise
             they would not face  very  significant  difficulties  or  very
             serious hardship if they both decided to live in India.

         56.  With regard to the Article 8 claim I have taken  into  account
             the case law set out in this determination and the submissions
             of Ms Alton on behalf of the  Appellant.   I  also  take  into
             account Section 117B and  in  particular  the  maintenance  of
             effective immigration controls being in the  public  interest.
             The Appellant has an appalling immigration record.  He has not
             established  that  he  has  received  poor  advice  from   his
             solicitors  who  made  representations  on  his  behalf.   The
             Appellant did in my view make a conscious effort not to attend
             the hearings.  I accept that the  Appellant  does  speak  some
             English and his English would no doubt improve if he remained.
              I repeat that the Sponsor was well aware of  the  Appellant's
             immigration status when they started  their  relationship  and
             indeed when they decided to marry.  I  therefore  give  little
             weight  to  this  relationship  and  private  life  which  was
             established at a time when the Appellant  was  in  the  United
             Kingdom unlawfully.

         57.  I accept that the Appellant's removal will interfere with  his
             private  and  family  life.   I  have  balanced  the   various
             considerations  that  I  have  set  out  at  length  in   this
             determination.  I accept that the Appellant  would  prefer  to
             remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  the  Sponsor  and  his
             daughter.  After taking all these matters into account and the
             submissions of Ms Alton on behalf of  the  Appellant,  I  have
             reached the conclusion that the Appellant's  removal  is  both
             necessary and proportionate having regard to the circumstances
             of this particular case."

The Rule 24 Response

16. On 7 January 2016 Mr Esen Tufan of the Specialist Appeals Team  settled
    the Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.   In  summary,  he  submitted
    that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  directed  himself
    appropriately:

         "3.  In a comprehensive determination Judge Dickson considered  all
             of the evidence submitted and made sustainable findings  under
             the requirements of the Rules.  The judge  concluded  at  {55]
             that the requirements of EX.1 and EX.2 are not met and that it
             would be reasonable for the child to live in  India  with  her
             parents.  The child is only several months  old.   It  is  not
             clear from the grounds as  to  what  other  consideration  the
             judge would materially have made as to the best  interests  of
             the child.  It is trite law that the best interests of a child
             are served  by  being  with  his  or  her  parents.   In  this
             particular caser it is clear that it  is  reasonable  for  the
             appellant's spouse to join him in India and that  the  child's
             best interests lie in being with them.

         4.   Furthermore it is clear from Section Gen of Appendix FM that a
             s. 55 considerations are  embedded  within  the  requirements.
             This section states thus with added emphasis:

                  Section GEN: General

                  Purpose

                  GEN.1.1.  This route is for  those  seeking  to  enter  or
                  remain in the UK on the basis of their family life with  a
                  person who is a British Citizen, is settled in the UK,  or
                  is in the UK with limited leave as  a  refugee  or  person
                  granted humanitarian protection (and the applicant  cannot
                  seek leave to enter or remain in the UK  as  their  family
                  member under Part 11 of these rules).   It  sets  out  the
                  requirements to be met and,  in  considering  applications
                  under this route, it reflects how, under Article 8 of  the
                  Human  Rights  Convention,  the  balance  will  be  struck
                  between the right to respect for private and  family  life
                  and the legitimate aims of protecting  national  security,
                  public safety and the economic well-being of the  UK;  the
                  prevention of disorder and crime; the protection of health
                  or morals; and the protection of the rights  and  freedoms
                  of others (and in doing  so  also  reflects  the  relevant
                  public interest considerations as set out in  Part  5A  of
                  the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002).   It
                  also takes into account the need to safeguard and  promote
                  the welfare of children  in  the  UK,  in  line  with  the
                  Secretary of State's duty under section 55 of the Borders,
                  Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

17. At the hearing before me, Ms Faryl relied on the case of  Abdul  [2016]
    UKUT 00106 in which the President of the Upper Tribunal emphasised  the
    need for the decision maker to make clear findings on the duty  arising
    under Section 55, balancing all relevant factors.  She submitted  that,
    as the Secretary of State's own internal guidance recognised, a British
    national child cannot be forced to leave the UK; and that, on a  proper
    consideration of  the  child's  best  interests,  the  outcome  of  the
    proportionality assessment could  have,  and  should  have,  yielded  a
    different outcome.

18. While formally adhering to the Rule 24 response, Mr  Harrison  conceded
    that the judge had failed to engage directly with Section 55,  and  had
    not conducted a clear assessment of the child's best interests.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

19. I find that an error of law is made out for the  reasons  canvassed  by
    the representatives on both sides.  In short, the judge needed to  show
    that he had conducted an adequate assessment of  the  affected  child's
    best interests before reaching a conclusion on proportionality  outside
    the Rules, and on the linked question of whether it was  reasonable  to
    expect a British national child to relocate with her parents to  India.



The Re-Making of the Decision

20. The necessary starting point in re-making the decision is that there is
    no challenge by way of appeal to the judge's findings under the  Rules.
    There are not insurmountable obstacles  to  married  life  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor being carried on in India, and the  appellant
    does not qualify for leave to remain on private life grounds under Rule
    276ADE.

The Assessment of Best Interests

21. EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 provides  helpful  guidance
    on the assessment of best interests and the related question of whether
    it is reasonable to expect a child to accompany a parent or parents  to
    the latter's country of origin.  Clarke LJ said:
       34. In determining whether or not, in a case such  as  the  present,
           the need for immigration control outweighs the best interests of
           the children, it is necessary to determine the relative strength
           of the factors which make it in their best interests  to  remain
           here; and also to take account of any  factors  that  point  the
           other way.


       35. A decision as to what is in the best interests of children  will
           depend on a number of factors such as (a)  their  age;  (b)  the
           length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they  have
           been in education; (c) what stage their education  has  reached;
           (d) to what extent they have become distanced from  the  country
           to which it is proposed that  they  return;  (e)  how  renewable
           their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent  they  will
           have linguistic, medical or other difficulties  in  adapting  to
           life in that country; and (g) the extent  to  which  the  course
           proposed will interfere with their family life or  their  rights
           (if they have any) as British citizens.


       36. In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic an answer
           falls to be given to the question: is it in the  best  interests
           of the child to remain? The longer the child has been here,  the
           more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his  education,  the
           looser his ties with the  country  in  question,  and  the  more
           deleterious the consequences of  his  return,  the  greater  the
           weight that falls  into  one  side  of  the  scales.  If  it  is
           overwhelmingly in the child's best interests that he should  not
           return, the need to maintain immigration control  may  well  not
           tip the balance. By contrast  if  it  is  in  the  child's  best
           interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with  some  factors
           pointing the other way), the result may be the opposite.


       37. In the balance on the other side there falls to  be  taken  into
           account the strong weight to be given to the  need  to  maintain
           immigration control in pursuit of the economic well-being of the
           country and the fact that, ex hypothesi, the applicants have no
           entitlement to remain. The immigration history  of  the  parents
           may also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers, or have acted
           deceitfully.
22.  Lewison LJ said:

         49.  Second, as Christopher Clarke LJ points out, the evaluation of
             the  best  interests  of  children  in  immigration  cases  is
             problematic.  In the  real  world,  the  appellant  is  almost
             always the parent who has no right to remain in the  UK.   The
             parent thus relies  on  the  best  interests  of  his  or  her
             children in order  to  piggyback  on  their  rights.   In  the
             present case, as  there  is  no  doubt  in  many  others,  the
             Immigration Judge made two findings about the children's  best
             interests:

             (a)  the best interests  of  the  children  are  obviously  to
                  remain with their parents; [29] and

             (b)  it is in the best interests of the  children  that  their
                  education in the UK [is] not to be disrupted [53].

         50.  What, if any, assumptions are to be made about the immigration
             status of the parent?  If one takes the facts as they  are  in
             reality, then the first of the  Immigration  Judge's  findings
             about  the  best  interests  of  the  children  point  towards
             removal.  If, on the other hand, one assumes that  the  parent
             has the right to remain, then one is assuming  the  answer  to
             the very question the Tribunal has to decide.  Or is there  is
             a middle ground, in which one has to assess the best interests
             of the children without regard to the  immigration  status  of
             the parent?

23.  The judge went on to analyse ZH (Tanzania) v  Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 in order to elicit an answer to  this
    question.  He reached the following conclusion:

         58.   In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis the  facts
             are as they are in the real world.  One parent has no right to
             remain, but the other parent  does,  that  is  the  background
             against which the assessment is conducted.  If neither  parent
             has the right to remain, then that is the  background  against
             which the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question
             will be is it reasonable to expect the  child  to  follow  the
             parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?"

      On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
      follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the family would be
      separated and the children would be deprived of the right to  grow  up
      in the country of which they were citizens.  That was a long way  from
      the facts of the case before them.  No one in the family was a British
      citizen.  None had the right to remain in the country.  If the  mother
      was removed, the father had no independent right to remain.  With  the
      parents removed,  then  it  was  entirely  reasonable  to  expect  the
      children to go with them:

         Although it is, of course a question of fact for  the  Tribunal,  I
         cannot see that  the  desirability  of  being  educated  at  public
         expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to  the  children  of
         remaining with their parents.  Just as we  cannot  provide  medical
         treatment for the world, so we cannot educate the world.

      Jackson LJ agreed with both judgments.

The relationship between s117B(6) and the Rules

24.  In AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held  that  the
    duty of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  quite  clear.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal was required  to  have  regard  to  considerations  listed  in
    Section  117B.   It  had  no  discretion  to   leave   any   of   those
    considerations out of account, if  it  was  a  consideration  that  was
    raised on the evidence before it.  The Tribunal continued in  paragraph
    [13]:

         There is also in our judgment no requirement that  the  FtT  should
         pose and answer the same question  more  than  once,  simply  as  a
         matter of form.  Thus since both  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
         Immigration Rules, and S117B(6), both raise the  same  question  in
         relation to a particular child, of  whether  or  not  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK: it is  a  question
         that need only be answered once.

The Article 8 Claim outside the Rules

22. As the question only needs to be answered once, I find it convenient to
    answer it in the context of an Article 8 Claim outside the Rules.

23. I answer questions 1 and  2  of  the  Razgar  test  in  favour  of  the
    appellant, as the effect of proposed interference is to break up family
    life established in the United  Kingdom  (albeit  that  there  are  not
    insurmountable obstacles to such family  life  being  reconstituted  in
    India).

24. I answer questions 3 and  4  of  the  Razgar  test  in  favour  of  the
    respondent.

25. On the crucial question of proportionality, the best interests  of  the
    child affected by the refusal decision are a primary  consideration  in
    the proportionality assessment.  The child is a British  national,  and
    she is therefore a qualifying child for the purposes of Section 117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act.

26. The child's mother faces a reasonable choice.  She can either choose to
    relocate to India  with  the  child  to  enjoy  family  life  with  the
    appellant there, or she can remain here with the  child  for  the  time
    being with a view to supporting an application for entry  clearance  by
    the appellant once she has so arranged her affairs  so  as  to  earn  a
    sufficient income as to enable the  appellant  to  meet  the  financial
    requirements of Appendix FM, and the associated evidential requirements
    of Appendix FM-SE.

27. If the mother chooses the first option, this will  be  adverse  to  the
    child's best interests in that, for the foreseeable future,  the  child
    will be deprived of the benefits of British citizenship, and  she  will
    also be deprived of regular and direct contact with family  members  on
    her mother's side of the family.  However, given her very young age, by
    far the most important consideration in the best  interests  assessment
    is the desirability of her remaining with  both  her  parents  wherever
    they happen to be, and there is no reason to suppose (in the  light  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings of fact) that her  welfare  or
    wellbeing would be to any degree imperilled  by  her  living  with  her
    parents in India as opposed to living  with  her  parents  in  the  UK.
    There are also  counterbalancing  advantages  in  her  going  with  her
    parents to India in that the child will have the opportunity  to  enjoy
    regular and direct contact in India with family members on her father's
    side of the family, and she will be immersed in the social and cultural
    milieu from which her father springs. She will also be  able  to  enjoy
    the benefits of being a citizen of India as well as being a citizen  of
    the United Kingdom.

28. Conversely, if  the  mother  chooses  to  stay  here  with  a  view  to
    supporting an application for entry clearance  by  the  father  in  due
    course, this will be adverse to the child's best interests in that  for
    the foreseeable future she will not have day-to-day  contact  with  her
    father.  But there is no reason to suppose that as a result  the  child
    will have unmet needs, or that the child will not be  adequately  cared
    for by a devoted mother who can draw upon assistance from other members
    of the family in providing childcare when she is at work.

29. My conclusion is that it is in the  best  interests  of  the  child  to
    accompany her father  and  mother  to  India,  and  I  consider  it  is
    reasonable to expect the mother to act in accordance with  her  child's
    best interests.  She knew when she entered into a relationship with the
    appellant, and particularly when she married him, that he  was  present
    in the country illegally and that their ability to  enjoy  family  life
    with a child in the United Kingdom on  a  permanent  basis  was  highly
    uncertain, given his illegal status. But if the child's mother  chooses
    to remain here to bring up the child as a single parent  for  the  time
    being, this will not be gravely inimical to the child's best interests.

30. Turning to wider proportionality considerations, I must have regard  to
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  The appellant is not fluent in  English,
    and the appellant is not financially independent  in  that  his  wife's
    income falls far short of the income level required by Appendix FM.  As
    found by the judge, the appellant has an appalling immigration history.

31. Accordingly, I find that the decision strikes a fair  balance  between,
    on the hand, the rights and interests of the appellant, the sponsor and
    their child, and, on the other hand, the wider  interests  of  society.
    It is proportionate to the legitimate end sought to be achieved, namely
    the maintenance of firm and effective immigration controls.

The conclusion on the question of reasonableness

32. By the same token, I find that it is reasonable to expect the child  to
    leave the UK pursuant to Section 117B(6).  For  the  same  reason,  the
    appellant does not qualify for leave to remain under EX.1(a)(ii).

Notice of Decision

The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the appellant's appeal against removal is dismissed  under  the
Rules and also outside the Rules under Article 8 ECHR.

I make no anonymity direction.







Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson






