
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LR-V1

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07536/2015
                                                               IA/08664/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th November 2016                         |On 20th December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           a l A (first appellant)
                          H o a (second appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Reid, Counsel for Obadiah Rose Solicitors, London


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The first Appellant's date  of
    birth is 21st October 1974.  She is the mother of the second  Appellant
    and her date of birth is 23rd March 2002.  The second Appellant is also
    a Dutch citizen.  The first Appellant has a daughter, AHC born on  25th
    March 2003 who is a Nigerian and Irish citizen.   The  first  Appellant
    applied for a derivative residence card as the primary carer of a child
    in education whose EEA national parent has worked in the United Kingdom
    and who was resident in the United  Kingdom  while  the  child  was  in
    education.  The second Appellant is her dependant and the  applications
    were refused under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2012, Regulation 15A (2) in a refusal letter dated 13th  January  2015.
    The appeals were heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Samimi  on
    7th April 2016.  She allowed their appeals under Article 15A of the  EU
    Regulations 2006. The decision was promulgated on 20th June 2016.

 3. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent.  The permission states that the appeals were allowed as the
    judge believed the Appellants had some right of residence deriving from
    the CJEU's judgement in Zambrano, on the basis that the children  would
    have to leave the territory of the EU should the Appellants  be  forced
    to return to Nigeria but this is not the case as neither  EEA  national
    child is a British citizen.  The  judge  failed  to  consider  why  the
    children could not live in Ireland or the Netherlands so, as  there  is
    an alternative to the children leaving the territory of the EU,  it  is
    arguable that the principles in Zambrano do not apply. The  judge  also
    made no findings on the  other  parts  of  Regulation  15A  and  it  is
    arguable that the Appellants did not meet any of these provisions.

 4. There is no Rule 24 response.

 5. The Appellants' representative submitted that she accepts that there is
    a material error of law in the judge's decision.  The judge  considered
    the case in terms of Ruiz Zambrano C-34(09).  She submitted  that  this
    was the wrong basis on which to consider this case  and  she  suggested
    that the case be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. The Presenting Officer accepted that this would be the correct  way  to
    treat this application.



Notice of Decision

 7. There is a clear material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Judge's
    decision.  It has been considered on the wrong basis.  The decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Samimi promulgated on 20th June 2016 must  be
    set aside.

 8. No findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  can  stand.   Under  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the  nature  and
    extent of judicial fact-finding necessary for the decision to be remade
    is such that it is appropriate to remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Members of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider  the
    case are not to include Judge Samimi.

 9. Anonymity has been directed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

