
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP/LW-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07357/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 January 2016                   |On 1 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MRS Rozina Hussain
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. K. Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. M. Iqbal, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and Mrs  Hussain
    as "the appellant".

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  who  is  married  to  Mr.  Shah
    Hussain, who first entered the United  Kingdom  as  a  student.   On  7
    January 2015 he was granted indefinite leave to remain  under  the  ten
    year long residence provisions.  The appellant  and  her  husband  were
    married on 7 August 2006.  She first entered the United  Kingdom  as  a
    student dependent on her husband on 11  December  2006  with  leave  to
    remain until 28 February 2007.  There were various grants of leave as a
    student  dependent  on  her  husband  until  20  December   2012.    An
    application for leave to remain was commenced on 24 September 2012  but
    withdrawn by the appellant on 19 January 2015.  A  further  application
    was made on 8 December 2014 but  refused  on  11  February  2015.   The
    Reasons for Refusal Letter stated that:-

         ".   the Appellant did not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  R-
             LTRP1.1(c) of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  rules  because
             specified evidence  relating  to  the  financial  and  English
             language requirements had not been provided;

         .    the Appellant did not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  R-
             LTRP1.1(d) because paragraph EX.1 was not  satisfied  in  that
             the Appellant had not  shown  that  there  are  insurmountable
             obstacles to family life with her partner  continuing  outside
             the United Kingdom;

         .    the Appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
             276ADE(vi) because it was not accepted  that  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to her integration into Pakistan if
             she required to leave the United Kingdom and return there;

         .    it was not accepted that there were exceptional  circumstances
             justifying a grant of leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
             outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules."

 3. For those reasons the respondent made a  decision  to  refuse  to  vary
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to remove  the  appellant  by
    way of directions under Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 4. The appellant appealed and following a hearing on 30 June  2015,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 8 July 2015, Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Chapman dismissed her appeal under the Immigration Rules but allowed it
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Cruthers on 7 October 2015.  His reasons for
    so doing were:-

         "1.  By a decision promulgated on 8 July 2015, First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge  Chapman  allowed  this  appeal.   Having  assessed  the
             evidence, the judge had concluded  that  the  appeal  did  not
             succeed by reference to the immigration rules (paragraph 39 of
             the decision under consideration).  But the judge's  view  was
             that the appeal did succeed through the application of article
             8 of the European Convention on Human Rights 'at  large'  (his
             paragraphs 40 to 51).

         2.   It is arguable, as per the grounds  on  which  the  respondent
             seeks permission to  appeal,  that  the  judge  may  not  have
             sufficiently taken account of some of those factors  that  the
             grounds make reference to.  Specifically:

                . it is arguable that the judge should have factored in what
                  the   Court   of   Appeal   recently   said   as   regards
                  'exceptionality' in SS (Congo) & Others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
                  387.  And arguable that  the  judge  may  not  have  given
                  sufficient weight  to  the  immigration  rules  (see,  for
                  instance, his paragraph 44)

                . and arguable that the judge has not  dealt  properly  with
                  the clear possibility of the appellant  returning  to  her
                  country  of   nationality   (Pakistan)   and   making   an
                  application for entry clearance as  a  spouse  from  there
                  (see Chen (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary  separation
                  - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC), circulated
                  on 20 April 2015)"

 6. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 7. Mr. Norton relied on the respondent's  grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal and further submitted that paragraphs 35 and 37 of  the  judge's
    decision disclose no "insurmountable obstacles" or  "serious  hardship"
    to suggest that there was any reason why the appellant could not return
    to her country of origin.  This related to the judge's analysis of  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.  This,  he  said,  is  in  contrast
    though to paragraph 51 of his decision and the analysis therein of  the
    required balancing exercise under Article 8.

 8. He further submitted that these issues have  already  been  dealt  with
    within the Immigration Rules themselves and  there  is  an  expectation
    that the "Rules" will be followed.  There is  nothing  in  this  appeal
    that enables consideration of Article 8 outside the "Rules".  Indeed at
    no point in the judge's findings does he lawfully engage with the  test
    outside of the "Rules" - that being, in this  case  by  virtue  of  the
    failure of the appellant to take the benefit of EX.1 of the  "Rules"  a
    "strict  test  of  exceptionality".   The  judge's   consideration   is
    therefore contrary to the decision of SSHD v SS (Congo)  &  Ors  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387, in particular he relied upon paragraph 31  thereof  which
    states:-

         "In other contexts, it cannot simply be assumed that a strict legal
         test of exceptional circumstances will be applicable when examining
         the application of Article 8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  (or
         within  the  Rules  themselves,  where  particular  paragraphs  are
         formulated so as fully to cover the applicability of Article 8,  as
         in paragraphs 399 and 399A as interpreted in  MF  (Nigeria)).   The
         relevant general balance  of  public  interest  considerations  and
         individual interests will  vary  between  different  parts  of  the
         Rules.  It is only if the normal balance of interests  relevant  to
         the general area in question is such  as  to  require  particularly
         great weight to be given to the public interest  as  compared  with
         the individual interests at  stake  (as  in  the  precarious  cases
         considered in Nagre and  the  foreign  criminal  deportation  cases
         considered in MF (Nigeria)) that a strict  test  of  exceptionality
         will apply."

 9. Beyond that it was argued that the  judge  failed  in  considering  the
    public interest by failing to take account of  other  material  factors
    such as that the appellant's family life  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
    precarious on the basis that she only ever had limited leave to  remain
    and would have, like her husband  at  the  time  of  the  decision,  no
    expectation of remaining in  the  United  Kingdom  other  than  through
    successful reliance on the substantive Immigration Rules.

10. Further it was argued that the judge misapplied the  authorities  of  R
    (on the application  of  Chen)  v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -
    temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) and
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 itself.

11. Mr.  Iqbal  responded  by  submitting  that  the  respondent's  grounds
    themselves were flawed and it was not possible for family  life  to  be
    precarious only "immigration status and private life".

12. He referred me to paragraph 39 of Nagre, R (on application of)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWHC 720 which states:-

         "In such a case, there is a substantial body of Strasbourg case-law
         which explains the general approach to be  applied  when  assessing
         the proportionality of a removal of a foreign national by reference
         to Article 8.  In Rodrigues da Silva and  Hoogkamer  v  Netherlands
         (2007)  44  EHRR  34,  drawing  on  previous  statements   in   its
         jurisprudence, the ECtHR explained the approach  at  para.  39,  as
         follows:

             'The Court reiterates that in the context of both positive and
             negative obligations the State  must  strike  a  fair  balance
             between the competing interests of the individual and  of  the
             community as a whole. However,  in  both  contexts  the  State
             enjoys a certain margin of appreciation. Moreover, Art.8  does
             not entail  a  general  obligation  for  a  state  to  respect
             immigrants' choice of the country of their  residence  and  to
             authorise family reunion in its territory. Nevertheless, in  a
             case which concerns family life as well  as  immigration,  the
             extent of a state's obligations  to  admit  to  its  territory
             relatives of persons residing there will vary according to the
             particular circumstances  of  the  persons  involved  and  the
             general interest. Factors to be taken  into  account  in  this
             context are the extent to which  family  life  is  effectively
             ruptured, the extent of the ties  in  the  contracting  state,
             whether there are insurmountable obstacles in the way  of  the
             family living in the country of origin of one or more of them,
             whether there are  factors  of  immigration  control  (e.g.  a
             history of breaches of immigration law) or  considerations  of
             public  order  weighing  in  favour  of   exclusion.   Another
             important consideration will also be whether family  life  was
             created at a time when the persons involved  were  aware  that
             the immigration status of  one  of  them  was  such  that  the
             persistence of that family life within the  host  state  would
             from the outset be precarious. The Court has  previously  held
             that where this is the case it is likely only  to  be  in  the
             most exceptional circumstances that the removal  of  the  non-
             national family member will constitute a  violation  of  Art.8
             .'"

    He  argued  that  "precariousness"  only  comes  into  play  when   the
    relationship of a party is formed when the status  of  that  person  is
    precarious.  Also that the judge had correctly analysed Section 117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which has  no  mention
    of "precariousness" but talks about "unlawfulness".  As the  judge  had
    not allowed the appeal on private life grounds it was a lawful decision
    upon a correct application of Section 117B.

13. As to the second of the respondent's grounds he argued  that  following
    SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 paragraph 31 - which states:-

         "In other contexts, it cannot simply be assumed that a strict legal
         test of exceptional circumstances will be applicable when examining
         the application of Article 8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  (or
         within  the  Rules  themselves,  where  particular  paragraphs  are
         formulated so as fully to cover the applicability of Article 8,  as
         in paragraphs 399 and 399A as interpreted  in  MF  (Nigeria)).  The
         relevant general balance  of  public  interest  considerations  and
         individual interests will  vary  between  different  parts  of  the
         Rules. It is only if the normal balance of  interests  relevant  to
         the general area in question is such  as  to  require  particularly
         great weight to be given to the public interest  as  compared  with
         the individual interests at  stake  (as  in  the  precarious  cases
         considered in Nagre and  the  foreign  criminal  deportation  cases
         considered in MF (Nigeria)) that a strict  test  of  exceptionality
         will apply."

    the test of exceptionality does not have "blanket application" and only
    applies where the status of one party is unlawful and where no children
    are involved.  He argued that the correct approach is to  be  found  in
    paragraph 33 of SS (Congo) which states:-

         "In our judgment, even though a test  of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of  LTR
         outside the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of "very compelling reasons"  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of public interest factors as finds expression in the
         Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in  Appendix  FM.
         It also reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has
         been tested and has survived scrutiny in  this  court:  see,  e.g.,
         Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ."

    and  the  instant  appeal   turned   on   "compelling   circumstances".
    Paragraphs 47 and 48 of  the  judge's  decision  show  the  "compelling
    circumstances" that the judge identified.

14. As to the respondent's third ground he argued that any failure  by  the
    judge to fully "copy and paste" the relevant  head  note  of  Chikwamba
    cannot be said  to  make  a  difference  in  this  appeal.   The  judge
    correctly focused his mind on  proportionality  and  the  impact  of  a
    temporary separation between the appellant and her husband.  The  judge
    has provided a balanced judgment acknowledging, as  was  the  position,
    that the appellant conceded she could not meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration  Rules,  that  this  is  one  of  the  rare   cases   where
    proportionality plays a part and that it would be disproportionate  for
    the appellant to be removed.

15. I do not accept the arguments of Mr. Iqbal.

16. In particular I find that the judge should have factored  in  what  the
    Court of Appeal said regarding "exceptionality" in SS (Congo)  and  has
    failed to give sufficient weight to the Immigration  Rules.   Moreover,
    the judge has failed to properly  deal  with  the  possibility  of  the
    appellant returning to her country of origin and making an  application
    for entry clearance therefrom as a spouse.  The  judge  has  failed  to
    identify what is "compelling" about this appellant's claim  for  it  to
    succeed on Article 8  grounds  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  or  to
    consider whether  there  is  a  "gap"  between  the  Immigration  Rules
    themselves and Article 8 and whether there are  circumstances  in  this
    appeal which take it outside the class of cases which  the  Immigration
    Rules properly provide for.  A test of "exceptionality" was disapproved
    of in the House of Lords in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11.   Whether  the
    circumstances are described as "compelling" or "exceptional" is  though
    not a matter of substance.  They must  be  relevant,  weighty  and  not
    fully provided for within the Immigration Rules.

17. The agreed facts here can be gleaned from paragraph 32 of  the  judge's
    decision which states:-

         "However, even away from those contexts, if the Secretary of  State
         has sought to formulate Immigration Rules to reflect a fair balance
         of interests under Article 8 in the general run  of  cases  falling
         within their scope, then, as explained above, the Rules  themselves
         will  provide  significant  evidence  about  the  relevant   public
         interest considerations which should be brought into account when a
         court or tribunal seeks to strike the proper balance  of  interests
         under Article 8 in making its own decision. As Beatson LJ  observed
         in Haleemudeen v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
         EWCA Civ 558; [2014] Imm AR 6, at [40], the new Rules  in  Appendix
         FM:

             '... are a central part of the legislative and policy  context
             in which the interests of  immigration  control  are  balanced
             against the interests and rights of people who  have  come  to
             this country and wish to settle in it. Overall, the  Secretary
             of State's policy as to when an interference with an Article 8
             right  will  be   regarded   as   disproportionate   is   more
             particularised in the new Rules than it had previously been.'

         Accordingly, a court or tribunal is required to give the new  Rules
         'greater  weight  than  as  merely  a  starting   point   for   the
         consideration  of  the  proportionality  of  an  interference  with
         Article 8 rights' (para. [47])."

18. Also, the conclusion at paragraph 33 where the  judge  finds  that  the
    appellant and her husband would have care and support if they  went  to
    Pakistan.

19. The facts of this appeal do not take  it  to  a  position  where  there
    should be a freestanding Article 8 analysis.  The  appellant  does  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules such  that  there  is  a
    "gap" as referred to in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and (for further
    explanation) R (on the application of Sunasee) v UTIAC [2015] EWHC 1604
    (Admin).  There are here no relevant  weighty  matters  which  are  not
    fully provided for within the "Rules".  If there are then in any  event
    I find the respondent's decision to be a proportionate one  considering
    the factual matrix found here alongside the public interest factors. In
    particular the ability of this appellant and her own family to continue
    their family life in Pakistan where they have,  unlike  in  the  United
    Kingdom, extended family members.  Indeed on an analysis of the factors
    found by the judge at paragraphs 32 and 35 of  his  decision  there  is
    nothing  within  this  appeal  to  render  the  respondent's   decision
    disproportionate.

20. The judge bore in mind the authority of R (on the application of  Chen)
    v SSHD IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) and  the  light  it  throws  on  the
    authority of Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.  There was in this appeal
    no evidence to suggest that a temporary separation from a family member
    to enable the appellant to apply for entry clearance  abroad  would  be
    disproportionate.  It was the appellant's  task  to  prove  this  to  a
    required standard and on the facts she failed to do so.

Conclusions

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

22. I set aside the decision.

23. I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it on all grounds.


Signed   Date 29 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 29 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
