
[pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07109/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                            RUNYARO MADGE NTABENI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mavaza of Walters Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Zimbabwe born on 23rd  July  1966.
    She first arrived in the UK on 14th September 2000 when she  was  given
    leave to enter as a student until 31st October  2001.   Thereafter  the
    Appellant was granted successive  periods  of  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student, a nurse (supervised practice), a work  permit  holder,  and  a
    Tier 2 (General) Migrant until 5th August 2012.  On 12th July 2012  the
    Appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain as a Tier 2  (General)
    Migrant.  That application was refused on 25th February  2013  for  the
    reasons given in a Notice of Decision of that date.  At the  same  time
    the Respondent decided to remove the Appellant under the provisions  of
    Section 47 Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The Appellant
    appealed, and her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Stokes sitting at Taylor House on 27th  August  2014.   He  decided  to
    dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules and also on human rights
    grounds for the reasons given in his Decision dated 8th  October  2014.
    The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 2nd December
    2014 such permission was granted but only as  regards  the  Section  47
    removal decision.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the Judge made an error of law in respect of his
    Section 47 removal decision so that it should be  set  aside.   At  the
    hearing, I heard brief submissions from Mr Whitwell and Dr Mavaza.   Mr
    Whitwell conceded that the Section 47 removal decision had been made at
    the same time as the decision to refuse the application  for  leave  to
    remain and was therefore made not in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
    Judge should have made a  finding  accordingly,  and  his  decision  to
    dismiss  the  appeal  against  the  Section  47  removal  decision  was
    therefore made in error  of  law  and  should  be  set  aside.   In  Mr
    Whitwell's submission, now that the provisions of the Crime and  Courts
    Act 2013 had come into force I should remake the decision of the  Judge
    by referring the matter to the Secretary of State for a further removal
    decision to be made.

 3. I agreed with the submission of Mr Whitwell  for  reasons  I  need  not
    explain as the issue was conceded by him.

Decision

There was an error of law in the decision  of  the  Judge  relating  to  the
Section 47 removal decision.  I set that  decision  aside.   I  remake  that
decision by deciding  that  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  was  not  in
accordance with the law and therefore to that extent I allow the  appeal  of
the Appellant and direct that the Section 47 removal  decision  be  referred
again to the Secretary of State for another decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  find  no
reason to do so.


Signed   Dated

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although I have allowed the original appeal of the Appellant  to  a  limited
extent, I make no fee  award  as  the  Appellant's  substantive  appeal  was
unsuccessful.


Signed   Dated

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
