
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07091/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 January 2015                            |On 23 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          THE HON. MR JUSTICE NICOL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                                 ERSHAD MIAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Bhuiyan a Solicitor from PGA Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr M Whitwell a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Mr Ershad Miah who is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh
    who was born on 22  August  1988  ("the  appellant").   His  appeal  is
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Scobbie ("the  FTTJ")
    who, following a hearing on 9  September  2014,  dismissed  his  appeal
    against the respondent's decision of 18   January  2014  to  refuse  to
    issue him with a residence card under the provisions of the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").

2.   The appellant claimed to be  the  husband  of  his  sponsor  and  wife,
    Justina, a Polish and EU citizen born on 17 April 1987 ("the sponsor").
     They claimed to have married in this country on 30 July 2013 and  that
    she was exercising Treaty rights in this  country  as  a  worker.   The
    appellant and the sponsor were interviewed  separately  on  14  January
    2014.  The respondent took the  view  that  there  were  a  significant
    number of discrepancies in their evidence.  She refused the application
    on the basis that the marriage was one of convenience.  The  definition
    of a spouse in Regulation 2 of the 2006 Regulations does not include  a
    party to a marriage of convenience.  The  respondent  appears  to  have
    accepted that the marriage itself was a valid one.

3.   The appellant appealed and the FTTJ heard the  appeal  on  9  September
    2014.  Both parties were represented and the appellant and the  sponsor
    gave evidence. The FTTJ had before him a bundle of documents  from  the
    appellant's then representatives.  The FTTJ  set  out  the  burden  and
    standard of proof in paragraph 5 of the  determination  where  he  said
    "The burden of proof is on  the  appellant  and  the  standard  is  the
    balance of probabilities".  That is a point to which we  will  need  to
    return.

4.   The judge reviewed the evidence in detail between paragraphs 14 and  53
    of the determination. In paragraph 53 he reached  the  conclusion  that
    this was a marriage of convenience  and  therefore  the  appeal  failed
    under the 2006 Regulations.  The FTTJ also  considered  the  Article  8
    human rights grounds, coming to the conclusion that in the light of the
    earlier findings the family life element of the claim was bound to fail
    and that the appellant had demonstrated very  little  private  life  in
    this country.  He  went  on  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the  2006
    Regulations and on human rights grounds.

5.   An application was made for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    which was granted.  We have to say that we find the  grounds  far  from
    clear; in substance they appear to be no more than  disagreements  with
    conclusions properly reached by the FTTJ on all the evidence.

6.   However the judge who  granted  permission  to  appeal  raised  another
    question; whether the FTTJ applied the correct burden and  standard  of
    proof. This is set out in paragraph 5 of the determination.

7.   The appellant's representatives have changed since the  hearing  before
    the FTTJ and Mr Bhuiyan who appears before us did not appear before the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He has submitted a skeleton argument and  in  his
    submissions he seeks to amend the grounds in order to argue  the  point
    raised by  the  judge  who  granted  permission  to  appeal.   We  gave
    permission for the grounds to be  amended  without  objection  from  Mr
    Whitwell.

8.   Mr Bhuiyan not only relied on his skeleton argument but submitted  that
    the FTTJ should have adjourned to enable the Secretary of State  or  to
    compel the Secretary of  State  to  produce  the  full  record  of  the
    interviews with the appellant and the  sponsor.   However,  he  accepts
    that at the hearing before the judge there was no  application  for  an
    adjournment. Furthermore, what the judge said about this  at  paragraph
    41 was:

         "I considered all that had been set out in the note of the meeting.
          The first thing I would point out is that it is  not  in  any  way
         disputed by either the appellant or his wife  the  questions  which
         were asked or the answers given."

    If the point was to be taken it should have  been  raised  earlier.  Mr
    Bhuiyan did not pursue it.

9.   Mr Whitwell relies on the case of Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage  of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).  He accepts, as  does  the
    Rule 24 response, that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law as to
    the burden of proof for  establishing  that  this  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  However, he submits that this was not a material error of
    law.  He submitted that from paragraph 8 onwards the determination gave
    clear  reasons  for  the  FTTJ's  conclusions  and  there   were   many
    discrepancies which covered a lengthy period.  He argued that this went
    to the core of the relationship.  He argued  that  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities the respondent had established that this was  a  marriage
    of convenience.

10.  In his reply, Mr Bhuiyan said that from paragraph 8  the  determination
    was no more than  a  cut  and  paste  exercise  from  the  respondent's
    decision and the FTTJ's reasoning did not support his conclusions.   He
    asked us to find that there were material errors of law, to  set  aside
    the decision and to send the case back to the First-tier Tribunal to be
    decided again.

11.  We find that the FTTJ erred in law.  The statement in  paragraph  5  is
    incorrect.  As Mr Whitwell concedes,  the  burden  of  proving  that  a
    marriage is a marriage of convenience falls on the Secretary of  State,
    not  the  claimant  and  the  standard  is  that  of  the  balance   of
    probabilities.   He  referred  us  to  Papajorgji  in  which  the  then
    President of the Upper Tribunal said in his  conclusions  in  paragraph
    39:

         "In summary our understanding is that where the issue is raised  in
         an appeal the question for the judge will therefore be in the light
         of  the  totality  of  the  information  before  me  including  the
         assessment of the claimant's answers and any information  provided,
         am I satisfied that it is more probable than not this a marriage of
         convenience."

12.  Even if Mr Bhuiyan had gone on to  argue  the  point  as  to  the  non-
    disclosure or the non-production of the full record of the  interviews,
    we find no merit in the argument that the FTTJ should have adjourned to
    enable them to be produced.  At the hearing before the FTTJ  there  was
    no application for an adjournment and what  he  said  in  paragraph  41
    records  that  neither  the  appellant  nor  the  sponsor  queried  the
    questions or answers set out in the summary of the interviews.

13.  We also find that the FTTJ did not  limit  himself  to  addressing  the
    problems and inconsistencies raised by the respondent.  As paragraph 44
    of the determination makes clear: "However that is not all.   Both  the
    appellant and his wife were cross-examined and further  inconsistencies
    arose.  I highlight some of these." That indicates to us that the  FTTJ
    went on to consider matters which arose at the hearing in  addition  to
    those raised by the respondent in the refusal letter.

14.  We find that the FTTJ reached clear conclusions  as  to  many  problems
    with the evidence of the appellant and the sponsor. These are  set  out
    at length in paragraphs 15 to 53 of the determination.  We find that on
    the assessment of the evidence  carried  out  by  the  FTTJ  any  judge
    properly directing himself or herself would inevitably have come to the
    conclusion that, to the standard of the balance of  probabilities,  the
    respondent had established that this was a marriage of convenience.

15.  We have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and  can  see  no
    good reason to do so.  We find that the FTTJ erred in law but this  was
    not a material error or an error such that the decision should  be  set
    aside.  We dismiss the appellant's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    uphold the decision of the FTTJ to dismiss the appellant's appeal under
    the 2006 Regulations and on human rights grounds



    ..........................................
    Signed        Date: 19 January 2015
    Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden


