
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07221/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 July 2015                      |On 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                              VERONICA Mwangala
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pratt, Waddell Taylor Bryan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Veronica Mwangala, was born on 7 February 1985 and is  a
    female citizen of Malawi appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Manuel) against the decision of the of the Secretary of State dated  23
    January 2014 to refuse to issue her a derivative residence card as  the
    primary carer of D K (who was born in September 2012) who is a  British
    child  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  First-tier   Tribunal
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are three grounds of appeal.  The first asserts  that  the  judge
    made an error of law in her determination of the appeal  on  Article  8
    ECHR grounds.  The third ground of  appeal  complains  of  the  alleged
    inconsistency on the part of the judge where she found (in relation  to
    Regulation 15A) that it was  reasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  to
    return to Malawi alone whereas (in her Article 8 analysis) she  reached
    the opposite conclusion.  The second ground of appeal asserts that  the
    judge failed to have proper regard to Zambrano [2011] AER 491 but  also
    MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside EU)  Iran  [2013]  UKUT  00380
    (IAC).  In that latter case, the  Upper  Tribunal  had,  following  its
    consideration of Regulation 15A(4A) of the 2006 Regulations, found  the
    correct legal  test  in  application  of  the  Regulation  involved  an
    assessment of whether the parent or carer with whom the  British  child
    would live (on the departure of the non-EU parent) was able  and  would
    "in practice" care for the  child.   The  appellant  asserts  that  the
    Secretary of State and the judge  did  not  consider  whether,  in  the
    instant case, the father of D K would care for him in practice.

 3. Taking the last ground first, I find that the judge has  not  erred  in
    law.  At [17] the judge noted that the Secretary of State had  "refused
    the application because the appellant had not provided evidence to show
    that the child's father [M K] was in a position to care for  the  child
    if the appellant was  forced  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom."   Quite
    rightly, the judge has reminded herself that the burden of proof in the
    appeal lay on the appellant.  The judge at [21], went  on  to  consider
    whether it might be:

         "... reasonable to expect [M  K]  [to  provide  a  statement]  that
         confirmed that he cannot look after the child and the  reasons  why
         he cannot do so.  The appellant's evidence is  that  his  wife  was
         aware of her and of the child.  I do not therefore accept the claim
         that the child's father cannot care for him."

    The principle adopted in MA and SM (which, in turn, is taken  from  the
    judgment of Hickenbottom J in Sanneh [2013] EWHC 793) namely  that  the
    UK-resident parent "in practice" care  for  the  child  if  the  non-EU
    parent leaves the country does not depend entirely on  the  willingness
    of the UK parent to assume responsibility for the child.  The principle
    allows for the possibility of the UK parent assuming responsibility for
    the child unwillingly but because there is no alternative to his  doing
    so if the child is  to  remain  living  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Had
    Hickenbottom J and the Upper Tribunal considered that the  test  to  be
    applied depended exclusively upon the willingness of the UK parent then
    they would have no doubt said so.   The  question  of  whether  the  UK
    parent will "in practice" assume responsibility  was  a  matter  to  be
    determined by the judge  on  the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal.  The
    assessment required must go beyond simply ascertaining the  willingness
    of the United Kingdom parent.

 4. In the present case, the  judge  accepted  that  D  K  lives  with  the
    appellant but he noted that M K was  financially  responsible  for  the
    child.  The judge found:

         "... the fact that the father regularly sends  money  claims  child
         benefit for D K and visits him and takes him out is not  consistent
         with the claim that he will not care for him particularly given the
         fact that his wife is aware of D K and also the fact that  he  told
         the appellant that he wants his other children to meet D K."

    That finding was made against a background of a lack of evidence (noted
    by the judge at [21]) from the father which might indicate  whether  he
    was willing or unwilling to assume responsibility  for  D  K.   In  the
    absence of such evidence, the judge was left  with  no  alternative  to
    make a finding, on the basis of the evidence which was before  her,  as
    to whether the father would "in practice" assume responsibility for the
    child.  Where the judge writes [29] that "the appellant has  failed  to
    discharge the burden of proof upon her to show that his  father  cannot
    care for [D K]" I find that it is implicit in her finding that she  has
    concluded that the appellant has failed to establish  that  the  father
    will not "in practice" assume responsibility for a child with  whom  he
    has regular contact and whom he supports financially.

 5. As regards Article 8 ECHR, it is not at all clear to me that Article  8
    arises as a legitimate ground in this appeal against a decision of  the
    Secretary of State to refused to issue  a  derivative  residence  card.
    Assuming that it does do so, I find that the judge  had  not  erred  in
    law.  At [29] the judge found (in determining the appeal under the 2006
    Regulations) that this was not a case "where D K will  be  required  to
    leave the UK."  She made that finding because she had concluded that  D
    K's father would "in practice" assume care for him.   That  finding  is
    not inconsistent with her subsequent finding at [35 and 38] that D K as
    a young child could, if he were not to  remain  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom with his father, reasonably be have expected to return with his
    mother to Malawi and enjoy family life with  her  there.   The  judge's
    finding in relation to Article 8 (as with her  finding  on  the  appeal
    under the Regulations) was predicated on her  finding  that  the  child
    would not be compelled to leave the United  Kingdom  because  he  might
    remain in the care of his father (see ZH (Tanzania) 2011  UKSC  4  with
    which the judge's finding is consistent).  The grounds  of  appeal  are
    based on the false notion that, because the father had  not  positively
    indicated willingness to look  after  the  child,  the  appeal  had  to
    succeed under the 2006 Regulations and Article 8 EHCR.

 6. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed   Date 10 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

