
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07201/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th January 2015                         |On 28th January 2015          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                            OLUSEGUN YAHAYA ABIJO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Bahja, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria whose date of birth  is  recorded
    as 15th May 1962.  On 3rd April 2013 he made application for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of both long  residence  and,
    outside the Immigration Rules, on human rights grounds.  On 8th January
    2014 a decision was made to refuse the  application  and  he  appealed.
    The Grounds of Appeal made reference to  the  Appellant  having  family
    life in the United Kingdom and indeed it is of note  that  considerable
    attention was paid by the Secretary of State to the contention  of  the
    Appellant that he had that family life.

 2. The  appeal  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  supported  by  various
    documents including photographs of  the  Appellant's  child  her  birth
    certificate.  At some point a request was made for  the  appeal  to  be
    decided on the papers without a hearing. On 21st August 2014 the matter
    came before Judge Howard.  He considered the evidence  before  him.  He
    noted that the  Respondent  had  considered  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    immigration rules together with the requirements of Appendix FM.  Judge
    Howard found the Appellant's immigration history to be  precarious  and
    went as far as to say:

         "To describe the Appellant's status  throughout  his  time  in  the
         United Kingdom as precarious is to understate it.  Put bluntly,  he
         should  not  have  been  here.  So  it   is   notwithstanding   the
         testimonials he has submitted from those he now counts as among his
         friends and who speak highly of him, by reason  of  his  status,  I
         attach little weight to the private life have as established during
         that time."

    Judge Howard also had  regard  to  the  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's child but accepted other evidence  which  pointed  to  that
    child and her mother, by the time the  matter  reached  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, having returned to Nigeria.

 3. I observe that the grounds which were eventually to  bring  the  matter
    before me do not challenge in any way, or take any point,  in  relation
    to that evidence or the clear implicit finding on the part of the judge
    that there was no family life being enjoyed by the Appellant  with  his
    child in the United Kingdom because the child, and the mother  of  that
    child, were no longer in the United Kingdom.

 4. In the event Judge Howard considered, albeit briefly,  Article  8  ECHR
    outside the Immigration Rules because he makes reference to the case of
    Razgar [2007] UKHL 27, at paragraph 20 of the  Decision.   He  was  not
    satisfied that there were grounds for granting leave to remain  outside
    the Rules and found there to be no family life so that there  could  be
    no interference in it.  Regard was had to the provision of Section 117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Judge Howard found
    no sufficient private life deserving of protection.

 5. Not content with the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  Notice
    dated 10th October 2014 application was made for permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  On  28th  November  2014  Judge  Levin  granted
    permission.  In granting permission Judge Levin said:

         "The grounds maintain that the Judge erred in  law  in  failing  to
         consider adequately the Appellant's appeal on private life  grounds
         and in particular the fact that he had been  in the UK for 18 years
         and therefore the issue of  whether  he  had  lost  all  ties  with
         Nigeria.

         Given that the Judge failed to consider  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
         Immigration Rules and whether the Appellant  met  the  requirements
         therefore in respect of having lost all ties with  Nigeria,  it  is
         arguable that the judge's decision was materially flawed."

 6. It is clear from the grant of permission that the issue  before  me  is
    whether or not Judge Howard dealt adequately or at all with  the  issue
    of the Appellant  having  lost  "all  ties"  with  Nigeria,  being  the
    exception to paragraph 276ADE requiring the Appellant otherwise to have
    lived twenty years in the United Kingdom, which on any view he has not.
     That is not in issue.

 7. Mr Bahja submitted a skeleton argument.  I have had the opportunity  of
    reading it and clearly he has devoted some time to  it.   The  skeleton
    argument reminds me that the line of cases which prefers  the  guidance
    in the case of Huang v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2007] UKHL 11 as an explanation of  what  was  said  in  the  case  of
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC)  is  to  be  preferred.  In  short  there  is   no   intermediate
    exceptionality test.  I brought to the attention of the representatives
    the guidance of Judge Grubb, sitting as a  Deputy  Judge  of  the  High
    Court in the case of  R  (on  the  application  of  Halimatu  SA  Adiya
    Damilola Aliyu and Fatimah Oluwakemi Aliyu v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2014] EWHC 3919 in which Judge Grubb after a review of
    the leading authorities also concluded that the approach in Huang is to
    be preferred.

 8. It follows that Judge Howard  had  open  to  him  the  opportunity  and
    discretion to consider relevant factors in Article 8 but  only  against
    certain guiding principles.  There has to be good reason to depart from
    the rules and Article 8 is not, and  it  is  trite  law  to  make  this
    observation, a general dispensing power for a judge.

 9. Mr Bahja accepted, after some discussion,  that  the  Appellant  really
    could not have the benefit of the family life  he  was  contending  for
    with his child and the mother of his child, both ways.

10. The application to remain in the United Kingdom had been made, in part,
    on the basis of a desire to maintain family life in the United  Kingdom
    with the child and her mother.  Mr Bahja sought to persuade that  there
    had not been any family life enjoyed since  2012.   He  was  not  able,
    however, to point to any evidence that was before  the  judge  to  that
    effect and I remind myself that the judge was asked to  deal  with  the
    matter on the basis of the papers.   The  evidence  placed  before  the
    judge, in my view, laid great emphasis on the fact that there was  this
    child in the United Kingdom together with her  mother,  which  explains
    why the photographs  of  the  child  and  the  birth  certificate  were
    submitted.  I also asked Mr Bahja to point to anything which  disabused
    the Secretary of State or the judge of the child being  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He was not able to do so.

11. However there was evidence placed before the judge that the  child  and
    the mother of the child had left the United Kingdom for  Nigeria.   The
    grounds bringing the matter before the Upper Tribunal do not take issue
    with that and so for the Appellant now to say that he has lost all ties
    with Nigeria when the child and the mother of their child with whom  he
    wished to enjoy family life in the United Kingdom were now  in  Nigeria
    is a point which is difficult, if not impossible, to make. In  fairness
    Mr  Bahja  accepts  the  reality  though  without  making  any   formal
    concession.

12. Mr Bahja accepted that in  reality  the  appeal  before  me  turned  on
    whether or not there was a freestanding  Article  8  issue  before  the
    judge in the First-tier Tribunal which ought to have been considered.

13. The question then is did  the  judge  materially  err  if  he  did  not
    consider all matters? (I am far from finding that  the  judge  did  not
    deal with the matter).  However Mr Bahja pointed to eighteen  years  in
    the United Kingdom at a time when  it  had  to  be  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's status was at all material times precarious. That  was  it.
    I asked Mr Bahja to point to other matters. He then said,  "Well  there
    were no ties"; a point already recognised by Mr Bahja as being one that
    could not really  be  pursued  given  the  family  having  returned  to
    Nigeria.

14. The judge considered paragraph 117B of  the  2002  Act.   He  has  made
    reference to Razgar and on the limited information  and  evidence  that
    was before the judge I find no material error of law in this appeal.  I
    should conclude by saying that whilst Mr  Bahja  did  not  concede  the
    appeal, he recognised the difficulties he faced on behalf of his client
    and was realistic in his approach to this appeal.

Notice of Decision

15. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.


Signed                              Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker




