
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/07701/2015
     IA/09983/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7 July 2016                           |On 26 July 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             NAHID NAZMUL ISLAM
                                 NAHID NIGER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Biggs, Counsel, instructed by London Law
Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Claimants are citizens of Bangladesh born respectively on 15  March
    1976 and 21 February 1978.  The  first  Claimant  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom on 10 October 2004 and was granted a student visa which he then
    extended.  He subsequently married and  his  wife  joined  him  in  the
    United Kingdom as his dependant on 11 July 2007.

 2. Further applications were made to extend their leave until 26  February
    2010  when  the  first  Claimant  applied  for  further  leave.    This
    application was rejected on 6 April 2010 and a further  application  ws
    made on 22 May 2010 which was also rejected on 4 June 2010 on the basis
    that it was an attempt to resubmit an invalid application out of  time.
    On 12 June 2010 the Claimant  made  a  further  application  which  was
    granted on 15 October 2010 and he was given  further  leave  to  remain
    which was extended.

 3. A further application made on 3 October 2014 was refused on 6  February
    2015 on the basis that the period of continuous  lawful  residence  was
    considered to have been broken in relation to the application that  was
    rejected on 6 April 2010, the next application  having  been  submitted
    out of time on 12 June 2010, which exceeds the 28 days permitted  under
    276B(5).

 4. The Claimant and his  wife  appealed  against  this  decision  on  23rd
    February 2015 and the appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge J  C
    Hamilton for hearing on 25 August 2015.

 5. In a decision dated 29 December 2015, the First tier Tribunal Judge  in
    a very  detailed  and  careful  decision  allowed  the  appeal  on  two
    different bases.  He says at [47]

         "47.  Looking at the evidence as a whole I have concluded that:

               1) The Respondent failed to notify the  appellant  about  the
                  non-compliant photographs submitted with his February 2010
                  application within the 28 day period provided for  by  the
                  Regulations.  As a result  she  lost  the  opportunity  to
                  treat that application as invalid and had no  power  under
                  the law to do so.

               2) As  the  February  2010  application  remained  valid  and
                  outstanding the Appellant's leave to remain in the UK  did
                  not lapse. His May 2010  application  should  either  have
                  been ignored or treated as a  variation  of  the  February
                  2010 application.

               3) The Responden'st procedures  are  manifestly  unfair.  She
                  misled the Appellant about how he could address this  non-
                  compliance and failed to give him the opportunity  he  was
                  entitled to under the Regulations  to  rectify  this  non-
                  compliance.

         48.  This means that on the evidence available to me I am satisfied
             the  appellant   meets   the   continuous   lawful   residence
             requirement  in  paragraph   276B(i)(a).    The   Respondent's
             decision is therefore contrary to the Immigration Rules and is
             unlawful.

         49.  There is no evidence in the refusal letter that the Respondent
             carried out the  'public  interest'  assessment,  required  by
             paragraph  276B(ii),  or   considered   any   of   the   other
             requirements in the paragraph. As I understand it,  prevailing
             legal opinion is that the public interest assessment  requires
             the respondent to exercise her discretion and I  cannot  usurp
             that role.  Therefore I cannot allow the  appeal  outright.  I
             can only find the Respondent's decision that the appellant did
             have 10 years continuous residence was unlawful.

         50.  Had I allowed the appeal on  the  above  basis  I  would  have
             allowed it on the  basis of the  Respondent's  breach  of  her
             public law duty of fairness. This remains  a  secondary  basis
             for refusal for the reasons given at paragraphs 41-42 above.

         51.  Accordingly I ws satisfied that  the  refusal  decisions  were
             contrary to the Immigration Rules and  unlawful  and  for  the
             reasons set out above, I am satisfied that the Appellants have
             shown that the Respondent's decision  was  not  in  accordance
             with the law."

 6. The Secretary of State sought  permission  to  appeal  in  time  on  12
    January 2016 on two grounds.  The first ground asserted that the  judge
    had made a material misdirection of law in relying on  the  Immigration
    (Leave to Remain) (Prescribed Forms and  Procedures)  Regulations  2007
    because these have ceased to have effect from 29 February 2008 and  the
    relevant provision in force at the time of the rejection was  paragraph
    34C of the Immigration Rules. The second ground asserted that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  materially  misdirected  himself  in  law  in  his
    interpretation  of  276B  of  the  Rules  holding  at  [29]  that   the
    requirements of a break to be less than 28 days referred solely to  the
    status of the Appellant at the time of the current application which is
    a misreading of 276B(v) and that the reference to time between  periods
    of entry clearance would be meaningless if only the Appellants' current
    status was relevant.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on 25 May 2016 by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cruthers who gave detailed comments in deciding that a  grant  of
    permission was appropriate.  In relation to the first ground, he states



         "Although I consider the Respondent's grounds  just  arguable,  the
         arguments are not attractive - not least  because  a  crucial  UKBA
         letter  of  4  June  2010  stated  that  the  Appellants'  original
         application of February 2010 was returned on 16 April 2010  because
         it did not comply with the requirements of the  Immigration  (Leave
         to Remain) (Prescribed Forms and Procedures) Regulations 2007."

 8. Judge Cruthers was not impressed by the ground in respect of  paragraph
    29 and the 28 day provision in 276B(5) because it was relatively  clear
    that the judge then went on to give consideration to whether or not the
    appeal should fail by reference to the "2010 gap".

         "More generally I think  the  primary  conclusion  of  the  judge's
         analysis was that the 2010 gap was effectively  rectified/nullified
         because of the Respondent's failings at the time that she  rejected
         the  first  Appellant's   application   in   February   2010:   see
         subparagraph 47(2) of the judge's decision. But even if the judge's
         reasoning in this respect was correct, I am not sure he ws entitled
         to retrospectively rectify the 2010 gap  to  the  effect  that  the
         appeal fell to be allowed pursuant to paragraph  276B  as  per  the
         judge's finding at  [48].  'Overall  there  is  sufficient  in  the
         grounds to make a grant of permission appropriate'."

    Hearing

 9. The appeal came before me for hearing on 7 July 2016 when the Secretary
    of State was represented by Mr Whitwell and the claimant by Mr Biggs of
    Counsel.   Mr Whitwell referred to the grounds of appeal and  submitted
    that the Secretary of State was really taking issue  with  the  judge's
    use and method of continuous lawful residence.  He relied on  ground  1
    in relation to the fact that the judge had referred  to  the  incorrect
    law in respect of the 2007 Regulations rather than paragraph 34C of the
    Immigration Rules.  He submitted that the only  reason  the  Claimant's
    February 2010 application had been refused was because the  photographs
    did not comply with the  correct  Regulations  and  that  the  Claimant
    simply needed to provide additional photographs.  It was on advice from
    his  solicitors  that  the  Claimant  was  told  he  needed  additional
    financial  information  and  essentially  the  judge  was  holding  the
    Secretary of State to account when it was  due  to  legal  advice  that
    there was a gap.  He submitted it was not open to the  judge  to  allow
    the appeal with reference to paragraph 276 of the Rules.

10. In relation to the second ground, he submitted that the judge had erred
    in law in misdirecting himself and there was no authority that extended
    the propositions in Basnett and Mitchell when the issue of fees was not
    involved.

11. In his clear and helpful response Mr Biggs submitted that even if there
    were errors of law, which was not conceded, it would not  have  made  a
    difference.   He  accepted  that  at  [29]  the  judge  does  seem   to
    misinterpret paragraph 276B(v) but pointed out as Mr Whitwell  accepted
    that the judge goes on to analyse the circumstances as if  he  had  got
    the Rule correct and nothing turns on that.

12. Mr Biggs's submissions primarily came down to what he  referred  to  as
    the independent alternative basis for the judge's decision at [50]  and
    this was the public law duty of  fairness.  The  judge's  reasoning  in
    respect of this is set out at [41] and [42]:

         "41.  I  have  considered   whether   it   was   the   Respondent's
             responsibility to inform the Appellant about what he needed to
             do or the requirements of the Regulations.  I  have  concluded
             that it was.  This is  because  the  Respondent  unequivocally
             took on this responsibility when she wrote to  the  Respondent
             on 2 March 2010 in  the  following  terms  'if  there  is  any
             problem with the  validity of the application, either  because
             of the fee paid  or  another  aspect  of  the  application,  a
             caseworker will write to you as soon  as  possible  to  advise
             what action you need to take to make a valid application'.

         42.  This representation would have led the  appellant  to  believe
             that the Respondent had a duty to tell him what to do  in  the
             event of  any  non-compliance.  This  representation  did  not
             actively prevent the Appellant  checking the position himself.
             However I find it likely the Appellant would  have  reasonably
             believed that the  Respondent  would  give  him  accurate  and
             impartial information that he did not need to  check.  He  was
             therefore effectively deterred  from  checking  the  situation
             himself. In all the circumstances and very  unusually  I  find
             that the Respondent made an unequivocal representation to  the
             Appellant that he relied on to  his  detriment  and  that  the
             appellant had a public law 'legitimate expectation'  that  the
             respondent failed to  honour."

13. Mr Biggs accepted that the gap between 6 April 2010 when the  Appellant
    received the refusal of his application from the Secretary of State and
    22 May 2010 when he made the next application was in excess of 28  days
    and therefore there was a gap.  However it was a much  shorter  gap  in
    residence than the 66 days asserted  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and
    relied upon in their refusal decision.  Indeed the period in excess  of
    28 days is only eighteen days.

    Decision

14. I find no material error of law in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hamilton for either of the reasons set out in  the  Secretary  of
    State's grounds of appeal and I uphold the  decision  with  the  effect
    that the judge's decision that the Secretary of  State's  decision  was
    not in accordance with the law stands.  The matter will need to go back
    to the Secretary of  State  to  reconsider  in  light  of  the  judge's
    findings.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                                  Date 26 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


