
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/07018/2013
                                                               ia/07015/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 August 2013                                |On 16 August 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                   miss eh
                                   miss el
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Not legally represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although no anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal, in
    my conclusion it is appropriate to make such direction in this  appeal.
    Both of the appellants are minors, the second appellant  being  only  5
    years old.  In such circumstances I direct  that  no  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly, or  indirectly,  identify  the  appellants.
    Such order is to remain in place unless and until this Tribunal, or any
    other appropriate court, directs otherwise.   Failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could lead to a contempt of court.  The  appellants  are
    to be known as EH and EL hereinafter.

 2. The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Portugal  born  in  1998  and  2008
    respectively.  Each applied for an EEA registration certificate as  the
    family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the United
    Kingdom.  It was asserted that both were the children of M.

 3. On 18 February 2013 the respondent refused to provide either  appellant
    with a registration certificate pursuant to the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.   Reasons  for  this  conclusion  were
    given in the following terms in a letter of 22 February 2013  addressed
    to M:

         "In support of their application  you  submitted  your  dependants'
         Portugal passports and two school letters.  You also submitted wage
         slips and a P60 as evidence of your employment along with a tenancy
         agreement and utility bill.

         In order to qualify for a  registration  certificate  an  applicant
         must provide evidence that your  dependants  are  related  to  you;
         their EEA sponsor.

         You have failed  to  provide  evidence  that  your  dependants  are
         related to you in the form of a full birth  certificate  confirming
         parentage.

         Therefore, it has been decided to refuse to issue the  confirmation
         your dependants seek ...."

 4. Both of the appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  There  was
    a request in each case for the appeal to be determined on  the  papers.
    The appeals came into the list  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foudy,
    sitting in Manchester, on 16 May 2013.   In  a  combined  determination
    promulgated on 21 May  2013,  but  prepared  on  16  May,  Judge  Foudy
    dismissed both of the appellants' appeals for the following reasons:

        "[4] The respondent questioned each appellants'  relationship  with
        the EEA national in  the  UK.   They  allege  that  they  were  the
        children of [M], a Portuguese national.  However the appellants did
        not provide birth certificates to confirm their relationship.

        [5] In the appellants' notices of appeal they  attached  copies  of
        Portuguese citizenship cards that named [M] as one  parent  however
        they still failed to submit  a  birth  certificate  to  show  their
        parentage.

        [6] No explanation has been provided as to why the appellants  have
        failed to submit their birth certificates.

        [7] There is no evidence before me as to  what,  if  any,  identity
        documents the Portuguese authorities require in order  to  issue  a
        citizenship card therefore I am not satisfied that the  cards  were
        issued after genuine birth certificates were examined.

        [8] It should be a very simple step for the  appellants  to  submit
        their birth certificates.  Their persistent failure to do so causes
        me to doubt their true parentage.

        [9] Each appellant has therefore failed to satisfy me that she [is]
        entitled  to  an  EEA  registration  certificate  under  the   2006
        Regulations."

 5. The appellants sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    enclosing with their applications (i) a typed letter dated 24 May  2013
    bearing M's name and signature and (i) a copy of a Royal Mail  recorded
    delivery slip.  The letter from M asserted that the  appellants'  birth
    certificates had been sent to the Tribunal Service in Manchester on  20
    May 2013 and received, according to the Royal Mail,  on  21  May  2013.
    The letter further  states  that  the  delay  in  providing  the  birth
    certificates had been as a consequence of a  delay  by  the  Portuguese
    authorities in sending them to M.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidge granted the appellants permission  to
    appeal by way of a decision dated 10 June 2013.  Thus the  appeal  came
    before me.

 7. At the outset of the hearing I provided Mr Avery with  a  copy  of  the
    documents that had been received by the Tribunal, from  M,  on  21  May
    2013. These documents constituted (i)  an  undated  handwritten  letter
    bearing M's name, such letter indicating that she was unable to provide
    a copy of the appellant's full birth  certificates  because  their  had
    been a delay in their receipt from Portugal and (ii) two  documents  in
    the Portuguese language bearing the appellant's names, their  dates  of
    birth  and  M's  name.  These  documents  were  not  accompanied  by  a
    translation.

 8. I thereafter invited M to make submissions on the  appellants'  behalf.
    In doing so she confirmed that the documents sent to the Tribunal on 20
    May 2013 were certified copies of the  appellants'  birth  certificates
    and that somebody else had written the covering letter on  her  behalf,
    that person having misunderstood what she had told them  regarding  the
    attached  documents.   M  provided  the  Tribunal  with  the  originals
    appellants' passports.  I observed that no mention is made  therein  of
    the names of the appellants' parents.

 9. In his submissions Mr Avery maintained  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had not erred in-law.  He submitted that the judge had taken into
    account  all  of  the  documentation  before  her  and  had  rationally
    concluded, in reliance on the failure of the appellants  to  provide  a
    copy of their birth certificates along with a  failure  to  provide  an
    explanation for not doing so, that  she  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellants' parentage had been established. Mr Avery  further  reminded
    the Upper Tribunal that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not  had  the
    benefit of hearing from M, the appeal having been determined without  a
    hearing at the request of the appellants.  As to the production of  the
    documents received by the Tribunal in Manchester  on  21  May  2013  Mr
    Avery submitted that it was  clear  that  the  determination  had  been
    written by that date and indeed it  had  been  promulgated  on  21  May
    itself.  He reminded me that the documents that had been submitted  had
    not been accompanied by a translation; he was not  prepared  to  accept
    that they were certified copies of the appellants' birth  certificates.
    He invited me to dismiss  the  appellants'  appeals  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

10. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination.

11. Having carefully considered all of the  documents  before  me  and  the
    submissions of both M and Mr  Avery  I  conclude  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination does not contain an error on a  point  of  law
    such that it ought to be set aside.  I now give my reasons  for  coming
    to this conclusion.

12. Dealing first with the substance of the findings made by the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, it is clear to me that the judge considered all of  the
    evidence before  her  but  nevertheless  concluded  that  she  was  not
    satisfied to the required standard that the appellants had proved M  to
    be their mother.  The judge did not have the benefit of hearing from M.
     The copies of the appellants' passports that were  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not assist in determining the  appellants'  parentage
    and although the appellants produced citizenship cards these were  only
    in copy form. In  my  conclusion  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    entitled  to  find  that  the  failure  of  the   appellants,   without
    explanation, to produce the originals or even  copies  of  their  birth
    certificates was a matter that caused doubt as to the assertions as  to
    their parentage and as to the reliability of information on the  copies
    of the citizenship cards.

13. As such I find  that  on  the  evidence  available  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal its decision to dismiss the appellants' appeals  was  open  to
    it, for the reasons it gives.

14. I next turn to the issue of the service of the documents served by M on
    the 20 May 2013. There is no dispute that these documents were received
    by the Tribunal on 21 May.  However,  I  observe  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's file that on 15 April 2013 the Tribunal sent notices to each
    of the appellants indicating (i) that  each  had  indicated  that  they
    wished to have their appeals determined without  a  hearing  (ii)  that
    "any written evidence and submissions must be received in  this  office
    by 13 May 2013." and (iii) that "any written evidence or submissions in
    a language other than English must be accompanied by a  certified  full
    translation."

15. M could have been left in no doubt from this  notice  as  to  what  was
    required of her and the appellants.  Despite this and despite the  fact
    that M  asserts  that  there  was  a  delay  in  obtaining  the  'birth
    certificates' from Portugal, no application for an  extension  of  time
    was made.  Further, and  in  any  event,  the  documents  sent  to  the
    tribunal on 20 May 2013 were not translated and indeed remain so.  Rule
    52 of the Asylum and Immigration (Procedure) Rules  2005  requires  any
    document filed with the First-tier Tribunal  must  be  in  English,  or
    accompanied by a translation into English signed by the  translator  to
    certify that the translation is accurate.  Rule 52(3) states that  "the
    Tribunal shall be under no duty to consider a document which is not  in
    English, or accompanied by a certified translation."   Additionally,  I
    further observe that these documents still have not been  sent  to  the
    Respondent.

16. As I identified  above  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  prepared  her
    determination on 16 May 2013, although it was not  until  21  May  2013
    that it was promulgated.  This of course was the  same  date  that  the
    additional documentation was received by the First-tier Tribunal.

17. Given all that I have said above  and  in  particular  given  that  the
    documentation was not received until the day  of  promulgation  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination despite the terms of the letter  to
    the appellants from the Tribunals Service on 15 April, and  given  that
    the  documentation  was  not  in  the  English  language  and  was  not
    accompanied by a translation, I am not prepared to  conclude  that  the
    appellants suffered from a breach of natural justice as  a  consequence
    of the First-tier Tribunal's failure to consider the documentation that
    was received by it on 21 May 2013.  Nor am I persuaded that the  First-
    tier Tribunal made a mistake of fact  amounting  to  an  error  of  law
    requiring me to set the determination aside.

18. For all these reasons I do not accept that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination contains an error on a point of law such that  it  should
    be set aside.  The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  remains
    standing.  Of course it is open to M to make further  applications  for
    registration certificates, on behalf the appellants', to the  Secretary
    of State.  She would be well-advised if so doing to  provide  certified
    copies of the appellants' birth certificates, accompanied by  certified
    translations, with the applications.

Decision

19. For the reasons given above I dismiss the appellants'  appeals  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  remains
    standing.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 14 August 2013

















