
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07182/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 28th January 2015                   |On 9th February 2015                 |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               gaanashree wood
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Smith, Counsel for Lewis Silkin, Solicitors,
London


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Singapore born on  1st  June  1984.   She
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 21st January 2014
    maintaining her original refusal dated 23rd  May  2013  dismissing  her
    application for indefinite leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of
    her ten years continuous residence.  Her appeal was heard by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Russell on 7th October 2014.   The  appeal  was
    allowed on human rights grounds in a determination promulgated on  23rd
    October 2014.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged  by  the  Respondent
    and permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lever on
    11th December 2014.  The grounds of application are that the judge  has
    placed significant weight on the Appellant's relationship with Mr Kiss-
    Toth a European citizen and the fact that the decision  to  remove  the
    Appellant from the United Kingdom would impact  on  his  private  life.
    The grounds state that this  interference  would  be  proportionate  as
    neither party could hold a legitimate expectation of  continuing  their
    relationship in the United Kingdom outside of their ability to  satisfy
    the relevant immigration control provisions.   The  grounds  go  on  to
    state  that  the  Appellant  cannot  satisfy  the  provisions  of   the
    Immigration Rules as she has not demonstrated continuous residence.  In
    spite of this the judge  considered  that  the  Appellant's  length  of
    residence is pertinent to the overall assessment under Article 8.   The
    grounds  state  that  length  of  residence  is  encompassed   in   the
    Immigration Rules and failure under  the  Rules  is  a  weighty  factor
    against the Appellant.  The grounds go on to refer  to  Article  8  and
    proportionality,  stating  that  the  Appellant's  and  Mr  Kiss-Toth's
    private and family life could be continued outside the United  Kingdom.
    They state that it is also open to the Appellant to make an application
    for entry clearance to the United Kingdom once she is able  to  satisfy
    the requirements as a partner under the Rules or the Regulations.  They
    go on to state that the judge has failed to lawfully engage  with  this
    and has erred in allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 4. A Rule 24 response was handed to me on the day of  the  hearing.   This
    response states that the judge did not err in law in his assessment  of
    Article 8 as at paragraph 45 he found that  her  private  life  engages
    Article 8, although her family life does not.  The response states that
    the Appellant's relationship with her Hungarian partner was not a major
    determinative feature in Judge Russell's conclusion but was  one  of  a
    number of factors that make up the Appellant's private life.  It states
    that at paragraph 49 the judge refers to the Appellant's  work,  social
    connections and outside interests and  her  attachment  to  the  United
    Kingdom as her home.  The judge considered all of  this  before  taking
    into account her relationship with Mr Kiss-Toth.  The response goes  on
    to state that the judge was entitled to take into account the length of
    time the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom but states that there
    is nothing in the determination to suggest that this was a  significant
    factor in the  judge's  conclusion.   The  response  then  states  that
    although the judge did not refer to Section 117B until paragraph 53  of
    the determination he  applied  the  principles  to  his  analysis.   At
    paragraph 48 he referred to  the  Appellant  paying  tax  and  national
    insurance and speaking  English  and  having  studied  to  postgraduate
    level.  The response states  that  these  factors  echo  the  statutory
    provisions of Section 117B(2) and (3).  The response then  states  that
    the judge took  into  account  Section  117B  and  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control.  Finally the  Rule  24  response  states
    that the determination allowing the appeal should stand.

The Hearing

 5. This is an error of law hearing and is the Secretary of State's appeal.



 6. The Presenting Officer made her submissions.  She submitted that it has
    not been challenged that the Appellant's application  cannot  meet  the
    terms of the Immigration Rules on long residency.  She  submitted  that
    the Secretary of State was therefore correct to refuse the application.
     She submitted that the judge has allowed the appeal under human rights
    based on the Appellant entering the United Kingdom  as  a  student  and
    developing a relationship which at the date of the  hearing  was  three
    months old.

 7. The Presenting Officer submitted  that  legitimate  expectation  is  an
    important issue in this  claim.   The  Appellant  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a student and therefore had  no  legitimate  expectation  of
    being able to stay  here.   She  returned  to  Singapore  and  took  an
    internship there.  While she was doing this internship  she  broke  her
    ankle and she states that this is the reason she was out of the  United
    Kingdom for more than  the  permitted  period  resulting  in  her  long
    residency in the United Kingdom being  broken.   She  was  out  of  the
    United Kingdom between October 2007  and  June  2008.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the judge did  not  find  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence about this was credible  but  found  that  the  Appellant  was
    trying to guide the evidence to  support  her  claim.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that this Appellant has no right  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as her application does not meet the terms of the Rules.



 8. I was asked to consider the Immigration Act of 2014 and find  that  the
    Appellant's private life should only be afforded little weight  as  her
    presence in the United Kingdom has been precarious  by  virtue  of  its
    impermanence and that her private life when balanced against the public
    interest  in  maintaining  effective   immigration   control   is   not
    disproportionately breached by the refusal.  I was referred to the case
    of Y Russia [2008] ECHR 1585, in that case the Appellant,  from  China,
    entered Russia and worked for a university and developed a family life.
     At paragraph 103 it is stated  that  the  state  must  strike  a  fair
    balance between the competing interests of the individual  and  of  the
    community as a whole and  where  immigration  is  concerned  Article  8
    cannot be considered to impose on  a  state  a  general  obligation  to
    respect a married couple's choice  of  country  for  their  matrimonial
    residence.   At  paragraph  104  it  is  stated   that   an   important
    consideration is whether family life was created at  a  time  when  the
    persons involved were aware that the immigration status of one of  them
    was such that the persistence of that family life within the host state
    would from the outset be precarious.  The Presenting Officer  submitted
    that that is the case here.  She  submitted  that  this  case  is  much
    weaker as the couple are not married and this is  a  new  relationship.
    She submitted that this Appellant is able to return  to  Singapore  and
    make  an  application  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  based  on   her
    relationship with an EEA national.  She submitted  that  that  is  what
    should happen and that Article 8 should not be used to  circumvent  the
    terms of the Immigration Rules.

 9. I was referred to paragraph 106 of the said case of Y Russia.  In  this
    it  is  stated  that  the  court  discerns  no   exceptional   personal
    circumstances which would have precluded the first applicant's  removal
    once his claims for both refugee status and territorial asylum had been
    rejected and the appeal process exhausted.  This paragraph goes  on  to
    state that the applicant had never sought to obtain a residence  permit
    as the spouse of a Russian national so the question of whether he would
    have received such a permit remains open.  It goes on to state that the
    other matter which remains open  is  whether  the  Appellant's  husband
    could join his wife in China.  Paragraph 107  states  that  it  follows
    that this complaint is manifestly ill-founded and must be rejected.

10. The Presenting Officer submitted that there are no good grounds for why
    the Appellant should remain in the United Kingdom.  She submitted  that
    the judge in this case appears to have treated  the  application  as  a
    near miss application and she submitted that either the claim meets the
    Rules or does not meet the Rules and in this case it does not meet  the
    Rules.

11. The Presenting Officer then went on to deal with Article 8 and referred
    me to the case of Patel and Others [2013]  UKSC  72  and  paragraph  56
    thereof.  This deals with a near miss issue and states that a near miss
    under the Rules cannot provide substance to a human rights  case  which
    is otherwise lacking in merit.  At  paragraph  57  it  is  stated  that
    Article 8 is not a general dispensing power and has to be distinguished
    from the Secretary of State's  discretion  to  allow  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules which may be unrelated to any protected  human  right
    rule.  The Presenting Officer submitted that in this case the Appellant
    wants to use her qualifications in the United Kingdom but  she  is  not
    entitled to do that.  She submitted that  in  the  case  of  Nasim  and
    Others Pakistan [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) Patel, is referred to in the  head
    note and the head note states that it has to be recognised that Article
    8's limited utility in private life  cases  is  far  removed  from  the
    protection of  an  individual's  moral  and  physical  integrity.   She
    submitted that this is a private life case.  She  referred  me  to  the
    case of Oludoyi and Others - R IJR [2014] UKUT 539 (IAC).   This  is  a
    judicial review case and I was referred to paragraph  20  which  states
    that a threshold test is not the way forward.  The evidence has  to  be
    looked at to see if there  is  anything  which  has  not  already  been
    adequately considered in the context of the Immigration Rules and which
    could lead to a successful Article 8  claim.   The  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that everything has  been  adequately  considered  under  the
    Rules  so  there  is  no  Article  8  claim  which  can  succeed.   The
    Appellant's representative objected to this stating that this does  not
    form part of the grounds of  application  but  the  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that all she is stating is that everything has to  be  looked
    at cumulatively.  She submitted that in this case the judge  considered
    everything in terms of the Rules and found that  the  claim  under  the
    Rules could not succeed and so  the  claim  should  not  succeed  under
    Article 8.  She referred  to  the  second  ground  in  the  grounds  of
    application and submitted that what she is submitting is an explanation
    of the case law.

12. The Presenting Officer referred to  Judge  Russell's  determination  at
    paragraph 40 which deals with the relevant case law as  does  paragraph
    44 and she then referred me to paragraph 45 relating to the Appellant's
    family life which the judge refers to as having  recently  begun.   She
    submitted that the Appellant's relationship had not even begun when the
    immigration decision was made and  the  judge  deals  with  credibility
    issues at paragraph 48 and does not accept that the  Appellant  had  to
    stay in Singapore for  longer  than  the  permitted  period.   In  this
    paragraph the judge  states  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    Appellant could not  equally  continue  and  develop  such  a  life  in
    Singapore or elsewhere.  The judge does not accept  that  it  would  be
    difficult for the Appellant to stay in Singapore.  At paragraph 49  the
    judge refers to the  Appellant's  visits  to  Singapore  becoming  less
    frequent and refers to her new relationship with Mr  Kiss-Toth  who  he
    finds to be a compelling witness.   The  Presenting  Officer  submitted
    that these are the sole reasons for the judge allowing the appeal.

13. The Presenting Officer then referred me to  the  Rule  24  response  in
    which it is stated that the Appellant is financially independent.   She
    submitted  that  there  is  no  evidence  of  this.   The   Appellant's
    representative submitted that the Appellant has had a job  since  2012.
    Again with regard to the  Rule  24  response,  the  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the Appellant cannot choose where  she  wants  to  live.
    She submitted that apart from her relationship  the  Appellant's  claim
    seems to be that she has been in the United Kingdom for a long time.

14. The Presenting Officer referred me to Section 117 of the 2002 Act which
    is referred to in the determination at paragraph 53.  She  referred  to
    this being primary legislation and submitted that the Appellant's  stay
    in the  United  Kingdom  at  the  time  her  relationship  started  was
    precarious so little weight should be given to this.  The judge  states
    that the  Appellant  has  an  excellent  immigration  history  and  the
    Presenting Officer submitted that she  does  have  a  good  immigration
    history but has been travelling to and from  Singapore  while  she  has
    been in the United Kingdom.   She  submitted  that  this  Appellant  is
    relying on a relationship with an EEA national and it is open to her to
    obtain  entry  clearance  under  the  Rules  on  this  basis   if   the
    relationship is as  she  claims.   She  submitted  that  this  was  not
    considered by the judge although it should have been and that the judge
    did not properly consider public interest when making his decision.

15. The Presenting Officer asked me to find that there is an error  of  law
    in the determination and that it should be set aside.

16. The Appellant's representative made her  submissions,  submitting  that
    she is relying on  the  Rule  24  response.   She  submitted  that  the
    Respondent has failed to show that there is a  material  error  in  the
    determination.  She submitted that all the Home Office is trying to  do
    is undermine the proportionality decision which has been properly  made
    by the judge who  heard  the  evidence  and  saw  the  documents.   She
    submitted that the terms of the application are purely  a  disagreement
    with the judge's decision.

17. I was referred to paragraph 40 of the determination and  she  submitted
    that she accepts that the judge did not accept the Appellant's  reasons
    for remaining outside the United Kingdom for more  than  the  permitted
    time but that the judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had  always  been
    legally in the United Kingdom although  he  found  that  she  had  been
    outside the United Kingdom for more than  the  permitted  period.   The
    representative referred to Judge Phillips and her determination on  the
    same issue which she sent back to the Secretary of State to see if  she
    was prepared to exercise discretion on the time spent by the  appellant
    outside the United  Kingdom  in  2007-2008.   The  Secretary  of  State
    decided not to exercise her discretion in favour of the  Appellant  but
    the representative submitted that the determination promulgated  on  23
    October 2014 does not indicate that the judge finds the application  to
    lack credibility per se.  She submitted that  the  judge  has  accepted
    much of the Appellant's evidence and at paragraph 40 has  set  out  the
    legal basis for allowing the appeal under Article 8.   He  referred  to
    the correct case law and she submitted that the grounds of  application
    do not contain an argument against the judge's decision to go ahead and
    deal with the claim under  Article  8  after  finding  that  there  are
    arguably good grounds for doing so.  She  submitted  that  the  judge's
    determination contains all the relevant case law and he  considers  the
    application under the Rules and then Article 8  is  considered  outside
    the Rules.  She submitted that was the correct way  to  deal  with  the
    claim.  She submitted that the judge made an Article  8  assessment  on
    the evidence before him.  She submitted that paragraphs 40 to 45  refer
    to the relevant case law and the judge is dealing with the  Appellant's
    private life not her family life because the  Appellant's  relationship
    is only of short duration.

18. At paragraph 46 the representative submitted that the judge found  that
    the Appellant retains strong links to  Singapore  but  he  goes  on  to
    consider the length of time  the  Appellant  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the letters of support, the value of the Appellant's work  and
    her friendships in the United Kingdom and the fact that  she  has  been
    paying tax and national insurance.  She submitted that  the  length  of
    time the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom must be relevant  and
    it cannot be an error to add this to the equation.  I was  referred  to
    the letter from the Appellant's employer and her payslips and the  fact
    that she is entitled to work here.

19. The representative referred to the judge's comments on the  Appellant's
    visits to Singapore being less frequent than they used to  be,  to  the
    fact that she now has roots in the United Kingdom and that  she  has  a
    large private life  here.   The  Appellant  not  only  works  but  does
    voluntary work and she submitted that although the appellant  may  have
    had no legitimate expectation of remaining here, she has put down roots
    and the content of her private life has to be looked at.  She submitted
    that the judge only takes into account her relationship at paragraph 50
    of the determination and the judge did not take the relationship as the
    determinative factor.  She considered all the other factors  too.   She
    submitted that the  relationship  is  still  part  of  the  Appellant's
    private life and had to be taken into account.

20. The representative referred to the Appellant's partner's  evidence  and
    the fact that the judge found him to be  genuine  and  the  judge  also
    found that removal would be a  problem  when  the  development  of  the
    Appellant's and Mr Kiss-Toth's relationship is considered.

21. The representative referred to paragraph 53 of  the  determination  and
    the judge's reference to Section 117B  of  the  2002  Act.   The  judge
    referred to effective immigration control and public interest  and  she
    submitted that this Appellant can speak English, is well  educated  and
    is well integrated into life in the United Kingdom and the  judge  took
    all this into account.  The Appellant will  not  be  a  burden  on  the
    taxpayer, she is financially independent, she works and  pays  national
    insurance and tax and she submitted that the judge has referred to  all
    of this.  The Appellant has never been in the United Kingdom unlawfully
    and she  submitted  that  her  time  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  not
    precarious when she entered into her relationship  with  Mr  Kiss-Toth.
    She was here legally.

22. The representative submitted  that  the  judge  has  given  appropriate
    weight to the public  interest  considerations  in  his  assessment  of
    proportionality.  She submitted that there is no error of  law  in  the
    determination.  What the Respondent is doing is carrying out  a  point-
    scoring exercise.  She submitted that the relationship may have  tipped
    the  balance  and  this  is  referred  to  at  paragraph  52   of   the
    determination.

23. The representative submitted that this has been a careful determination
    and the judge has applied the legal principles to  the  facts  and  was
    entitled to reach the  conclusion  he  did.   She  submitted  that  the
    Respondent is merely disagreeing with the judge's decision and that the
    determination should stand.

24. The Presenting Officer made further submissions referring to  ground  3
    paragraphs (b) and (c).  She submitted that the Appellant can  continue
    her relationship either in Singapore or Mr  Kiss-Toth's  member  state.
    She submitted that although the Appellant's representative went through
    the Immigration Act and has stated that the Appellant has  always  been
    in the United Kingdom lawfully, what she has not taken into account  is
    the fact that she has always been in the  United  Kingdom  temporarily.
    She submitted that if the Article 8 claim succeeds in  this  case  this
    would mean that any good student should be able to remain in the United
    Kingdom even if the terms of the  Rules  cannot  be  met  and  this  is
    clearly not the case.  She submitted that the said case of Patel has to
    be taken into account and the judge allowed this appeal  based  on  the
    length of time the Appellant  has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom,  her
    employment and her short relationship.  She submitted that that is  not
    enough.  When public interest is  taken  into  account  this  Appellant
    should go  back  to  Singapore  and  if  she  wishes  to  continue  her
    relationship with the EEA national she should make an application  from
    there under the Rules.  She submitted that Section 117B of the 2002 Act
    was not properly dealt with  in  the  determination  and  the  decision
    should be overturned.

Determination

25. I have to decide if there is a material error of  law  in  the  judge's
    determination when she allowed the appeal under Article 8 of ECHR.   It
    was accepted by both parties that the application  does  not  meet  the
    terms of the Immigration Rules.

26. The judge has noted that when considering Article 8 the focus is on the
    Appellant's private life.  The Appellant's representative clearly  felt
    that when the Appellant entered into her relationship her situation  in
    the United Kingdom was not precarious but what she did  not  take  into
    account  and  what  the  judge  did  not  take  into  account  in   his
    determination was the fact  that  the  Appellant  has  only  ever  been
    temporarily in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant  was  aware  of  this
    when she was developing her private life and as she has been  here  for
    quite a long time she clearly has quite a considerable private life  in
    the United Kingdom.  In spite of this she has never  had  a  legitimate
    expectation of being able to remain here.  This has to  be  taken  into
    account when her relationship with Mr Kiss-Toth is considered and  when
    his human rights are considered as clearly he must also have been aware
    that the Appellant was only temporarily in the United Kingdom.  I  find
    therefore that the Appellant's situation in the United Kingdom  is  and
    was precarious because of its impermanence.

27. This is important when considering Section 117A to D of Part 5A of  the
    2002 Act.  Paragraph 117B(5) states that little weight should be  given
    to a private life established by a person at a time when  the  person's
    immigration status is precarious.  That is  the  situation  here.   The
    appellant has never been in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  but  her
    relationship has been formed when she has been here temporarily.   This
    is what has to be balanced against public interest and the  maintenance
    of effective immigration control.

28. When proportionality is assessed not only does this have  to  be  taken
    into account but the fact that the application cannot meet the terms of
    the Immigration Rules must weigh against  the  Appellant.   This  is  a
    public interest factor in favour of removal.

29. It is true that the judge  has  taken  the  whole  of  the  Appellant's
    situation into account when considering Article 8 of ECHR including not
    only her relationship but her ability to speak English, her  work,  her
    friends and the fact that she  has  integrated  well  into  the  United
    Kingdom but that is not  enough.   There  are  many  students  in  that
    position and they cannot all be allowed  to  remain  in  the  UK  under
    Article 8 of ECHR when the terms of the  Immigration  Rules  cannot  be
    satisfied.  The Appellant cannot choose whether she wishes to  live  in
    the United Kingdom or in her own country.  If this appeal is  dismissed
    she will require to go back to  Singapore.   She  has  been  travelling
    between the UK and Singapore and her family is in Singapore.   This  is
    not an unusual case with compelling or compassionate  reasons  for  her
    remaining here.  The judge has not  properly  taken  into  account  the
    statutory position regarding private life as indicated in  Section  117
    of the 2002 Act.  Although the judge has referred to  this  Section  in
    paragraph 53 and has  stated  that  the  maintenance  of  an  effective
    immigration control is in the public interest, he has  found  that  the
    removal of the Appellant for this reason is not  proportionate  to  the
    achievement of that legitimate aim bearing  in  mind  the  interference
    with the Appellant's relationship with Mr Kiss-Toth.  This  is  clearly
    an error of law.  A proportionality assessment has  not  been  properly
    carried out as her particular status in the United Kingdom has not been
    considered.

30. The judge clearly found credibility issues in the Appellant's  evidence
    and in Dr Li's evidence and at paragraph 30 states that  he  finds  the
    Appellant's evidence not to be credible.  At  paragraph  31  he  states
    that the Appellant is trying  to  fit  the  evidence  about  her  ankle
    fracture and her subsequent internship in Singapore  into  a  narrative
    that supports her claim to have been prevented from  returning  to  the
    UK.  He makes it clear why he finds there to be a lack  of  credibility
    and at paragraph 34 he states that it is a cause for some  dismay  that
    both Dr Li and Mrs Siva thought it helpful to contradict their  earlier
    evidence to support the Appellant's evidence.   It  is  clear  that  he
    believes that the Appellant found  her  internship  in  Singapore  more
    important than her position in the  United  Kingdom  and  so  tried  to
    convolute her evidence to her advantage.  In spite of this he  went  on
    to allow the claim under Article 8.

31. At paragraph 40 the judge deals with the relevant case law relating  to
    Article  8  and  finds  that  there  are  good  arguable  grounds   for
    considering the claim under Article 8 of ECHR.  He refers to compelling
    and compassionate reasons for the Appellant  remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  At paragraph 43 he states that the right of States to control
    the entry of non-nationals is that Article 8 does not impose on a State
    any general  obligation  to  respect  the  choice  of  residence  of  a
    foreigner but that immigration control has to be exercised consistently
    with Convention rights.  He refers in that paragraph to  insurmountable
    obstacles and goes on to make his proportionality assessment relying on
    the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  The judge then goes on to deal with
    the appellant's private life,  finding  that  her  family  life  is  so
    recently begun that it cannot be given much weight.   At  paragraph  46
    the judge finds that the Appellant has strong links to Singapore.   She
    spent five months there in 2011.  At paragraph 47 it is clear that  the
    judge knows that she has been in the United Kingdom as a student  which
    means that she has a temporary right to remain until her visa is at  an
    end.  At paragraph 48 he states that there is nothing to  suggest  that
    the Appellant could not  equally  continue  and  develop  her  life  in
    Singapore or elsewhere.  At paragraph 49 he accepts that as  a  student
    she has no legitimate expectation of being allowed  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He refers to her putting down roots here but  she  has
    done so knowing she was only here on a temporary basis.   At  paragraph
    50 the judge refers to her relationship with Mr Kiss-Toth  and  I  find
    that this is the tipping  point  when  the  judge  makes  his  decision
    relating to Article 8.  I have noted that when the application was made
    the Appellant did not know Mr Kiss-Toth.  This  is  a  very  short-term
    relationship and at paragraph 51 the judge states that he needs to  set
    aside any sympathy for the Appellant or find her attributes to be  more
    deserving than those of others.  This however seems to be what  he  has
    done.  He refers to the case of Nasim and  Others  (Article  8)  [2014]
    UKUT 25 (IAC).

32. This is not an unusual case.  This is the case  of  a  student  in  the
    United Kingdom having completed her studies and having started to  work
    here and wishing to remain here.  She does not have that  choice.   She
    comes from Singapore and she requires to return there at the end of her
    visa.  There was no legitimate expectation on her part to remain  here.



33. I have also taken into account No 3 of the grounds of  application.   I
    accept 3(a) and find that the essential  elements  of  the  Appellant's
    protected rights could  reasonably  be  continued  outside  the  United
    Kingdom.  With regard to 3(b) it is clear that the Appellant wishes  to
    continue her  relationship  with  Mr  Kiss-Toth.   She  can  do  so  in
    Singapore or within the EEA or it is open to her to make an application
    for entry clearance to the United Kingdom once she is able  to  satisfy
    the requirements as a partner under the Rules or the Regulations.  This
    is something that has not been properly considered by the judge in  his
    determination and remains open.  The Appellant's evidence is  that  she
    and Mr Kiss-Toth are already making wedding plans.  There clearly  will
    be an interference to both of their private lives  if  she  returns  to
    Singapore but the judge  recognises  that  Mr  Kiss-Toth,  a  Hungarian
    national is exercising Community law rights in the United Kingdom.   At
    paragraph 52 the judge states that the  forming  of  this  relationship
    tips the balance in deciding whether the interference with her right to
    private life is serious.  What the judge should have found was that the
    Appellant could return to Singapore and make an application  to  return
    to the United Kingdom as an unmarried partner or a fianc�e and may well
    succeed under the Rules.  Because  of  this,  this  application  cannot
    succeed under Article 8 of ECHR.

34. Public interest has been mentioned by the judge at paragraph 53  but  I
    find it has  not  been  properly  dealt  with  in  the  proportionality
    assessment.  The judge has gone against the decision in the  said  case
    of Nasim and I find he has not set aside his sympathy for the Appellant
    and has found her attributes to be more deserving than those of others.
     This is a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

35. I  find  that  there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    determination when he allowed the appeal under Article 8 of ECHR.

36. The appeal cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules.

37. I am setting aside Judge Russell's determination  allowing  the  appeal
    under Article 8 of  ECHR.    I  have  heard  the  submissions  of  both
    parties.  A second stage hearing is not required.

38. I dismiss the appellant's application for leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom under the Immigration Rules and under ECHR.

39. No anonymity direction is made.








Signed                              Date 06.02.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray


