
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07970/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 October 2013                            |On 21 November 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN



                                   Between

                             LEONARDO D'EMILIJO

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant appealed to a Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  against
    the respondent's decision of 5 April 2013 refusing his application  for
    a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.  The  judge  heard  the  appeal  on  the  papers  and
    dismissed it on  the  basis  that  there  were  no  relevant  documents
    available to him and accordingly the  burden  of  proof  had  not  been
    satisfied by the appellant.

2.   In his grounds of appeal the appellant refereed to a detailed  document
    that had been  provided by special delivery to the Tribunal on 30  July
    2013, two days before the day on which the judge considered the appeal.
     Proof of sending the documentation  was  provided  with  the  grounds.
    Permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis  that  there  was  an
    arguable procedural error.

3.   At the hearing before me it  was  in  effect  common  ground  that  the
    documentation should have been put before the  judge  who,  through  no
    fault  of  his  own,  was  as  a  consequence  unable  to  address  it.
    Accordingly the appropriate disposal of the appeal  is  for  it  to  be
    heard again de novo in the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton  Cross  by   a
    judge other than Judge Camp.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

