
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/07748/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11 February 2016                      |On 22 February 2016               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                Wisdom Awuah
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Unigwe, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana who appealed against a  refusal  by
    the respondent to grant his application for a residence card under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. His appeal was heard in Birmingham and in a decision promulgated on  22
    July 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Jessica Pacey dismissed it.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal J. M. Holmes on 9 November 2015.   His  reasons
    for so doing are:-

         "1.  In  a  Decision  promulgated  on  22  July  2015  Judge  Pacey
             dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
             decision to refuse to issue him with a residence card  as  the
             dependent descendant of an EEA national by reference to Reg  7
             of the EEA Regulations.

         2.   It was not in issue that the Appellant was the  adult  son  of
             the sponsor - but it was disputed by the  Respondent  that  he
             was dependent upon the sponsor at the date of decision.

         3.   The Judge rejected the claimed dependency.  Whilst this is  an
             extremely brief decision that in several respects is less than
             clear, it is arguable that she  did  accept  that  they  lived
             together.  If so, that raised  the  question  of  whether  the
             sponsor was telling the truth when he claimed to have paid all
             of the  utility  bills  for  the  accommodation  they  shared.
             Arguably there  is  no  decision  upon  that  issue.   If  the
             decision is to be interpreted as including such a finding, and
             if it is adequately reasoned, and is sustainable, then  it  is
             arguable that she failed to go on  to  engage  with  the  true
             nature of the test of 'dependency' in the Reg 7 context.

         4.   There might have been no need  for  the  Judge  to  go  on  to
             consider in the alternative  whether  the  Appellant  met  the
             requirements of Reg 8, as  the  EFM  of  the  sponsor,  if  an
             earlier decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Craig of 18 May  2012
             had rejected the Appellant's claim that when he lived in Ghana
             he had been dependent upon,  or  had  been  a  member  of  the
             household, of the sponsor, who was  then  living  in  the  UK.
             Given however the arguable failure of the  Judge  to  identify
             precisely what findings were made in  this  decision,  and  to
             relate them to the chronology of the Appellant's life in Ghana
             prior to travelling to the UK it is arguable that she did need
             to do so, and that she failed to do so."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. Mr. Unigwe argued that it was incumbent upon  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to firstly consider the two types of dependent family  members  -
    membership of the household and dependent  family  member.   He  argued
    that the judge should have allowed the appeal and that she had erred in
    ignoring the appellant's membership of the same household, that of  his
    sponsor.  Beyond that it was wrong of her to go on  to  consider  other
    aspects of the appeal.  Not only has the judge got it  wrong,  but  she
    has failed to appreciate the dependency is purely a factual test.   The
    judge had wrongly placed emphasis on an application previously made  in
    Ghana and has failed to give reasons for coming to the conclusion  that
    there was in this appeal no dependency.

 6. I referred Mr. Duffy to paragraph  3  of  Judge  Holmes's  reasons  for
    granting permission to appeal.  He accepted that it was  difficult  for
    him to resist the reasoning therein.

 7. I share the analysis of Judge Holmes having further considered not just
    the arguments put forward by the  appellant's  Counsel,  but  also  the
    written material before me.  I find  the  judge  did  accept  that  the
    appellant lived with the sponsor.  That raised the question of  whether
    the sponsor was telling the truth when he claimed to have paid  all  of
    the utility bills for the accommodation that they shared.  There is  no
    decision on this particular issue.  If,  however, the decision is to be
    interpreted as including such a finding which is  adequately  reasoned,
    the judge has also failed to go on to engage with the  true  nature  of
    the test of "dependency" in the context of  Regulation  7.   For  those
    reasons there is within this decision a material error of law.

 8. The issue then arose as to how I should dispose of the appeal before me
    today.  Mr. Unigwe argued that I should proceed  to  allow  the  appeal
    outright.  Mr. Duffy sought to persuade me  that  the  appropriate  way
    forward was remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. I preferred the arguments of Mr. Duffy.  This is an  appeal  where  one
    party has been deprived of a fair hearing.  Facts have to be  found  on
    various issues which require substantial evidence to be given.  For all
    these reasons I find the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  contains
    errors of law and  has  to  be  set  aside  in  its  entirety.   It  is
    appropriate for the appeal to  be  considered  once  more  and  decided
    afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

10. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt with  afresh,
    pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(b),  before  any  judge
    aside from Judge Jessica Pacey.

11. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 15 February 2016.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



