
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07604/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th September, 2014                          |On 19th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                            RODNEY DARRELL AZEMIA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Frantzis, Counsel, instructed by Legal
Justice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Grimshaw
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 3rd July 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of the Seychelles born on 4th November 1981.
     His  wife  and  children  are  British  citizens.   They  began  their
    relationship in the Seychelles in November 2002 and their children were
    born on 25th December 2003 and 14th January 2009.  They lived  together
    as a family unit until June 2012 when the Appellant's wife came to  the
    UK with the children.  The Appellant accompanied them on a  visit  visa
    and returned to the Seychelles within the currency  of  that  visa.  He
    subsequently made an out of country application for entry clearance  as
    a partner but was refused on maintenance grounds.

 3. In May 2013 the Appellant returned to the UK for a visit and  to  spend
    time with his family.  He made an in  time  application  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his family and private life in the UK.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the application under Appendix FM of the
    Immigration Rules. The Appellant could not succeed  under  the  partner
    route because E-LTRP2.1 requires that  the  applicant  must  not  be  a
    visitor. Neither could he succeed under the parent route because he did
    not have sole responsibility for his  child,  nor  under  private  life
    because he had not lived continuously  in  the  UK  for  the  requisite
    period.

 5.  The  Secretary  of  State  then  considered  whether  there  were  any
    exceptional circumstances.  In the refusal letter she wrote:

         "It has also been considered whether the  particular  circumstances
         set out in your application  constitute  exceptional  circumstances
         which, consistent with the right to respect for private and  family
         life contained in Article 8 of the ECHR might warrant consideration
         by the Secretary of State of a grant of leave to remain in  the  UK
         outside the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   It  has  been
         decided that it does not, as the grounds raised by your application
         are covered by the consideration of the Rules above.   Further,  as
         your children are British citizens along with your spouse, they are
         not being expected to leave the UK as a result  of  this  decision.
         Your application for  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  is  therefore
         refused."

 6. The judge relied  on  the  case  of  Sabir  (Appendix  FM   -  EX1  not
    freestanding) [2014] UKUT 00063 which held that, from the  architecture
    of the Rules as regards partners, EX1 is parasitic on the relevant Rule
    within Appendix FM  that otherwise grants leave to  remain.   In  Sabir
    the facts were similar to the present case.  She said that  the  appeal
    had no realistic prospect of success under the Immigration Rules.

 7. The judge stated that there was  no  question  of  the  children  being
    separated from their mother and she found as a fact that they were  not
    required to leave the UK.  She referred to the case of Gulshan (Article
    8 - new Rules) [2013] UKUT 00640 which held that,  after  applying  the
    requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  only  if  there  may  be  good
    grounds for granting leave outside them,  because  of  non-standard  or
    particular features to the application, is it necessary for  Article  8
    purposes  to  go  on  to  consider   whether   there   are   compelling
    circumstances that have not been sufficiently recognised.

 8. The judge said that the Appellant was  granted  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor, could not meet the financial requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules or the eligibility criteria set out  in  Appendix  FM,   and  the
    children could remain with their mother where they  could  continue  to
    receive care and support which they needed and to continue  with  their
    education.  The genuine and subsisting relationship that the  Appellant
    enjoys with his children would not be severed  by  his  return  to  the
    Seychelles.

 9. She wrote as follows:

      "Unfortunately for the Appellant I do not believe that there are  any
      non-standard or particular  features  of  his  application  requiring
      leave to be granted outside the Rules.  I am not persuaded that there
      are any aspects of the Appellant's private and family life that  have
      not been fully taken into account by the Respondent.  In short, I  do
      not accept that the  Appellant's  circumstances  are  exceptional  or
      compassionate or that it would be unjustifiably harsh to expect   him
      to return to the Seychelles.

      I conclude that the removal of the Appellant pursuant to the decision
      to refuse to grant leave would not engage the operation of Article 8.
       In any event, I find such removal  would  be  proportionate  to  the
      legitimate public end, namely the operation of a fair  and  effective
      system of immigration control."

The Grounds of Application

10. The grounds argue that, in effect,  the  Upper  Tribunals  decision  in
    Sabir was wrong  and  that  the  judge  erred  in  following  it.   The
    interpretation favoured by the Tribunal resulted  in  better  treatment
    for overstayers or those  on  temporary  admission  than  persons  here
    lawfully as visitors and provide a perverse  incentive  for  appellants
    like Mr Azemia to overstay or enter illegally.

11. Second, the judge erred in her approach to Article 8.  No authority for
    the phrase "unjustifiably harsh consequences" is provided. The  Supreme
    Court in Patel and Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72  reiterated  that  Lord
    Bingham's speech in Huang v  SSHD  [2007]  2AC  167  remains  the  most
    authoritative guidance on the  correct  approach  of  the  Tribunal  to
    Article 8.  There is no separate test of exceptionality.  The Court  of
    Appeal authority in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192  confirmed
    that the new Rules do not herald a restoration  of  the  exceptionality
    test and that Article 8 requires a  two  stage  approach.   Exceptional
    circumstances or unjustifiably harsh consequence are not  requirements.
    Furthermore, Nagre R (on the application of) v SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720,
    relied on by the Tribunal in Gulshan is a so-called  precarious  family
    life case whereas here family life was  established  years  before  the
    immigration question arose.

12. Third, the judge failed to consider the effect of the separation of the
    Appellant from his children on their family  life  and  the  children's
    best interests.  There was undisputed evidence that the  Appellant  was
    heavily involved with the children's day-to-day care.  He  is  of  good
    character and the only legitimate aim being  pursued  is  the  economic
    wellbeing of the country - his wife works and he  has  a  job  offer  -
    highly relevant to a proper consideration of the proportionality of the
    interference with family life.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Lobo on 30th July 2014.

14. On 8th August 2014 the Secretary of State served a reply defending  the
    judge's application of Sabir. She argued that the judge did not in fact
    apply an exceptionality test because she had also reminded herself that
    the  Appellant   needed   to   show   "good   ground   and   compelling
    circumstances".

Submissions

15. Miss Frantzis sought to argue that the judge ought to have engaged with
    the arguments as to why Sabir was wrongly decided, and had she done so,
    it would have informed her decision on Article 8.

16. More profitably, she then  submitted  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    tainted by an exceptionality test and in any event  her  assessment  of
    proportionality was flawed because she had not properly considered  the
    impact of the severance of the Appellant's physical  relationship  with
    his children.

17. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the  judge  was  correct  so  far  as  the
    Immigration Rules were concerned but accepted that her  reasoning  with
    respect to Article 8 was not adequate. It was clearly engaged. She said
    that she was content that the facts as outlined by Miss Frantzis in her
    submissions should form the basis of the decision since no challenge is
    made to  them.   She  provided  a  landing  card  which  confirmed  the
    Appellant's history as claimed  and  which  stated  that  he  told  the
    Immigration Officer that only a visit was intended, and he visited  the
    UK last year and complied.

Consideration of the whether there is a Material Error of Law

18. There is no error in this determination so far as  the  application  of
    the Immigration Rules is concerned.  The judge was bound to follow  the
    reported case of Sabir, which is the relevant authority and  there  was
    no obligation on her to engage in arguments  which  have  already  been
    decided.

19. However, it is right to say that the judge did err in her consideration
    of Article 8. There are non-standard and particular  features  to  this
    application which require the consideration of whether there  are  good
    grounds for granting leave to remain outside the Rules (Gulshan).   The
    judge's  conclusion  that  removal  would  be  proportionate   to   the
    legitimate public end of a fair and  effective  system  of  immigration
    control is not adequately reasoned because there is no consideration of
    the impact of the Appellant's removal not only on the  British  citizen
    children but on the ability of his British wife to support  the  family
    without him.



Factual Basis of the Claim

20. The Appellant's wife acquired her  British  nationality  by  birth  but
    lived in the Seychelles all her life until 2012  when  a  decision  was
    taken that the family should come to the UK, principally because it was
    thought that the best interests of the  children  lay  in  their  being
    raised here.  She came with her two sisters and their children, but the
    older generation remain in the Seychelles, although there is a maternal
    uncle in the UK who is the chef manager for BUPA. He  has  offered  the
    Appellant work either as a chef or as a care assistant.

21. The Appellant's wife works as a care assistant in two care homes,  with
    two contracts, earning the  national  minimum  wage  and,  because  her
    husband is here to help with the children, is able to  work  50  or  60
    hours a week.

Submissions

22. Mrs Pettersen submitted that, on the evidence, the Appellant's wife was
    unlikely to be able to meet the income requirements of the Rules.   She
    said that it would have been sensible for her to  have  used  the  time
    when her husband was here to earn  sufficient  money  and  provide  the
    specified evidence in order to  make  a  quick  application  for  entry
    clearance on a return to the Seychelles. The children  did  not  suffer
    from any particular medical conditions and their best interests lay  in
    remaining with their mother.  She accepted that,  so  far  as  the  job
    offer was concerned, it was likely that the Appellant could obtain work
    through his family connections, but submitted  that  removal  would  be
    proportionate.

23. Miss Frantzis submitted that it would be  unsafe  to  assume  that  the
    Appellant could  meet the financial requirements for an entry clearance
    application, and in any event relied on the case of Chikwamba  for  the
    proposition that to require him to return to  make an application would
    be disproportionate. The Appellant  was  of  good  character.   He  had
    sought legal advice upon arrival and had been told that he  could  make
    application for leave to remain.  The effect on  the  family  would  be
    severe if he was required to leave, since normal family life could  not
    properly be enjoyed if he was in the Seychelles.

Findings and Conclusions

24. Family life is enjoyed by the Appellant  with   his  British  wife  and
    children.  Removal to the Seychelles would be a clear interference with
    their enjoyment of family life which would manifestly be  qualitatively
    different if he was apart from them and in the Seychelles.

25. Removal would be lawful, since the Appellant has no basis  of  stay  in
    the UK.

26. The legitimate aim sought to be pursued is the  economic  wellbeing  of
    the country. In this  case  the  economic  impact  of  the  Appellant's
    removal, on the unchallenged evidence, is likely to be adverse  so  far
    as the UK is concerned in that it is accepted that  his  wife  is  only
    able to work 50 - 60 hours per week because of the Appellant's role  in
    looking after the children.  Furthermore, it was also accepted  at  the
    hearing that the Appellant was likely to be able to obtain work through
    his wife's maternal uncle, probably as a care assistant.

27. On the other hand the maintenance of effective immigration  control  is
    in the public interest. Since the Appellant has no basis of stay in the
    UK under the Immigration Rules, that is clearly a  strong  argument  in
    favour of removal.

28. I turn to the issue of proportionality. This is not a precarious family
    life case.  This couple have been together for some twelve  years  when
    there was no issue at all so far as  immigration  was  concerned.   The
    question of what constitutes public interest has been now  set  out  in
    primary legislation in  the  2014  Immigration  Act  which  amends  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It states  that  when  a
    court or tribunal is determining an  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
    little weight should be given to a private life or a relationship  that
    is established by a person at a time when  the  person  is  in  the  UK
    unlawfully or when his immigration status is precarious. However  there
    is no such consideration here.

29. The significant aspect of this  appeal  is  that  it  has  never   been
    argued by the Secretary of State  that  the  British  citizen  children
    should leave the UK. The reasons for refusal  letter  states  in  terms
    that the children are not being expected to leave the UK. Mrs Pettersen
    also made it clear in her submissions that this was not the basis  upon
    which the case was being argued. The children have spent  the  majority
    of their lives in the Seychelles, as have their parents, and there  are
    strong family ties there.   It  might  be  thought  that  it  would  be
    difficult to resist the argument that  they  could  not  reasonably  be
    expected to live  there.   However,  that  is  not  the  basis  of  the
    Secretary of State's case. Indeed, she  has  consistently  argued  that
    EX1, which has a requirement that it would not be reasonable to  expect
    to leave the UK, does not apply in this case.   Her  case  is  that  it
    would be proportionate for the Appellant to return  to  the  Seychelles
    and, in due course of time, make the appropriate application for  entry
    clearance, and that  the  best  interests  of  the  children  would  be
    adequately safeguarded by the presence of their mother.

30. The best interests of the children are a primary consideration in  this
    appeal although they can be outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of
    other considerations.  They are clearly to remain as part of the stable
    family unit which they have always enjoyed.  There is no  criticism  of
    the Appellant's conduct.  He accompanied his family to  the  UK  whilst
    they settled here, returned within the currency of his visit  visa  and
    then made the appropriate application from abroad.  On his  arrival  in
    the UK on his second visit visa he sought legal advice and was informed
    that he could make an in time application for leave which  he  did.  So
    far as the economic impact of his presence in the UK is concerned,  the
    evidence is positive. Not only does he enable his wife to work the very
    long hours which she does, but he also has the opportunity to work here
    as well.

31. It is not for me to make the Secretary of State's case.  She  does  not
    rely on the argument that it would be  reasonable  for  the  family  to
    return as a unit to the Seychelles.  The sole argument in her favour is
    importance of the maintenance of immigration control.  That  being  the
    case, I conclude that the arguments in the Appellant's favour  outweigh
    the   public   interest   in   removal   which   would   therefore   be
    disproportionate.

Decision

32. The original judge erred  in  law.  The  decision  is  set  aside.  The
    Appellant's appeal is allowed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

