
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/07902/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons             |
|On 18 May 2016                            |On 01 Aug 2016                   |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR KITTI SONGSAENG
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dhanji of Counsel, instructed by UK Migration
Lawyers Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  by  Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal S Taylor allowing an appeal under Appendix  FM
   of the Immigration Rules.

2) Mr Kitti Songsaeng (hereinafter referred to as "the applicant")  was  the
   appellant before the First-tier Tribunal.

3) The applicant was born on 18 July 1986 and is  a  national  of  Thailand.
   As the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal observed at paragraph 18  of  the
   decision, the facts of this appeal are not greatly in dispute.  The judge
   further observed, at paragraph 16, that the  applicant  had  submitted  a
   great deal  of  documentary  and  photographic  evidence  concerning  the
   relationship with his partner but this relationship was not  in  dispute.
   The only issue before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  there  were
   insurmountable obstacles to the applicant carrying on  family  life  with
   his partner outside  the  UK,  in  terms  of  paragraph  EX.1(b)  of  the
   Immigration Rules.

4) The facts as summarised by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal are  that
   the applicant arrived in the UK at the age of 12 in  1999.   He  has  not
   since returned to Thailand.  He completed his secondary education in  the
   UK.  His mother lives in the UK and is  now  a  British  citizen,  having
   arrived a few years before the applicant.  The applicant has not seen his
   father since the age of 4 and does not know his whereabouts.  He  has  no
   close relatives in Thailand apart from an aunt.   The  applicant  has  an
   unmarried partner, Ms Kanokwan Thongtawee, in the UK.   The  couple  have
   been in a relationship since 2005 and have been  cohabiting  since  2007.
   The applicant's partner is a  Thai  national  with  indefinite  leave  to
   remain in the UK.  She said at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
   she would not return to Thailand as she had spent over a decade  building
   her life in the UK by studying and working.  This future would be  thrown
   away if she returned to Thailand.  The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence
   from the applicant's mother stating that she had lived in  the  UK  since
   the early 1990s and was a British citizen.  She had built her life in the
   UK with her partner and she would be devastated if the applicant  had  to
   return to Thailand after she had brought him to the UK as a  child.   The
   judge accepted that the applicant was "totally acclimatised  to  life  in
   the UK" and considered the UK as his home.  He had no cultural attachment
   to Thailand and considered it to be a foreign land.  His only  connection
   with Thailand was an elderly  aunt  and  he  left  so  young  he  had  no
   remaining circle of friends either from his school or student  days.   He
   had no experience of working or studying in Thailand.   The  judge  found
   that the difficulties which the applicant  would  face  on  returning  to
   Thailand would be considerably aggravated by having to be separated  from
   the two main relationships in his life, with his partner and his  mother.
   The judge considered that the total severance  of  the  applicant's  core
   relationships in the UK, together  with  having  to  start  afresh  in  a
   country where he had no experience as  an  adult  and  no  experience  of
   working or studying, was considerably more  than  a  mere  inconvenience.
   This combination of facts would amount to insurmountable obstacles to his
   continuing with his family life in Thailand.   The time and effort  which
   the applicant's partner had invested in building her life in the  UK  was
   an additional factor showing that  family  life  would  not  continue  in
   Thailand.

5) In the application for permission to appeal it was  submitted  on  behalf
   of the Secretary of State that the judge's approach  to  the  test  under
   paragraph EX.1 was flawed.  The judge had erroneously taken the partner's
   choice not to accompany the applicant as  determinative.   The  partner's
   evidence was that she had family in Thailand, including her  mother,  her
   mother's partner and a sister.  She would find it difficult to find a job
   and rents were high.  She would have to share a room on her return.   The
   choice of where a couple wished to reside did not overrule the UK's right
   to control its  borders.   The  judge  failed  to  engage  with  how  the
   partner's  circumstances  in  Thailand  would  amount  to  insurmountable
   obstacles under the Rules.  In addition the judge had failed to take into
   account the fact that the applicant and his partner met  in  2005,  which
   was 2 years after the applicant's last leave expired in 2003.

6) It was further contended  that  the  applicant's  family  life  with  his
   mother was immaterial in the absence  of  reasons  as  to  how  this  was
   relevant to his family life with his partner.  The judge failed  to  give
   reasons  why  any  potential  difficulty   the   applicant   might   have
   establishing aspects of his private life was an  insurmountable  obstacle
   to family life continuing in  the  context  of  his  partner's  ties  and
   support network in Thailand.

7) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was  arguable  that
   the judge's conclusions regarding whether family or  private  life  could
   continue if the applicant's partner  moved  with  him  to  Thailand  were
   inadequate  and  that  the  judge  had  given  excessive  weight  to  the
   applicant's partner's desire to remain in the UK.  In  addition,  it  was
   said that the failure of the judge to have regard to section 117B of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as  amended,  was  also  an
   arguable error of law.

Submissions

8) In his submission at the hearing, Mr Wilding relied  on  the  grounds  of
   the application for permission to appeal.  He contended that the decision
   was based on the applicant's partner  not  wanting  to  go  to  Thailand.
   There was, however, a connection with Thailand and this was  set  out  in
   the summary of the evidence at paragraphs 10 and 11 of the decision.  The
   judge's conclusion was predicated on a desire by the  applicant  and  his
   partner to stay in the UK.  The question was one of  whether  there  were
   insurmountable obstacles to family life  being  carried  on  between  the
   applicant and his partner in Thailand.  It was pointed out that paragraph
   EX.2, giving a definition of "insurmountable obstacles", was inserted  in
   the Immigration Rules with effect from 28 July 2014, which was  prior  to
   the making of the Secretary of State's decision in February 2015.

9) For the applicant, Mr Dhanji referred to paragraph 18  of  the  decision,
   where the judge made findings in relation to paragraph EX.1.   The  judge
   had considered all the relevant factors.  At paragraph 17 the  judge  had
   accepted the evidence of the witnesses.  Although the judge had  referred
   to the severance of the applicant's core relationships with  his  partner
   and mother, Mr Dhanji acknowledged that this was immaterial to  the  test
   of insurmountable obstacles.  Under this test all  the  relevant  factors
   should  be  considered  except  for  severance,  as  the  test   required
   consideration of whether there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
   life with the partner continuing outside the UK.  This was, however,  not
   fatal to the judge's decision.  The judge  may  have  been  generous  but
   there was no challenge on the basis of perversity, only on the  basis  of
   misdirection.

10) It was pointed out that the judge made no direct reference to  paragraph
   EX.2, where the definition of "insurmountable obstacles"  is  given.   Mr
   Dhanji responded that there was nothing to show that the  judge  did  not
   have in mind the very significant difficulties which were referred to  in
   paragraph EX.2.  In Thailand the applicant would  struggle  to  obtain  a
   job, as found by the judge, he would  have  no  home  and  no  social  or
   cultural ties.

11) Mr Dhanji submitted that the applicant had applied  for  leave  in  2004
   and this had not been decided until 2007.  The applicant would  have  had
   leave  under  section  3C  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  until   2007.
   Accordingly section 117B(6), which  applies  to  a  relationship  with  a
   qualifying partner commenced when a person is in the UK  unlawfully,  did
   not apply.  The applicant had had leave until he was 17 years  old.   The
   overstaying by the applicant began  when  he  was  still  a  child.   The
   applicant spoke English and there was no problem  with  funding  for  the
   couple.

12) Mr Dhanji acknowledged that the applicant  would  not  succeed  with  an
   application for entry clearance because his  partner  did  not  meet  the
   financial requirements under Appendix FM.   If  paragraph  EX.1  was  not
   satisfied then the appeal could be  considered  outside  the  Immigration
   Rules.  If this were to be done, it should be taken into account that the
   applicant came to the UK as a child.  His relationship with  his  partner
   was of long standing.  It would be difficult for them if they  could  not
   continue their family life in the UK.  Mr Dhanji further informed me that
   the applicant's partner is now a British citizen.

13) In response Mr Wilding submitted that there was an error of law  in  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge had not engaged with  the
   relevant and material issues.  The judge did address with the  definition
   of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  in  paragraph  EX.2  as   meaning   very
   significant difficulties.  The judge's decision  was  predicated  on  the
   parties not wanting to go back to Thailand.  The judge should have  asked
   whether there were very significant  difficulties  in  continuing  family
   life outside the UK and then considered whether these difficulties  could
   be overcome or would entail very serious hardship.   The  judge  did  not
   take into account that  the  applicant's  partner  still  has  family  in
   Thailand.

14) Mr Wilding further submitted that it  was  incorrect  to  say  that  the
   applicant had had section 3C leave until 2007.  He  referred  me  to  the
   reasons for refusal letter in this regard.  The point he sought  to  make
   was that the applicant's leave had expired at the  end  of  August  2003,
   before the application of November 2004 was made, so section 3C leave did
   not run.

15) Mr Wilding further referred  to  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
   Rules and the test of very significant obstacles.  The evidence  did  not
   establish that this threshold was met either.  Although when  considering
   the appeal outside the Rules there was no intermediate test, nevertheless
   the failure to satisfy the Rules was relevant.  Under section 117B little
   weight should be given to the  relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner
   formed when the applicant was in the UK unlawfully.  It was difficult  to
   see how the Secretary of State's decision could be disproportionate.





Discussion

16) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal has made clear  findings  upon  the
   evidence, which  as  the  judge  pointed  out,  was  largely  undisputed.
   Regrettably, when it came to applying paragraph EX.1, the  judge  omitted
   to take account  of  the  definition  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  in
   paragraph EX.2.  This states that for the purpose of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)
   "insurmountable obstacles" means the very significant difficulties  which
   would be faced by the applicant or  their  partner  in  continuing  their
   family life together outside the UK and which could not  be  overcome  or
   would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.

17) The judge found that there would be  significant  difficulties  for  the
   applicant or his partner in continuing their family life together outside
   the UK.  It  is  not  clear  whether  the  judge  considered  that  these
   difficulties would be very  significant.   The  judge  did  not  consider
   whether these difficulties could not be overcome  or  would  entail  very
   serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.

18) Mr Dhanji submitted that the  judge  had  considered  all  the  relevant
   factors and there was nothing to show that the judge had  not  considered
   that there were very significant  difficulties  to  the  continuation  of
   family life.  What is not established from the judge's decision, however,
   is  that  the  judge  had  proper  regard  to  the  full  definition   of
   "insurmountable obstacles" in paragraph  EX.2  and,  in  particular,  the
   further requirements to the effect that where there are very  significant
   difficulties they either cannot be overcome or would entail very  serious
   hardship.

19) By admitting to follow the definition  and  apply  the  full  test,  the
   judge made an error of law.  Had this error not been made, it  cannot  be
   said that the judge would necessarily  have  reached  the  same  decision
   under the Immigration Rules and accordingly the decision  should  be  set
   aside and re-made.

20) As I indicated to the parties at the hearing, if the  decision  were  to
   be set aside I would re-make it on the basis of the judge's findings  and
   the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  So far as paragraph EX.1(b)
   is concerned, it is  accepted  that  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and
   subsisting relationship with his partner who is in  the  UK  and,  having
   been already settled in the UK, is now a British  citizen.   It  must  be
   shown that there are insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with  the
   partner continuing outside the  UK.   For  this  purpose  "insurmountable
   obstacles" has the meaning set out in paragraph EX.2, referred to  above.



21) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal drew attention to the  difficulties
   the applicant would face in continuing family life outside the  UK.   The
   applicant has been in the UK for 16 years since the age of 12.  Not  only
   is his partner here, in a relationship that has subsisted for  more  than
   10 years, but his mother has  been  here  since  the  early  1990s.   The
   presence of his mother is not a strong point in itself, as  the  evidence
   does not indicate that there  is  anything  more  than  a  normal  family
   relationship between  the  applicant  and  his  mother.   There  is  more
   significance to be attached to  the  fact  that  the  applicant  has  few
   relatives left in Thailand, apart from an aunt, whom he has not seen  for
   many years.  He is nevertheless now  around  30  years  old  and  he  has
   educational qualifications  from  his  secondary  schooling  in  the  UK.
   Although it would  be  difficult  for  him  to  re-establish  himself  in
   Thailand, it has not been shown that the difficulties he would  encounter
   could not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship.

22) The applicant's partner came  from  Thailand  in  2004.   She  has  been
   studying in the UK and at the time of the hearing before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal she was awaiting an assessment of her dissertation for the award
   of the degree of MBA.  She has returned to Thailand  three  times  in  10
   years and still has close family there.  Her evidence was that  it  would
   be very difficult to return as she would have to start again with no home
   and not being used to the culture.  It would be difficult to find  a  job
   in Thailand and rents  were  very  high.   Again  these  are  significant
   difficulties but the evidence does  not  show  that  they  could  not  be
   overcome or would entail very serious hardship.  The applicant's  partner
   would be returning to Thailand as a highly educated young woman  with  UK
   education qualifications and work experience.

23) The applicant's  partner  has  said  in  her  evidence  that  she  would
   probably not return to Thailand with the applicant.  This, however, would
   be her choice.  On the evidence I am not satisfied that  the  applicant's
   satisfies the test in paragraph EX.1(b).

24) Mr Dhanji referred  me  to  the  test  for  private  life  in  paragraph
   276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules on the basis that the applicant is
   someone who has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20  years  but
   there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration  into  the
   country to which he would have to go if required to  leave  the  UK.   At
   first sight, "very  significant  obstacles"  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
   would seem to be a lesser test than "insurmountable obstacles" as defined
   in paragraph EX.2.  Given that the applicant left Thailand at the age  of
   12, I would not have much difficulty in accepting  that  there  would  be
   significant obstacles to his integration on return but it is questionable
   whether these would be very significant obstacles,  as  required  by  the
   wording of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The applicant  spent  the  first  12
   years of his life in Thailand and he has received a  secondary  education
   in the UK.  He is young and appears to be  fit.   These  factors  do  not
   suggest the existence of very significant obstacles  to  his  integration
   into Thailand.

25) The question then  arises  of  consideration  outside  the  Rules  under
   Article 8.  I may state here for the sake of completeness that the  Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal did not err by not considering the application
   of section 117B.  The provisions in section 117B apply where the Tribunal
   is determining  whether  a  decision  made  under  the  Immigration  Acts
   breaches a person's right to respect for private  or  family  life  under
   Article 8.  The judge allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  and
   not under Article 8, where section 117B would be relevant.

26) Looking at section 117B, the first principle is that the maintenance  of
   effective immigration controls is in the public interest.  It is also  in
   the public interest that persons who seek to remain in the UK are able to
   speak English and are financially independent.  It is not  disputed  here
   that the applicant can speak English and is financially independent.

27) The difficulties for the applicant arise in relation to subsections  (4)
   and (5).  Under subsection  (4)  little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
   relationship formed with a qualifying partner that is  established  by  a
   person at a time when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  It
   seems it was accepted by Mr Dhanji in the course of the hearing that  the
   applicant's leave expired in 2003 and that the application made  in  2004
   therefore did  not  extend  leave.   Accordingly,  when  the  applicant's
   relationship with his partner began in 2005 he was an overstayer and  was
   in the UK unlawfully.  The statutory provision means that  little  weight
   should then be given to his relationship with his partner.

28) The applicant established private life in the UK  from  his  arrival  in
   1999 until the expiry of his  leave  in  2003.   Subsection  (5)  states,
   however, that little weight should be given to a private life established
   by a person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.
    This was held in the case of AM (s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 00260,  among
   others, to mean that where a person has limited  leave  their  status  is
   precarious.  As the applicant had only limited  leave  between  1999  and
   2003, little weight is to be given to  private  life  established  during
   this period.

29) I accept that little weight does not mean no weight but it  is  for  the
   applicant to  show  that  there  are  compelling  circumstances,  in  the
   meanings set out in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 to outweigh the public
   interest   in   maintaining   effective   immigration   controls.     The
   circumstances of the applicant and his partner simply do  not  meet  this
   threshold.  Their wish to continue their relationship within  the  United
   Kingdom, given all the effort the applicant's partner, in particular, has
   put into establishing herself here, is understandable  but  does  not  of
   itself lead to the conclusion that the Secretary of State's  decision  is
   disproportionate.  Furthermore, as  the  applicant's  partner  is  now  a
   British citizen, there is the possibility that the couple might  be  able
   to return to the UK in the future with  leave  for  the  applicant.   The
   circumstances at present, when considered outside the Immigration  Rules,
   are not sufficiently compelling to outweigh the public interest and  show
   that the Secretary of State's decision is disproportionate under  Article
   8 of the Human Rights Convention.  Accordingly, the decision must be  re-
   made by dismissing the appeal.

Conclusions

30) The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

31) I set aside the decision.

32) I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal.


Anonymity

33) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  have
   not been asked to make such an order and I see no reason of substance for
   so doing.


Fee Award              Note: this is not part of the decision

As the appeal has been dismissed, no fee award can be made.





Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal


