
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07611/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 September 2017                  |On 5 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                            Sukhjinder singh brar
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby, Counsel instructed by ATM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Greasley, sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  30
    November 2015) dismissing on the papers the appellant's appeal  against
    the decision of the respondent to refuse to issue him with a  residence
    card as confirmation of his right to reside in the United Kingdom as  a
    family member of an EEA national exercising Treaty  rights  here.   The
    sole ground of refusal was  that  the  appellant  had  entered  into  a
    marriage of convenience with his EEA national sponsor.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not  consider
    that the appellant requires anonymity  for  these  proceedings  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 2. On 7 August 2017, Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal for the following reasons:

      1) The application is made by the appellant  in  person.   He  asserts
         that the Judge of the First-tier has incorrectly placed the  burden
         of proof upon the appellant, when the burden is on  the  respondent
         to show that there is a marriage of convenience.  The grounds  also
         state that the appellant had not received letters inviting him  for
         interview and that is why he had not attended.

      2)  I  consider  that  there  are  arguable  errors  of  law  in   the
         determination.

      3) The Judge states that the burden lies on the appellant to show that
         the marriage is not one convenience; that is arguably wrong.

The Appeal Hearing

 3. At the hearing to determine whether an error of law was  made  out,  Mr
    Sowerby explained that, since the grant of permission  to  appeal,  the
    appellant had instructed ATM Solicitors, who had in turn instructed him
    to appear on the appellant's behalf.  He acknowledged that Mr Tufan had
    produced a letter dated 8 July 2014 and a letter  dated  18  July  2014
    addressed  to  the  appellant  at  an  address  in  Harlington,  Hayes,
    Middlesex.  The first letter invited the appellant and  his  spouse  to
    attend an interview in Liverpool on  1  August  2014;  and  the  second
    letter invited him and his spouse to attend an interview on  20  August
    2014.  However, he submitted, it did not appear that these letters were
    included in the Home Office bundle  which  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Accordingly, he submitted, the respondent had not made out a
    prima facie case that the  appellant  had  been  invited  to  attend  a
    marriage interview, and consequentially the respondent had not made out
    a prima facie case that the marriage to the  EEA  sponsor  was  one  of
    convenience.  Thus, the Judge had erred in law in not  recognising  the
    evidential deficiency in the respondent's case, and  his  finding  that
    the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience   was   unsustainable   and/or
    inadequately reasoned.

 4. On behalf of the Secretary of State,  Mr  Tufan  adopted  the  Rule  24
    response opposing the appeal settled by a colleague.  It  was  open  to
    the Judge to find that the appellant had failed to  attend  a  marriage
    interview to which he had been invited.  Moreover, the  respondent  had
    another ground for suspecting the marriage to be  one  of  convenience,
    which was that his application for further leave to remain outside  the
    Rules had been voided on 10 January 2014, and so he did not have lawful
    status under the Rules after his existing leave to remain expired on 10
    May 2014.




Discussion

 5. The appellant had made an earlier application for a residence  card  as
    the spouse of an EEA national sponsor, which had  been  refused  on  13
    November 2013 on the basis that there was insufficient evidence of  her
    exercising Treaty rights as a self-employed person.  The appellant made
    a fresh application for a residence card on 9 May 2014, which  was  the
    day before his leave to remain as a student expired.

 6. When refusing the  application  on  21  October  2014,  the  respondent
    observed that the appellant was now here without authority.   In  order
    to provide him with the opportunity to demonstrate that he was a family
    member of an EEA national exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  UK,  the
    Department had invited him to attend a marriage interview on  1  August
    2014, for which he had failed  to  confirm  attendance.   He  was  then
    invited to attend a marriage interview on 20 August 2014, and again  he
    failed to confirm his attendance.  The interview was an opportunity for
    him to provide more evidence to satisfy  the  Department  that  he  was
    related as claimed to Izabella Kovacs, a Hungarian national.

 7. As he had failed to comply with the request without  good  reason,  the
    SSHD was allowed to draw any factual inferences about  his  entitlement
    to a right to reside as might appear appropriate in the  circumstances;
    and to decide, following such an inference, that  the  person  did  not
    have or ceased to have a right to reside in the  UK.   Consequentially,
    his application had been refused under Regulations 2 and 20B(5) of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations.

 8. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal were vague
    and formulaic.  They did not put in issue  the  respondent's  assertion
    that the appellant had  twice  been  requested  to  attend  a  marriage
    interview with his spouse, but had failed to respond to either request.

 9. As was rehearsed by Judge Greasley in his decision at paragraphs [8] to
    [10], the appellant was initially represented by Visa  Expert  Limited,
    and later on by Marks &  Marks  Solicitors.   The  appellant  initially
    asked for  a  paper  hearing,  but  then  requested  an  oral  hearing.
    However, shortly before the oral hearing listed for 13 September  2016,
    the appellant's new representatives, Marks & Marks Solicitors, wrote to
    the Tribunal to  say  that  they  had  recently  been  instructed,  and
    requesting an adjournment of the hearing listed for 13 September  2016.
    The Tribunal refused the adjournment request, as the appointment of new
    solicitors was not a ground for an adjournment.  On 9  September  2016,
    the same solicitors wrote back to the Tribunal stating  that,  "due  to
    unforeseeable circumstances" the appellant would not be able to  attend
    the hearing on 13 September, and so  he  was  now  requesting  a  paper
    appeal disposal.

10. The Judge acknowledged that the appellant  had  previously  provided  a
    short bundle of documents, together with a witness statement signed  by
    him on 15 July 2016.  In his witness statement, the  appellant  claimed
    that  he  had  never  received  any  invitation  letter  to  attend  an
    interview.  He said that he had always updated his current  address  to
    the Home Office from time to time.  He claimed that the respondent  had
    a history of sending post to other addresses which were  not  relevant.
    For example, on 3 February 2015 his  representatives  had  specifically
    requested the Home Office to send correspondence to their address,  but
    the Home Office had sent the refusal decision to a  different  address.
    The respondent had not enclosed any piece of evidence in  their  bundle
    which proved that he had been invited for a  marriage  interview.   The
    appellant said that this cast doubt upon  whether  the  respondent  had
    written the two letters.  The appellant said that  he  lived  with  his
    spouse until the end of March 2016, but that due to family issues  they
    had now separated,  and  the  appellant  was  now  in  the  process  of
    obtaining a divorce.

11. As stated at paragraph [11], the appellant claimed that  he  had  asked
    his estranged spouse to provide supporting evidence in relation to  her
    employment and residence, but she had refused to do so.

12.  At  paragraph  [13],   the   Judge   referred   to   Papajorgji   (EEA
    spouse/marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038.  He said that
    the ratio of that decision was that the  appellant  did  not  bear  the
    burden of  proof  to  establish  that  the  marriage  was  not  one  of
    convenience until such time as  the  respondent  raised  the  issue  by
    evidence.  If such evidence was raised, it was  for  the  appellant  to
    properly address any such suspicions. The  Judge  found,  at  paragraph
    [14], that evidentially the  respondent  had  raised  "such  evidential
    suspicions of a proper and legitimate basis, namely by  virtue  of  the
    appellant's failure to attend the marriage interviews."

13. At paragraph [15], the Judge held that the appellant did  not  properly
    address  these  assertions.   Notwithstanding  the  appellant's  appeal
    statement, there was no letter from his previous representative dated 3
    September 2015 specifically  requesting  the  respondent  to  send  all
    correspondence  "to  the  appellant's  address".   Nor  was  there  any
    available  documentary  evidence  to   suggest   that   the   appellant
    specifically notified the Home Office of any changes of address in  the
    past.  It was relevant that the appellant had  settled  on  having  his
    appeal determined on the basis of  documentary  evidence;  he  had  not
    availed himself of the opportunity to attend any appeal  hearing  where
    his account could have been tested through proper cross-examination.

Ground 1

14. The Judge directed himself, in paragraph [2], as follows:  "The  burden
    of proof is  upon  the  appellant  to  demonstrate,  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities, that the marriage is not one of convenience in the event
    that I find that the respondent has  raised  reasonable  suspicions  on
    this issue by virtue of credible  evidence.   There  is  an  evidential
    burden on  the  claimant  to  address  evidence  justifying  reasonable
    suspicion that the  marriage  was  entered  into  for  the  predominant
    purpose of security residence rights."

15. The Judge's self-direction in the second sentence of paragraph  [2]  is
    correct.  The Judge's self-direction in the first  sentence  is  wrong.
    The Judge's error in this regard is replicated in paragraph [13] of his
    decision where he summarises and adopts the ratio  of  Papajorgji.  His
    understanding of the ratio is not wrong, but the authority is no longer
    good law on the question of the incidence of the legal burden of proof.
    The legal burden of proof always rests with the SSHD to make out a case
    that the marriage is one of convenience, as was  clarified  in  Agho  v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1198. However, the  differences  between  the  two
    approaches are quite subtle and the outcome of the two  approaches  is,
    in practice, likely to be the same, albeit not in Agho (where the prima
    facie case was very weak).  If an appellant does not  put  in  credible
    evidence to rebut the evidence which engenders  reasonable  grounds  to
    suspect that the marriage is one of convenience, the  legal  burden  of
    proving a marriage of convenience is likely to be discharged.

Ground 2

16. Mr Sowerby rightly (in my view) focused his attention on  the  question
    of whether it was open to the Judge to find, as  he  did  in  paragraph
    [14], that the respondent had raised a prima facie case  by  virtue  of
    the appellant's failure to attend the marriage interviews.

17. On the particular facts of this case, I find that it was  open  to  the
    Judge to find  as  a  fact  that  the  appellant  had  failed,  without
    reasonable excuse, to attend the marriage interviews to  which  he  and
    his spouse had been invited.

18. As a general rule, there  is  no  requirement  to  give  disclosure  in
    respect of an agreed fact.  Although it would have been  best  practice
    for the invitation letters to have been included  in  the  Home  Office
    bundle, the appellant had not raised an issue in his grounds of  appeal
    about the letters  not  being  sent  or  received.   The  letters  were
    addressed to the appellant at the address which  he  had  said  in  his
    application form should be used for correspondence.   It  was  not  the
    appellant's case that he had changed his correspondence address  before
    February 2015. The appellant did not raise an issue about receiving the
    invitation  letters  until  nearly  two  years  after  they  had   been
    supposedly sent.  If the appellant had elected for an oral hearing,  it
    is likely that the Presenting Officer at the oral  hearing  would  have
    dug out the two letters, as Mr Tufan did for the hearing in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  But as the appellant elected for a paper hearing, it was not
    procedurally unfair for the Judge to proceed on the  premise  that  the
    hearsay assertions made in the refusal letter were  true,  namely  that
    the invitation letters had been sent to the appellant  at  the  address
    which he had nominated for the receipt of correspondence from the  Home
    Office.  Although the factual assertions made  in  the  refusal  letter
    were not the best evidence (the best evidence being the  production  of
    the letters  themselves,  and  proof  of  delivery),  they  constituted
    hearsay evidence which the Judge could properly take into account.

19. Although not directly on the  point,  the  observations  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Mitchell (Basnet  revisited)  [2015]  UKUT  563  have  some
    relevance to the issue under discussion.   In  Mitchell,  the  Tribunal
    distinguished the earlier case of Basnet on two  grounds.   The  second
    ground that distinguished the case before them was that there had  been
    a lengthy delay before the appellant had asserted that the  application
    in question  had  been  wrongly  rejected  on  validity  grounds.   The
    Tribunal found that the appellant's failure to raise the matter at  the
    time impacted upon the question of where the burden of proof  lay,  and
    that in such a case, "a more nuanced approach to the  burden  of  proof
    may be  needed"  (headnote,  paragraph  2).   At  paragraph  [12],  the
    Tribunal said:

         Further, the position is that at all relevant times  the  applicant
         knew that the Secretary of State's position was that her leave  had
         expired on 31  January  2010.   We  have  great  sympathy  with  Mr
         Matthews's submissions that if she wanted to assert  the  Secretary
         of State's view was wrong, she should have done  so  at  the  time:
         this view is if anything reinforced by the  evidence  to  which  we
         refer below.  One reason why any difficulty needs to  be  taken  up
         promptly is that nobody is entitled to require anybody else to keep
         documents indefinitely (my emphasis).

20. In the light of the appellant's lengthy delay in raising the  issue  of
    the alleged non-service of the invitation  letters,  coupled  with  the
    appellant electing not to attend an oral hearing, it was  open  to  the
    Judge to find that the  appellant  had  not  credibly  shown  that  the
    invitation letters had not been  sent  to  him  and  received  by  him.
    Accordingly, consistent with Regulation 20B, it was open to  the  Judge
    to dismiss the appeal for the reasons which he gave.

Conclusion

21. Although the Judge's line of reasoning could have been better,  and  he
    erroneously implied that the legal burden of proof - as  distinct  from
    an evidential burden - shifted to the appellant  to  dispel  reasonable
    suspicion, the decision is not vitiated by a material error of law.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date 27 September 2017


Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge








