
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/07478/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 4 September 2014                      |On 8 September 2014       |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MISS NATTHAYA CHANJANG
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Molloy  on  15  July  2014
           against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark-Bell
           who had allowed the Respondent's appeal against the  refusal  of
           her application for leave to remain as the spouse  of  a  Points
           Based System migrant.  The determination was  promulgated  on  1
           May 2014.  The appeal  was  determined  on  the  papers  as  the
           Respondent had requested.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of Thailand, born on  12  September
           1982.  The Respondent had been granted leave to enter the United
           Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  until  1  January
           2014.  On 27 December 2013 she applied for leave  to  remain  as
           the dependant partner of a  Points  Based  System  migrant,  her
           husband Mr Khanut Kaenwiangrat, who had leave  to  remain  as  a
           Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant until 26  January  2015.   They
           had married  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  18  July  2013.   The
           application  was  refused  on  22  January  2014,  because   the
           Respondent had not previously had leave as a dependant  partner.
           The application was refused under  paragraph  319C(i)(iv)(3)  of
           the Immigration Rules.  Removal Directions under section  47  of
           Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 were made.


      3.    Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable that the judge had not applied  the  Immigration  Rules
           correctly.


      4.    Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
           the appeal would be reheard immediately if a material  error  of
           law were found.


      5.    When the  appeal  was  called  on  for  hearing,  there  was  no
           appearance  by  the  Respondent  nor  any  application  for   an
           adjournment  in  consequence.   The  tribunal  noted  that   the
           Respondent had chosen not to appear at the First-tier  Tribunal.
           Having satisfied itself that notice of the time, date and  place
           of the hearing had been  duly  served  on  the  Respondent,  the
           tribunal decided that it  should  proceed  in  the  Respondent's
           absence.






      Submissions - error of law


      6.    Mr Tufan for the Appellant (the Secretary of  State)  relied  on
           the grounds on which permission  to  appeal  had  been  granted.
           Plainly [8] of the reasons for  refusal  letter,  of  which  the
           judge had complained, was a  simple  typographical  error.   The
           words "Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant" should  be  substituted
           for the  name  of  the  Respondent's  husband.   The  judge  had
           misdirected himself in two ways at  [9]  of  his  determination.
           There were no transitional provisions and so the application had
           to be determined by the Immigration Rules in force at  the  date
           of decision: Odelola [2009] UKHL 25.  In any  event,  the  judge
           had further misdirected himself when  stating  that  the  Points
           Based System migrant sponsor (i.e., the Respondent's spouse) was
           required to have leave to remain for at 12 months or  more,  and
           be sponsored  by  a  Recognised  Body,  which  the  Respondent's
           husband met.   The  judge  did  not  appreciate  the  difference
           between a "Recognised Body" and  a  "Listed  Body",  which  were
           separate concepts.  The Respondent's  husband's  college  was  a
           Listed Body.  Mr Tufan produced to  the  tribunal  the  relevant
           lists.




      Material error of law finding


      7.    The tribunal studied the two lists  as  produced  by  Mr  Tufan.
           Recognised Bodies as defined have degree award powers granted by
           Royal Charter, United Kingdom statute or the Privy Council.  The
           Respondent's husband is studying at the Ealing, Hammersmith  and
           West London College.  That college is merely a Listed  Body  and
           so the Respondent's husband is not  qualified  to  sponsor  her.
           Mr Tufan's submission on that element of the appeal  is  plainly
           right and must succeed.


      8.    No transitional provisions were in place, so that the Respondent
           was required to satisfy the Immigration Rules in place as at  22
           January 2014.   Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  relevant  rule,
           paragraph  319C(i)(iv),  makes  no   provision   for   switching
           categories as the Respondent wished to do:


          (iv) the following conditions must be met:

              1) the relevant Points Based System Migrant must be applying
                 for entry clearance, leave to enter, or leave to remain, to
                 undertake a course of study that is longer than six months
                 and either:

                    a) have entry clearance, leave to enter, or leave to
                       remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student or as a student
                       to undertake a course of study longer than six
                       months; or

                    b) have last had entry clearance, leave to enter, or
                       leave to remain within the three months preceding the
                       application as a Tier 4 (General) Student or as a
                       student to undertake a course of study longer than
                       six months; and

                 2) the Partner must either:

                    a) have entry clearance, leave to enter, or leave to
                       remain as the Partner of a Tier 4 (General) Student
                       or a student with entry clearance, leave to enter, or
                       leave to remain, to undertake a course of study
                       longer than six months; or

                    b) have last had entry clearance, leave to enter, or
                       leave to remain within the three months preceding the
                       application as the Partner of a Tier 4 (General)
                       Student or as a student to undertake a course of
                       study longer than six months; and

              3) the relevant Points Based System Migrant  and  the  Partner
                 must be applying at the same time.


      9.     The  judge  fell  into  material  error  on  both  issues.  His
           determination must be  set  aside.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's
           decision is remade in the only way permissible, namely that  the
           original Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


      DECISION:


      The making of the previous decision involved the making of a  material
      error on a point of law.  It is set aside and remade as follows:

      The original Appellant's appeal is dismissed

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




      TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE
      FEE AWARD


      The appeal was dismissed and so there can be no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell



















































































































































































































































































































