
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07993/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th November 2016                        |On 25th November 2016         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                    S O S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Coleman instructed by Nandy & Co, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria whose date of birth  is  recorded
    as 23rd March 1986.  On 20th October 2014 he made  an  application  for
    leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  family  and
    private life.  O 12th January 2015 a decision was made  to  refuse  the
    application and the Appellant appealed.

 2. On 9th May 2016 the appeal was heard before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Porter sitting at Hatton Cross, London.  In a  decision  dated
    9th June 2016 she dismissed the appeal.  It is clear from the  decision
    that she was, to say the least, "unimpressed" by the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant.  In respect of part of the evidence she said, "I  found  the
    Appellant's evidence to be incredible and wholly implausible".

 3. It is also of note at paragraph 20 of that  decision  that  whilst  the
    judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant's  name  appeared  on  the  birth
    certificate of the child associated with  this  appeal,  and  that  the
    birth of that child occurred one  year  after  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor married, absent DNA evidence, the judge  found  that  paternity
    had
    not been  established  "conclusively".  Whether  the  judge  found,  on
    balance of probabilities that paternity had been  established  is  moot
    since it is clear, and both parties before me agree, that no sufficient
    finding was made.

 4. Not content  with  that  Decision,  by  Notice  dated  23rd  June  2016
    application was made for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    There were a number of grounds but that which found  most  favour  with
    Judge Hollingworth, in granting permission, was no sufficient reference
    to Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,
    consideration of which is mandatory, and relevant  to  this  appeal  is
    Section 117B(6) because  the  public  interest  does  not  require  the
    person's removal where the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

 5. It is now trite law that that particular part of section 117B  requires
    consideration of the whole section but that was not done.

 6. Application was made before me to introduce  further  evidence  in  the
    form of a DNA report which evidenced the Appellant being the father  of
    the child to a probability of 99.9%.  Mr Diwnycz for the  Secretary  of
    State made objection to that evidence being admitted on the basis  that
    there had been no DNA testing of the mother, notwithstanding  the  fact
    that it was not in issue that the mother of the child  was  indeed  the
    mother.

 7. Given the inevitable finding, certainly on  balance  of  probabilities,
    based on that evidence that the Appellant was the father of that child,
    and given the fact that it concerns a child, it seemed to  me  entirely
    proper that the evidence should be admitted, all the more so  since  it
    went to the issue of whether or not there had  been  an  error  of  law
    based on the facts.  I gain help from the guidance in the case of E and
    R v Home Secretary [2004] QB 1044.

Was there an error of law?

 8. On the basis of the inevitable finding that the Appellant is the father
    of the child, which evidence was not before the judge, Mr  Diwnycz  did
    not seek to persuade  me,  quite  properly,  that  the  error  was  not
    material.  It is perfectly clear to me reading the decision as a  whole
    that the judge did not accept that the Appellant was the father of  the
    child and that view appears to have infected, or is at least at risk of
    having infected, all other findings.

 9. In the end, by consent, this case is to be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with no findings preserved to be heard afresh before  a  judge
    other than Judge Porter at Taylor House. If possible the matter  should
    be listed before me but given the involvement of a  child  it  is  more
    important that the case is heard earlier than that it is  heard  at  my
    convenience.

10. Given the involvement of the child I make an  anonymity  order  in  the
    usual terms.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to be  re-made  in  the
First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

