
IAC-AH-dh-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07915/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 December 2014                            |On 18 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               LUCIE KUBINOVA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Rahman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by Denning
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is  an  appeal  that  was  allowed  at  the  First-tier,  and  the
    appellant in the Upper Tribunal is therefore the  Secretary  of  State.
    For clarity and convenience, however, I will refer to  the  parties  in
    this decision as they were at the First-tier.

2.   The appellant, who is a citizen of the Czech  Republic,  and  therefore
    an EU citizen, appealed against a decision taken under Regulation 19(3)
    of the 2006 Regulations.  This decision was that she should be  removed
    from the UK on the basis that she did not have, or had ceased to  have,
    a right to reside under the Regulations.

3.   Following a hearing that she attended, and  where  she  gave  evidence,
    her appeal under the Regulations was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Barker, in a determination  promulgated  on  12  September  2014.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lever.
    This was on the basis that it was arguable that the  judge's  reasoning
    in support  of  his  findings  was  inadequate.   The  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal had concentrated on the limited evidence  to  show
    that the appellant was self-employed, and complained that the  findings
    were not open to the judge on the evidence before him, or alternatively
    that the reasoning was inadequate.

4.   At the start of the  hearing  I  indicated  to  both  parties  that  it
    appeared to me, having read the papers, that this was a case  in  which
    the findings were open to the judge, and  that  the  reasoning  in  the
    determination was adequate.  Ms Rahman, for  the  respondent,  did  not
    concede the case on behalf of the Secretary of State, but she made very
    brief submissions in defence of the grounds.

5.   Mr Iqbal, for the appellant, made submissions at greater  length.   His
    main submission was that the  appeal  had  been  bound  to  be  allowed
    following the  findings  at  paragraph  21  of  the  determination,  in
    relation to the company that the appellant used to  work  for,  because
    this was the basis of the refusal.  The further  matters  went  to  the
    issue of whether the appellant remained qualified.

Error of Law Decision

6.   In my view this was a sound determination, in which the  findings  were
    open to the judge on the  evidence  before  him,  and  were  adequately
    reasoned.

7.   The judge was well aware  of  the  difficulties  with  the  documentary
    evidence.   This  is  clear  throughout  the  determination.    Between
    paragraphs 14 and 23 the judge set out his reasoning  at  some  length.
    There is no challenge  to  his  findings  in  paragraph  21  about  the
    validity of the company concerned.  I accept the submission made on the
    appellant's  behalf  that  this,  in  itself,  rendered  the   decision
    unlawful.  In the rest of the determination,  however,  the  judge  has
    provided a thorough and detailed assessment of the  evidence  presented
    by the appellant to show that she was working as a  psychotherapist  in
    private practice.  The judge considered the appellant's oral  evidence,
    and a range of documents.

8.   In my view the grounds in reality amount to  a  disagreement  with  the
    outcome.  If the judge had not given an indication, in  his  reasoning,
    of being alive to the weakness of the documentary evidence, then  there
    may have been an arguable point.  In a case where a judge is faced with
    a situation of having to consider oral evidence, including explanations
    for missing items of  documentary  evidence,  and  then  also  consider
    disparate pieces of documentary evidence, it is the judge's task, often
    a difficult one, to make an  assessment  of  whether  the  evidence  as
    presented, noting any difficulties or inconsistencies, is sufficient to
    establish facts on balance of probabilities.  There will be cases where
    the documentary evidence is insufficient to  establish  certain  facts,
    but where reliance can be placed on oral evidence.  There is  no  fixed
    evidential rule that it is impossible to reach balance  of  probability
    findings on oral evidence.

9.   In this case it appears to me that the judge has set  out  clearly  and
    in some detail  his  reasoning  process  in  relation  to  all  of  the
    findings, and has assessed all of the  relevant  documentary  and  oral
    evidence.  The findings appear to me to proceed from a sound, balanced,
    and careful assessment of what weight could be placed  on  the  various
    disparate pieces of oral and documentary evidence.   In  short  I  have
    little hesitation in concluding that the findings reached by the  judge
    were ones that were open to him on the evidence, and that the  findings
    were adequately reasoned.

10.  My conclusion, therefore, is that no material error  of  law  has  been
    established  in  the  judge's  determination.   The  judge's   decision
    therefore remains undisturbed.

11.  There was no anonymity order and no fee award.  Neither side  suggested
    that this position, in either respect, should change.

Notice of Decision

12.  The appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed.

13.  The judge's decision allowing the appeal  under  the  2006  Regulations
    remains undisturbed.



Signed        Date 17 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

