
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/07022/2015
                                                               IA/07023/2015
                                                               IA/07024/2015
                                                               IA/07025/2015
                                                               IA/07026/2015
                                                               IA/07027/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 July 2016                       |On 7 July 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     ks
                                     sk
                                     hs
                                     jk
                                     tk
                                     ss
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ali of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Petersen a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the Appellants. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,
       all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could  give
       rise to contempt of court  proceedings.  I  do  so  as  most  of  the
       Appellants are minors.

    2. The Respondent refused the  Appellants'  applications  for  leave  to
       remain on the basis of their private and family life both within  and
       outside the Immigration  Rules  on  30  January  2015.  Their  appeal
       against that decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ince
       following a hearing on 11 November 2015. This is  an  appeal  against
       that decision.

The grant of permission

    3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted permission  to  appeal  (19
       May 2016) on the ground that;

       "... it is arguable that the Judge erred in relying on  the  previous
       Judge's view as to whether a photograph  was  of  A  or  not  without
       expert evidence. As to the view taken as to  A's  credibility  having
       obtained a passport from the Afghan embassy in London,  it  is  noted
       that passports have been issued to others in those circumstances.  No
       evidence has been produced to suggest the Afghan documents are  false
       or forged; moreover, the Judge clearly believed that the  child  "JK"
       was born in Jalalabad and that the document recording her  birth  was
       genuine. It is arguable that the Judge  did  not  apply  the  correct
       standard of  proof  in  relation  to  nationality  and,  despite  the
       guidance in SSHD v D (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT 702, gave too  much  weight
       to the earlier Judge's decision on that issue."

Respondent's position

    4. It was asserted in the Rule 24 notice (14 June 2016) that  the  Judge
       directed himself appropriately and applied the  correct  standard  of
       proof.  Cogent  reasons  were  provided  for  the  findings.  Anxious
       scrutiny was given to the evidence. The Judge was entitled to come to
       conclusions he did based on the evidence produced.  The  grounds  are
       merely a disagreement with the adverse outcome of the appeal  without
       identifying any arguable material error of law.

    5. It was submitted orally that Article 8  was  considered  through  the
       prism  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  Judge   conducted   the
       proportionality balancing exercise.

Appellant's position

    6. The Judge placed too much weight on the  previous  finding  regarding
       nationality and lost sight of the low standard of proof.  The  Indian
       documents were never verified by the Respondent. There was no  expert
       evidence to confirm the photographs with the Indian application  were
       of the Appellants. There was nothing more than a generic challenge to
       the new documents. Debating reasons but giving no  weight  to  points
       and  applying  disproportionate  weight  to  earlier  findings  is  a
       material error of law. Mr  Ali  summarised  his  position  orally  by
       stating  that  too  much  weight   was   placed   on   the   previous
       determination.

    7. The children should not be  penalised  for  the  behaviour  of  their
       parents. Two of the children had accumulated over 7 years'  residence
       in the United Kingdom at the date of decision and were old enough  to
       fully understand the environment they were growing up in.  They  were
       qualifying children in accordance with section 117D (1)  (b)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration, and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002  act").  The
       Judge did not consider whether it was reasonable for  those  children
       to leave the United Kingdom in accordance with section 117B  (6)  (b)
       of the 2002 act.

    8. PD and others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka  [2016]
       UKUT 00108 (IAC) should have been  applied.  The  Judge  should  have
       looked at  each  individual  applicant  instead  of  considering  the
       position of the children as appendages of their  parents.  The  Judge
       erred in looking for sufficiently  exceptional  circumstances  rather
       than focusing on the best interests of the  children.  There  was  no
       public interest or strong reason for moving the children.

The Judge's findings regarding nationality

    9. The Judge stated;

       "[41]      I was not satisfied that the Appellant told the truth when
       he appeared before me. For the  reasons  set  out  below  I  was  not
       satisfied that he had been candid  about  his  origins.  Moreover,  I
       agree with IJ Hanratty's findings that his attendance at  the  Afghan
       Embassy to obtain a passport was contradictory to his alleged fear of
       living in that country due to religious  persecution.  Moreover,  his
       account of being issued with a passport simply because he was able to
       describe various features of Jalalabad did not ring true. It  is  not
       plausible that any Embassy would issue a passport to  a  person  who,
       apparently without  producing  the  documentation,  gave  information
       about a place which could have been obtained simply by  living  there
       -it does not follow that a person was born in such a place.

       [42] In addition, there was little corroboration  of  his  account  -
       given the importance of the issue for him it was notable that none of
       the signatories to the petition were prepared to attend  the  hearing
       and give evidence that they had in fact  known  the  Appellant  as  a
       citizen of Afghanistan in Jalalabad. I  comment  upon  the  potential
       corroboration of the documentation below but such by itself  was  not
       determinative.

       [44] I begin by considering the nationality of the family. I use  the
       determination of IJ Hanratty as the starting point. He found that the
       family were from India and  that  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  had
       fabricated an asylum claim. He placed particular  emphasis  upon  his
       assessment that the Appellants before him were the same  persons  who
       had attended the BHC in New Delhi and who had had  their  photographs
       taken there. Accordingly, he found as a "fact"  that  the  Appellant,
       his wife and eldest  child  had  physically  attended  the  BHC.  The
       Appellant has always denied this and maintains that he has never been
       to India (as indeed did his wife before IJ Hanratty).  Their  account
       is that the agent took their photographs in Jalalabad  and  they  did
       not know what the agent then did.

       [45] Since that time additional evidence,  which  it  could  be  said
       could not have been obtained prior to the hearing before IJ  Hanratty
       due to lack of  time  and  opportunity,  has  been  produced  by  the
       Appellant. There are before me copies of the ID documents  issued  to
       the Appellant and "JK"; what appears to be a  copy  of  the  original
       document issued  by  the  hospital  recording  "JK's"  birth;  and  a
       petition signed  by  numerous  persons  who  professed  to  know  the
       Appellant in Afghanistan and/or who knew of  his  family  background.
       There is the fact that he and his family have  maintained  that  they
       are from Afghanistan ever since the hearing before  IJ  Hanratty  and
       this can be added to the fact that the  Appellant  still  speaks  the
       languages of Afghanistan, namely Dari and Pushto. It is fair  to  say
       that I have more evidence before me  than  did  IJ  Hanratty  of  the
       Appellant's Afghan background.

       [46]  However,  that  is  not  to  say   that   it   is   necessarily
       determinative.  There  is  still  the  fact  that  Indian  passports,
       apparently issued to the  Appellants,  were  used  to  support  their
       applications for visit visas at New  Delhi  in  2006,  and  that  the
       Appellant, his wife and eldest child  apparently  attended  there  to
       lodge the applications and be interviewed.  I pause there to  comment
       that what does not  appear  to  have  been  considered  is  that  the
       passports may themselves have  been  forgeries  and  that  they  were
       obtained by the agent as this was his preferred modus operandi.  In a
       case, as here, where the Appellant is being accused of being a  party
       to the obtaining of false documents, it may seem perverse  to  assume
       that any of his ID documents were  in  fact  genuine.   There  is  no
       evidence before me to  suggest  that  the  Respondent  has  submitted
       copies of these documents to the Indian authorities  to  check  their
       provenance.  Having said that,  I  take  account  of  the  fact  that
       someone purporting to be the Appellant was interviewed by the  BHC  -
       if the Appellant's account is  correct  and  he  never  attended  for
       interview, it means that an imposter attended in his place pretending
       to be him, which further strains the credibility of his explanation.

       [47] I note that the Respondent has had an  opportunity  to  consider
       these new documents and has relied on a generic  challenge  to  them,
       namely that forged documents are easy to obtain in that part  of  the
       world.  No specific analysis of the documents has been carried out by
       the Respondent, or if there has, she has not revealed the outcome  of
       such.  However, it is fair to say that copies of  official  documents
       which had already been issued  (namely  the  official  ID  documents)
       carry less weight than those originals.

       [48] I further note that, although the Respondent  has  also  had  an
       opportunity to consider the backgrounds of the persons who signed the
       petition (or check whether they originated from Jalalabad or  nearby)
       but has not come forward with any information about their backgrounds
       adverse  to  the  Appellant.   Having  said  that,  none   of   those
       signatories have come  to  give  evidence  and  have  their  accounts
       tested, so the evidential value of that petition is limited.

       [49] There is one document which appears to carry greater weight than
       the others and that is the document issued by the hospital where"  JK
       "is said to have been born.  This does not appear to be  a  duplicate
       copy issued by the hospital but  a  copy  of  the  original  document
       issued contemporaneous to" JK's "birth.  I  remind  myself  that  the
       Respondent has not produced any evidence  specifically  stating  that
       this document has been forensically analysed  and  found  not  to  be
       genuine.  Moreover, as she was not alive in 2006 she is  not  tainted
       by any appearance at the BHC in New Delhi.  Accordingly, on the  face
       of it, I see no reason not to accept it as genuine and  therefore  as
       proof that" JK "was born in Jalalabad  which  suggests  that  she  is
       Afghani.

       [50] Of course, there is the argument that just  because  someone  is
       born in Jalalabad does not mean they are Afghani -  they  might  have
       been living there temporarily.  However, it can also be  argued  that
       if the family were having the problems they apparently said they were
       having as Sikhs living in Afghanistan, if they were Indian this  begs
       the question why they simply did not return to India.   There  is  no
       suggestion that India holds any fears for them, just that they do not
       wish to go there because they are Afghanis and not Indians.

       [51] Having said all the above, however, I return to  an  inescapable
       fact and that is that IJ Hanratty made findings that  the  Appellant,
       his wife and eldest child all attended at the BHC in New Delhi,  were
       photographed whilst they were there, and produced Indian passports in
       their names in support of visit visa applications to come to the  UK.
       No new evidence (such as a forensic analysis from an  expert  stating
       that the people in the photographs are not the Appellants before  me,
       or a report from the Indian authorities confirming that the passports
       used by them in support of those applications were not  genuine)  has
       been produced to challenge those findings.  The  additional  evidence
       of their association with Afghanistan may add to their case but is of
       such a nature that it does  not  overcome  the  existing  significant
       disadvantage produced by IJ Hanratty's findings.

       [52] In conclusion, whilst I acknowledge that there is more  evidence
       before me than was before IJ Hanratty in support  of  the  Appellants
       being Afghanis, the answer to the question of the nationality of this
       family (the burden of proof being on the Appellants)  remains  firmly
       on the side of them being Indian.  On that basis,  I  too  find  that
       they are Indian nationals.  In this regard however  I  remind  myself
       that the children of the Appellant and his wife are not culpable when
       the question of  responsibility  for  their  fraudulent  practice  in
       maintaining that they are Afghanis is considered."

Discussion regarding nationality issue

   10. The Judge considered the findings made by IJ Hanratty as the starting
       point for his consideration of the facts of the case, considered  the
       fresh evidence that had been supplied since then in detail,  analysed
       that evidence in detail, and reached findings that were open  to  him
       on the evidence. He was required  to  do  all  of  these  things.  He
       identified and applied the correct burden and standard of  proof.  It
       was a matter for him what weight  to  place  on  all  the  pieces  of
       evidence. It has not been suggested that he missed  anything  out  of
       his consideration or  that  he  considered  something  that  was  not
       relevant. The grounds amount to nothing more than a disagreement with
       findings the Judge was entitled to make on the evidence  before  him.
       The fact  that  a  different  Judge  may  have  reached  a  different
       conclusion is not the test. The Judge made no material error  of  law
       regarding the nationality issue.

The children

   11. The Judge dismissed the applications that were made  under  paragraph
       276 ADE of the Immigration Rules. I set out his findings in  relation
       to that below.

       "[53]      I now consider the position under  paragraph  276ADE,  and
       most specifically, paragraph 276ADE (iv), which states:

             "(iv)      is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has  lived
             continuously in the UK for at least 7 years  (discounting  any
             period of imprisonment); and it would  not  be  reasonable  to
             expect the applicant to leave the UK".

       [54] There is also paragraph 276ADE (vi), which states:

             "(vi)     subject to sub- paragraph (2) [which does not  apply
             here], is aged 18 years or above, has  lived  continuously  in
             the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and there would be very significant obstacles to
             the applicant's integration into the country to which he would
             have to go if required to leave the UK."

       [55] Paragraph 276ADE (iv) applies particularly to the  children"  HS
       "(now aged 12 or 13) and "JK" (now aged 8 or 9),  the  former  having
       attended school in the UK for over seven years now, with "JK" not far
       behind.  The question I have to decide is whether requiring  them  to
       move to another school in India, is "reasonable"  at  this  stage  in
       their education.  I note that "HS" is particularly settled  into  his
       school and is doing well, that he has a  number  of  connections  and
       interests outside his home environment and that his teacher considers
       that he would be "devastated" if he had to leave his school  at  this
       point.  I further note that it is argued that he is at a crucial  age
       and time in his educational career, the early teens, when significant
       choices have to be made.

       [56] There is no information before me  as  to  whether  there  is  a
       suitable school in India for him to go to but it  is  the  case  that
       that India has a very  well-developed  education  system.   Moreover,
       English is the joint official language in India (together with Hindi)
       and there should be no cultural difficulties in the  sense  that  the
       family is a Sikh family and therefore should  be  able  to  integrate
       with other  Sikhs  there.   I  appreciate  that  moving  schools  and
       countries may be daunting to  a  13  year  old,  but  that  would  be
       entirely natural and not a feature particular to "HS" - there  is  no
       medical  evidence   in   support   of   his   teacher's   contention.
       Accordingly, on this question I consider that the scales come down on
       the side of concluding that it would not be unreasonable  to  expect"
       HS "to leave the UK.

       [57] The issue is less well developed for "JS" since she has not been
       in the UK education system as long as "HS", and  she  is  not  at  as
       crucial a stage as he is.  Having said that she has also embraced the
       educational opportunities here  wholeheartedly  and  has  an  outward
       looking approach.  However, even  though  in  her  case  she  has  no
       recollection of a life abroad since she came here as  a  baby,  I  am
       drawn to the same conclusion as with" HS ", namely that it would also
       not be unreasonable for her to leave the UK  at  this  stage  in  her
       development.

       [58] It therefore follows that if an application was made today under
       paragraph 276ADE it would not be  successful  as  regards  these  two
       children, which in turn means that the family as a whole would not be
       entitled to remain in the UK.

       [59] In respect of paragraph  276ADE  (vi),  having  agreed  with  IJ
       Hanratty's findings that the whole family are Indian; noting that  it
       is likely  that  they  would  find  Sikh  communities  in  India  and
       therefore be able to practise their religion freely; and there  being
       no allegation from them that they are under any threat from anyone if
       they return there, I  cannot  see  that  there  would  be  any  "very
       significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country
       to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."

       [60] Accordingly, paragraph 276ADE (vi) also remains unsatisfied."

   12. The Judge quoted  extensively  from  Gulshan  (article  8-new  rules-
       correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) and  extracted  section  117A
       and 117B of the 2002 act.  He then sets out  his  findings  regarding
       the children within the context of the rules.

       "[71]      The situation here is that I have found that it would  not
       be unreasonable for the two  eldest  children  to  return  to  India.
       Moreover, as they and the rest of  their  family  would  be  able  to
       follow their religion in India without difficulty and they  would  be
       able to participate in  the  developed  Indian  education  system,  I
       cannot see that any of the criteria set out in  the  paragraph  above
       would not be satisfied.  It therefore  follows  that  Section  55  is
       satisfied.  They are Indians being educated in India and they are not
       a threatened minority.

       [72] I also note that their private lives have been accumulated  when
       their immigration position was precarious (since they had no leave to
       remain here  and  had  not  made  a  voluntary  departure)  and  that
       therefore the public interest lies in their removal.

       [73] Taken together, I do not consider that  all  the  above  factors
       cumulatively amount to exceptional  circumstances  that  justify  the
       family's  case  being  considered  under  the  residual   Article   8
       provisions.  I do not consider that it would be "unjustifiably harsh"
       for the family to return to India, especially  since  they  have  not
       alleged any persecutory fear of that country.  I  therefore  conclude
       that  the  Appellants  have  failed  to  show  that  there  are   any
       sufficiently exceptional circumstances  in  their  case  which  would
       justify considering their cases outside the Immigration Rules."

   13. The Judge then sets out the law on proportionality should that  stage
       have been reached, which in his judgement it had not, followed by his
       findings on that issue.

       [77] On the question of proportionality generally, I would have noted
       that the House of Lords in the cases of Huang and Kashmiri [2007]  11
       said that the "ultimate question" was whether the refusal of leave to
       enter or remain, (in circumstances where the life of the family could
       not reasonably be expected to  be  enjoyed  elsewhere),  taking  full
       account of all considerations weighing  in  favour  of  the  refusal,
       prejudiced the family life of the applicant in a manner  sufficiently
       serious to amount to a breach of the fundamental right  protected  by
       Article 8.  If the  answer  to  this  question  is  affirmative,  the
       refusal is unlawful.  It is not necessary to ask in addition  whether
       the case meets a test of exceptionality. However, I also  would  have
       taken account of the requirements of sections 117A and  117B  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as set out above.

       [79] I would have noted that against the Appellants was the fact that
       they have no right to remain in the UK under  the  Immigration  Rules
       and that their private lives had  developed  when  their  immigration
       positions were precarious.  Moreover, I would have taken  account  of
       the fact that the adults maintained that they were  Afghanis  whereas
       the evidence before me indicated to a significant  degree  that  they
       are Indians.  This in turn means that they continue not to  tell  the
       truth about their origins, which is a significant point when it comes
       to assessing proportionality.  Moreover, I would have noted that they
       were Sikhs returning to a country where Sikhs are not persecuted  but
       are allowed to practise their religion freely.  They would likely  be
       able to find and be assimilated into Sikh communities,  if  that  was
       their preference, as they have been assimilated into a Sikh community
       here in the UK.  Language would not be a  problem  since  they  speak
       and/or understand English and Punjabi  (another  language  spoken  in
       India).   India  has  a  thriving  economy   and   a   well-developed
       educational system so they would have opportunities there  which,  if
       their history in the UK is anything to go by, they would embrace.   I
       see little or no disadvantage in them relocating to India.

       [80] In their favour are the facts that since arriving in the UK they
       have integrated into the culture here; they have otherwise been model
       citizens; they have remained here for more than seven years and  have
       taken advantage of the opportunities  that  presented  themselves  to
       them, including taking advantage of a  health-care  system  that  the
       Respondent considers they were not  entitled  to.   The  children  of
       school age have done well.  However, such matters are  what  I  would
       expect any visitors to these  shores  to  respect  and  so  there  is
       nothing of any real significance in their behaviour to date which  is
       determinative of the issue before me.

       [81] Taking all these matters into account, even if I had gone on  to
       consider Article 8 outside the Rules, I would still have conclusively
       decided that their removal would not be disproportionate."

Discussion regarding the children

   14. I do not accept that the Judge incorporated a test of  exceptionality
       into the proportionality balancing exercise because  he  specifically
       excluded that in [77].  He  correctly  applied  it  when  considering
       whether Article 8 could be considered  at  all  (SSHD  v  SS  (Congo)
       [2015] EWCA Civ 387, Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558).

   15. It is correct that the Judge did not quote  section  117D(1)  of  the
       2002 act. He did  not  need  to  because  having  already  found  the
       children had lived  here  7  years  they  were  therefore  qualifying
       children which meant that he had to consider section 117B (6)(a)  and
       (b) of the 2002 act which he plainly did given what he said in [77].

   16. One only has to read these findings to see that the Judge  looked  at
       the children's cases individually at [55-57 and 71]. He did not  then
       have to repeat that same information when  he  considered  Article  8
       later on in the determination. He did  not  visit  the  sins  of  the
       parents on the children (see for example sentence 4 of [49]) and made
       no reference to their parents' behaviour  or  their  own  "precarious
       status" in [55-57 or 71]. He delineated the parents'  behaviour  from
       that of the children  (sentence  2  of  [79]).  He  fully  considered
       whether having been here for 7 years (which he accepted) it would  be
       reasonable for them to return to India. The  fact  that  a  different
       Judge may have reached a different conclusion is  not  the  test.  He
       looked at Article 8 through the prism of the immigration rules  which
       was what he supposed to do (Patel & Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72).

   17. In those circumstances I am not satisfied that there was  a  material
       error of law regarding the way he considered the  evidence  regarding
       the children.

Decision:

       The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       the making of an error on a point of law.

       I do not set aside the decision.

       The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  the  Appellants'
       appeals stands.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
6 July 2016
