

                                              [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal number: IA/07457/2014
      IA/07460/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision and Reasons           |
|On November 28, 2014             |Promulgated                    |
|                                 |On December 1, 2014            |
|                                 |                               |
|                                 |                               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                               MRS SALHI NOURA
                          MASTER MOHAMAD BOUDKHILA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Youssefian (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Whetwell (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, born August 20, 1974 and December 2, 2011 are  citizens
    of Algeria. The first named appellant came to the United Kingdom  as  a
    visitor and she married Noureddine Boudkhila  September  16,  2003  and
    they have lived together since that  date.  On  January  12,  2004  she
    applied to change her status and extend her time in the United  Kingdom
    but her application was refused on February 10, 2004.


 2. Her husband arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  January  10,  1999  and
    claimed asylum on January 20, 1999. He was granted refugee  status  and
    indefinite leave to remain on March  21,  2000.  On  May  18,  2001  he
    returned to Algeria because his father was ill and remained there until
    May 25, 2011. On March 6, 2004 he was issued with an Algerian  passport
    and this fact coupled with his visit in 2001 led to the UK  authorities
    refusing to grant him British  citizenship  and  in  January  2006  the
    respondent revoked his refugee status and indefinite leave  to  remain.
    Although he appealed this decision his appeal was dismissed on July 17,
    2007. On April 14, 2008 he applied for leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom based on article 8 ECHR and in the absence of a decision by the
    respondent his solicitors submitted further written submissions on  May
    4, 2010. This was refused on May  23,  2011  and  he  was  issued  with
    removal directions. In a determination promulgated on July 20, 2011  he
    was granted discretionary leave to remain outside of  the  Rules  until
    October 21, 2014.

 3. The first appellant and her husband  have  three  children  namely  the
    second appellant and  two  other  children  born  March  11,  2005  and
    September 22, 2006. All of the children were born in the United Kingdom
    and the eldest two children are classed  as  British  citizens  because
    they were born in the United Kingdom at a time when  their  father  had
    indefinite leave to remain. The respondent has never  challenged  their
    status.

 4. On October 17, 2012 the appellants applied for leave to remain but this
    was refused on October 30, 2013 on the  basis  the  appellant  did  not
    satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  and   there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances that merited consideration outside  of  the  Rules  under
    article 8 ECHR. The appellant was not issued a right of  appeal  as  no
    removal notices were issued. The appellants' solicitors threatened  the
    respondent with judicial review proceedings  and  the  respondent  then
    served removal notices dated January 22, 2014.

 5. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  on  February  6,
    2014. On August 26,  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Grant
    (hereinafter referred to  as  the  "FtTJ")  heard  their  appeals.  She
    dismissed their appeals under the Immigration Rules and article 8  ECHR
    in a determination promulgated on September 11, 2014.

 6. The appellants lodged grounds of appeal on  September  19,2014  and  on
    October 23, 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Simpson  granted
    permission to appeal finding it arguable the FtTJ had erred because:

     a. The FtTJ should have applied the guidelines in Secretary  of  State
        for the Home Department v D (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT  00702*  (formerly
        known as Devaseelan) in  respect  of  the  best  interests  of  the
        children as these had  been  considered  at  the  hearing  in  2011
        Tribunal hearing.


     b. There was no reason to  depart  from  the  findings  in  Devaseelan
        because the factors had not materially altered.

     c. The finding at paragraph [27] of the determination about the first-
        named appellant's intentions was unfair, as  the  finding  had  not
        been put to the first-named appellant.

     d.  The  findings  in  EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  were
        irrelevant because two of the children were British citizens.

 7. The respondent filed a Rule 24 reply in which she stated:


     a. The FtTJ was entitled to consider all of the circumstances when she
        considered the appeal and depart from the  findings  made  in  2011
        because the circumstances had changed for the reasons  set  out  in
        paragraphs [30] to [32].


     b. Private and family life was now within the Immigration  Rules.  The
        appellants could not meet the Immigration Rules.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 8. Mr Youssefian submitted as follows:


     a. Grounds One and two: The FtTJ departed from  the  findings  in  the
        2011 determination despite the fact  there  had  been  no  material
        changes to the family circumstances and the Judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal in 2011 found it was not in  the  best  interests  of  the
        children that they be removed. As far as the children are concerned
        they have now been here longer and the FtTJ should have found  that
        the position in the 2011 determination had strengthened.  The  FtTJ
        found material changes were


           i. The children could learn English and Arabic  in  Algeria  but
              failed to balance  that  finding  with  the  fact  there  are
              schools teaching Arabic in the United Kingdom.
          ii. The FtTJ attached weight to the  fact  the  first-appellant's
              husband's leave was due to expire in October 2014 but  as  he
              was entitled to apply for it to be extended this  was  not  a
              factor she should have had regard to.
         iii. The first-named appellant's health had  improved  since  2011
              but the Judge in 2011 allowed her husband's appeal because it
              was not in the children's best interests for him and them  to
              be removed.


         Whilst British citizenship was not a trump card the FtTJ  erred  by
         failing to attach any discernable weight to the fact  the  children
         were British citizens and in particular the  FtTJ  failed  to  have
         regard to the comments in paragraph [41] of   ZH  (Tanania)  [2011]
         UKSC 4 .

     b. Ground Three. The FtTJ found at paragraph [27] of her determination
        that the first-named  appellant  planned  to  come  to  the  United
        Kingdom and marry but she failed to put this issue to  the  witness
        at the hearing.


     c. Ground Four. The FtTJ materially erred by saying the  children  had
        no right to  an  education  and  relied  on  the  decision  of  EV.
        Education in the United  Kingdom  is  compulsory  and  two  of  the
        children are British. The FtTJ should not have relied on EV.

     d. Ground Five. The FtTJ should have considered the appeal outside  of
        the Immigration Rules. The Court in R on the application of Halimat
        SA Adiya Damiola Aliyu and Fatima Oluwakemi Aliyu)  v  SSHD  [2014]
        EWHC 3919 (Admin) (approving the decision   of  The  Queen  on  the
        application of Ganesabalan v SSHD [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin)) made it
        clear that if there is an article 8 claim it should be  considered.
        In  paragraph  [27]  the  FtTJ  erroneously  found  there  were  no
        compelling circumstances that required consideration outside of the
        Rules. This was an error in law.

 9. Mr Whetwell responded to these submissions and submitted:


     a. Grounds One and Two. The FtTJ had full regard to the  earlier  2011
        decision. The FtTJ identified four changes since 2011 and  she  was
        therefore entitled to  depart  from  the  2011  conclusions.  These
        factors were the first-named appellant's  health,  the  passage  of
        time and the requirement to consider the position  on  "real  world
        facts", article 8 ECHR is now in the Rules and must  be  considered
        in that light  and  the  children  are  all  entitled  to  Algerian
        nationality (including the latest child).


     b. Ground Three. Whilst the FtTJ did not  specifically  challenge  the
        witness on this issue it is submitted it was not  material  to  her
        decision.

     c. Ground Four. Paragraphs [24] to [32] form the basis of her findings
        and regard should not be had to just one sentence in paragraph [32]
        especially as not clear she was referring to all  of  he  children.
        The  parents'  immigration  status  cannot   be   overlooked   when
        considering the appeal.

     d. Ground Five. The FtTJ dismissed the appeal under  article  8  ECHR.
        Alternatively, if the FtTJ  found  there  were  no  compellable  or
        exceptional circumstances then that was open to her  on  the  facts
        before her.

10. In response to those submissions and matters raised by me Mr Youssefian
    submitted:


     a. The medical issue had no bearing  on  the  best  interests  of  the
        children. Legal changes do not make any difference to an article  8
        assessment. British citizenship should be given weight just  as  an
        entitlement to Algerian nationality. The children have continued to
        live here and socially integrate. Whilst  there  had  been  changes
        they were not material.


     b. The FtTJ should have considered the wider issue of  article  8  and
        there were clearly grounds to consider  the  case  outside  of  the
        Rules and whilst the  FtTJ  dismissed  the  article  8  claim  this
        contradicted what she stated in paragraph [27].

11. I reserved my decision and both parties agreed that no further evidence
    was needed if I found an error in law was found.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

12. This family's history is not straightforward because the appellants and
    the first-named  appellant's  husband  are  Algerian  but  two  of  the
    children are British citizens by virtue of  the  fact  the  first-named
    appellant's husband was granted asylum. The father was refused  British
    citizenship and also had his refugee status  and  indefinite  leave  to
    remain revoked in January 2006 but  the  two  children  retained  their
    status for the reason set out in paragraph [3] above.


13. The second-named appellant's application is  wholly  dependant  on  the
    circumstances of the first-named appellant's claim  and  Mr  Youssefian
    submitted both to the FtTJ and myself that her  claim  is  inextricably
    linked to the two other children's position.

14. In short, his main submission is the FtTJ was wrong to depart from  the
    findings of the 2011 determination. Mr Whetwell  has  argued  the  FtTJ
    reached a finding that was open to her because there had been a  number
    of material changes both in the law and in the family's  circumstances.



15. In Devaseelan the Tribunal was concerned with a  human  rights  appeal,
    which followed an asylum appeal on the same issues.  The Tribunal  said
    that, in such circumstances, the first Tribunal's determination  stands
    as an assessment of the claim the Appellant was making at the  time  of
    that first determination.  It is not binding on the second Tribunal but
    there again the second Tribunal is not hearing an  appeal  against  it.
    The Tribunal set out various principles:

     a. The first decision is always the starting point;
     b. Facts since then can always be considered;
     c. Facts before then but not relevant to the first decision can always
        be considered;
     d. The second Tribunal should treat with circumspection relevant facts
        that had not been brought to the first Tribunal's attention;
     e. If issues  and  evidence  on  the  first  and  second  appeals  are
        materially the same, the second Tribunal should treat the issues as
        settled by the first decision rather than allowing the matter to be
        relitigated.


16. The Tribunal also gave a caveat and said that there will be  occasional
    cases where the circumstances surrounding the first  appeal  were  such
    that it would be right for the second Tribunal to look at the matter as
    if the first determination had never been made.


17. In B (Pakistan) 2003 UKIAT 00053 the Tribunal said that the  Devaseelan
    guidelines are not limited  to  human  rights  appeals  and  should  be
    applied to immigration appeals where the appellants have made  a  fresh
    application  following  the  dismissal  of  a  previous   appeal.    An
    Adjudicator must consider the determination of the previous  appeal  in
    the second appeal.

18. Turning to the facts of this appeal  the  FtTJ  carefully  set  out  in
    paragraph [23] of her determination the findings of facts made  by  the
    judge in the 2011 determination. She has been provided with a  copy  of
    that decision and I have referred back to  this  when  considering  the
    application before me.

19. At paragraph [13] of the 2011  determination  the  judge  set  out  the
    submissions made on behalf of  the  husband/father.  These  submissions
    relied on established case law on children and families, the  fact  the
    children were British citizens who had been born and  had  subsequently
    lived  all  their  lives  in   the   United   Kingdom,   his   personal
    circumstances, the delay in dealing with the appeal, the wife's pending
    surgery and the decision of Zambrano (Case C-34/09). At paragraph  [17]
    the FtTJ found the husband/father had family life  and  there  were  no
    plans to remove his wife despite her having no  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom. He recorded  the  fact  the  children  were  British  and  the
    husband/father had to look after  the  family  because  of  his  wife's
    pending operation. Significantly at paragraph [20] the judge found that
    removing the husband/father  would  interfere  significantly  with  his
    family and private life with his children and wife. At  paragraph  [23]
    the judge found removal was not proportionate because:

     a. The children had a right to reside here in accordance with national
        and European law.
     b. The mother was incapable of looking after the children alone.
     c. It was in the children's best interests they continued to live here
        given their integration, friendships and close  relationships  with
        their first cousins, lack  of  any  connection  to  Algeria,  their
        predominant use of English  to  communicate,  their  mother  needed
        treatment.
     d. Delay in dealing with the appeal.

20. It is against this background that  the  FtTJ  considered  the  current
    appeals albeit these appeals do not include the husband/father.


21. The FtTJ approached the applications by firstly considering whether the
    Immigration Rules were met. Since July 9,  2012  this  is  the  correct
    approach to take. She found that  the  first-named  appellant  did  not
    satisfy the requirements of Section E-LTRPT 2.4 of Appendix FM  because
    she  had  shared  responsibility  for  the  children  and  she  had  to
    demonstrate sole responsibility. Having found the  appellants  did  not
    satisfy  Appendix  FM  she  then  stated  there  were   no   compelling
    circumstances that required consideration outside of  the  Rules.  This
    latter finding is ground 5 of this appeal and I  will  return  to  that
    later.

22. The FtTJ then proceeded to make a number of findings  about  her  claim
    and these were:

     a. No evidence the family,  including  the  husband/father  and  other
        children, could not return to Algeria. The husband demonstrated  he
        was able to return  and  had  done  so  and  obtained  an  Algerian
        passport.


     b. The first-named appellant had contact with family in Algeria.

     c. The first-named appellant married in haste  and  she  believed  she
        always planned on marrying and remaining here (ground three of this
        appeal).

     d. The parents speak Arabic and the children understand Arabic  as  it
        is the language spoken in the home.

     e. The children could attend a bi-lingual school in  Algiers  if  they
        wish to continue to be educated in English. They will have to learn
        to read and write Arabic as the Koran is written in Arabic and this
        would best be done in Algiers.

     f. The children are entitled to become Algerian citizens because their
        father  is  Algerian  and  his  name   appears   on   their   birth
        certificates.

     g. The children should live with both parents. The appellants have  no
        right to remain here and the father's leave is shortly to expire.

     h. The above factors override the first-named appellant's desire  that
        the children remain here to continue their education.

     i. The mother is no longer ill.

     j. The husband's appeal was granted because the mother "was not  in  a
        position to look after the children alone and for those reasons and
        the extent of  the  children's  ties  to  the  United  Kingdom  her
        husband's appeal was allowed and he received a short grant of leave
        which expires next month. She  is  not  ill  or  disabled  anymore"
        (paragraph [31] of the FtTJ's determination).

     k. The Rules have changed and the first-named appellant is  no  longer
        incapacitated.

     l. Children cannot stay merely for an education.


23. Having considered the FtTJ's determination and  having  regard  to  the
    earlier 2011 findings I am satisfied the FtTJ did have  regard  to  the
    approach set out in  Devaseelan.  The  FtTJ  was  fully  aware  of  the
    previous findings because firstly she set them out in her determination
    and secondly, she considered those findings and gave  reasons  why  she
    found there had been change. Paragraph [31] is evidence of this because
    the FtTJ noted why the husband/mother had been granted leave  but  then
    went onto to set out both in that paragraph and paragraph [32] why  she
    felt the position was different.


24.  Mr  Yousefian  has  submitted  the  starting   point   is   the   2011
    determination. Despite the fact the appellant  was  different  I  agree
    with him that the findings do have some significance in the appeal that
    came before the FtTJ. However, this is an article 8 claim  following  a
    failure to meet the Immigration Rules and the relevant date is  today's
    date and not 2011. This means that if facts, circumstances and the  law
    change then the respondent and ultimately the FtTJ must have regard  to
    those  changed  factors  and  decide  whether  they  materially  change
    anything.

25. The FtTJ had regard to the circumstances in which the children retained
    their British citizenship but also noted the children were entitled  to
    Algerian citizenship as were their sibling and their parents. The  FtTJ
    rejected the first-named appellant's claim she had no ties to  Algiers.
    She noted one of the reasons the first-named  appellant's  husband  was
    granted leave to remain was because of his wife's medical condition and
    her inability to look after the children if he were  forced  to  leave.
    She noted a material change in that situation. All these  factors  were
    matters the FtTJ was entitled to consider when assessing whether  there
    had been any material changes. This was not an appeal  where  the  FtTJ
    was required to make fresh findings on material issues  but  it  was  a
    case where the FtTJ had to consider the current situation and how  that
    affected the previous determination.  She  assessed  the  evidence  and
    concluded in paragraph [32] she could not follow the conclusion in  the
    husband's determination.

26. I am satisfied that the FtTJ did not err in her approach  as  submitted
    in grounds one and two of this appeal.

27. In ground three Mr Youseffian argued the FtTJ found at  paragraph  [27]
    of her determination that the first-named appellant planned to come  to
    the United Kingdom and marry but she failed to put this  issue  to  the
    witness at the hearing. I have considered this submission and whilst  I
    accept the question was not put to  the  witness  I  do  not  find  the
    finding material to why this appeal was rejected. The  FtTJ  considered
    her explanation of why she  came  here  and  made  a  finding  on  that
    explanation-something  she  is  entitled  to  do.  However,  when   she
    ultimately assessed the claim it is not  something  she  refers  to  in
    paragraphs [30] onwards when she considered the best interests  of  the
    children. I do not therefore find a material error on ground  three  of
    the appeal.

28. At ground four Mr Youseffian argued the FtTJ materially erred by saying
    the children had no right to an education.  The  finding  in  paragraph
    [32] cannot be said to apply to the two British  citizens  who  clearly
    have a right to be educated but the youngest  child  clearly  does  not
    have a right to remain for an education. The statement was open to  her
    and I am not persuaded she erred in paragraph [32].

29. The final ground of appeal related to the FtTJ's comment  in  paragraph
    [27] when she stated, "I find there  are  no  compelling  circumstances
    which require consideration outside of the  Rules."  If  the  FtTJ  had
    ended her determination on that statement then I would have found merit
    in Mr Youseffian's  submission  but  she  did  not.  She  proceeded  to
    consider the whole of the claim and at paragraph [33] she dismissed the
    claim under article 8 ECHR.

30. Although Mr Youssefian put before me the cases of R on the  application
    of Halimat SA Adiya Damiola Aliyu and Fatima Oluwakemi  Aliyu)  v  SSHD
    [2014]  EWHC  3919  (Admin)  and  The  Queen  on  the  application   of
    Ganesabalan v SSHD [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin) I  am  satisfied  that  the
    FtTJ did actually consider the article 8 claim. She considered  all  of
    the factors raised in the husband's appeal and ultimately in  paragraph
    [32] declined to follow the approach taken in the husband's appeal  and
    she dismissed it. I am satisfied the FtTJ considered the matter outside
    of the Rules and reached a finding, for the reasons set out above, open
    to her. She had regard to the best interests of the children and  found
    that despite the fact they were British citizens she found that as  her
    mother and sibling had no status and  their  father  had  been  granted
    limited leave for a combination of reasons it would be proportionate to
    require the family as a whole to leave.  A  different  judge  may  have
    found otherwise but that is not the test I have to apply.

    DECISION


31. There was no material error of law The original decisions  are  upheld.




32. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                           Dated:






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee award was made and I see no reason to alter that decision.

Signed:                           Dated:





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
