
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07853/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd June 2014                                |On 6th June 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                          MR MUHAMMAD SHAHZAD ASHIQ
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Khan
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 9th August 1976 is a citizen  of  Pakistan.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by Mr Khan.   The  Respondent
    was represented by Miss Johnstone, a Home Office Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system.  He made application on 29th June 2012.  That  application  was
    refused by  the  Respondent  on  27th  February  2013.   The  Appellant
    appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Colvin sitting at Taylor House on 30th January 2014.  The
    judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal under both the Immigration Rules
    and on human rights grounds.

 3. Application for permission  to  appeal  was  made  and  permission  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  on  21st  March
    2014.  The judge found an arguable error  of  law  in  respect  of  one
    matter namely that the judge made no findings that removal  by  way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006 was not in accordance with the law given that at the  date  of
    decision (27th February 2013) Section 51 of the Crime  and  Courts  Act
    2013 had not come into force.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 4. Miss Johnstone accepted that an error of law had been made in terms  of
    the matters raised in paragraph 2 of the permission  to  appeal  grant.
    There was nothing further added by Mr Khan.

 5. I provide my decision with reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 6. An error of law was made in this case and the manner identified in  the
    permission to appeal  being  granted  at  paragraph  2.   The  date  of
    decision in this case by the Respondent was 27th  February  2013.   The
    Respondent had made an error of law in not having previously  curtailed
    the Appellant's extant leave and the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had made an error of law in not finding that the decision made  by  the
    Respondent was unlawful in that the issuing of directions under Section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 at that time was
    not in accordance with the law.

 7. Whilst that situation has  now  been  rectified  by  the  insertion  of
    Section 51 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 from 8th May 2013 that  was
    not the position at the date of decision.

 8. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal should have  remitted  the  matter
    back to the Home Office to make a decision in accordance with  the  law
    in this case.  His failure to do so amounted to  a  material  error  of
    law.

Decision

 9. I find that the judge made a material error of law in this case and set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  in  substituting  a
    fresh decision direct that this matter be remitted  back  to  the  Home
    Office for them to make a decision in accordance with the law.






Signed                          Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
