
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07615/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15 November 2013                             |On 26 November 2013        |
|Prepared 18 November 2013                       |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                            Si mohammed ouassassi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Howorth, Irving & Co solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Jack, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Morocco born 28 August 1984.  He  entered
    the United Kingdom on 14 January 2012 as a visitor with leave conferred
    until 30 May 2012. It is said that after his arrival he met and  formed
    a relationship with Ms El-Khaldi, a Moroccan  national  with  leave  to
    remain as a refugee until 2 December 2015. He married Ms  El-Khaldi  on
    12 March 2012, less than two months after his arrival  United  Kingdom.
    On 16 May 2012 the appellant applied for  variation  of  his  leave  to
    enter in order that he may remain here with his wife.

 2. The Secretary of State refused this application in a decision dated the
    21 January 2013, and at the same time made a  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant from the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.  In  so  far  as  the
    Immigration Rules are concerned with the Secretary of State  considered
    the application under paragraph 284 of those Rules but  concluded  that
    the appellant could not meet a  number  of  the  requirements  set  out
    therein; i.e. (i) the appellant's wife was not present and  settled  in
    United Kingdom, (ii)  the  appellant  had  not  produced  the  required
    English language test certificate and (iii) the appellant  had  entered
    the United Kingdom in a category which did not allow him to switch into
    paragraph 284 leave [this being as a consequence of the length  of  the
    leave he had been granted]. The Secretary of  State  further  concluded
    that the appellant failed to meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE
    of the Rules.

 3. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  This  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Zahed on 2 July 2013  and  dismissed
    on all grounds in a determination promulgated on 8 August 2013.  It  is
    pertinent to observe at this stage that the appellant and his wife  had
    a child born of their relationship on 14 July 2013. Whilst  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge was aware, at the date of the hearing  before  him,
    that the birth of the  child  was  imminent  he  was  not  subsequently
    informed of the fact or date of the birth.

 4.  At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer quite properly withdrew the decision to  remove  the
    appellant, thus leaving  only  the  decision  to  refuse  to  vary  the
    appellant's leave as the decision under appeal.

 5. When coming to his conclusions the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  swiftly
    dealt with the Immigration Rules, providing ostensibly the same reasons
    for dismissing the appeal on this ground  as  had  been  given  by  the
    Secretary of State in the decision under appeal. Although  the  grounds
    of appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  take  issue  with  such  findings,
    permission to appeal was not granted to pursue these grounds and in any
    event Ms Howorth properly accepted before the Upper Tribunal  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 6. Turning to the First-tier Tribunal's consideration of  Article  8  ECHR
    outwith the Immigration Rules, having properly directing himself to the
    decision in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    concluded as follows:

        "11. The appellant is married to his wife who is expecting  a  baby
        in the first week of July this year. I find that there is a  family
        life. I find that article 8 is engaged in this case. I find that  I
        can answer questions 3 and 4 in the affirmative and go on to decide
        on proportionality.

        12. The higher courts have stated that in deciding  proportionality
        under article 8  I  am  to  take  account  of  the  importance  the
        respondent gives to factors under article 8 within the  Immigration
        Rules. The respondent has  stated,  within  the  immigration  rules
        themselves as well as Appendix FM EX1, that entering the  UK  as  a
        visitor and  being  granted  6  months  leave  makes  a  person  is
        illegible (sic) to seek to remain in the  UK  through  marriage.  I
        give substantial weight to this  criterion  that  a  person  should
        apply for leave to remain as a spouse if a person enters the UK  as
        a visitor and marries a person in the UK.

        13. The appellant has given evidence that he cannot leave his  wife
        and  unborn  child  whilst  he  makes  an  application  for   entry
        clearance. I note that his wife's sister and her family live in the
        UK. I find that there is no reason why the appellant cannot  return
        to Morocco to seek entry clearance to return as his wife's  spouse.
        I find that during that period the appellant's wife can rely on her
        sister and be in touch with the appellant through the telephone and
        Skype. I also take into account that the appellant has  not  passed
        the English language requirement. I find that the  interference  in
        their family  life  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
        effective immigration control.  I  dismiss  the  appellant's  human
        rights appeal."

 7. Upper Tribunal Judge  Chalkley  granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision on 11 September 2013:

        "I can see that it is properly arguable that  the  judge  may  have
        erred by failing to consider and apply Hyatt (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA
        Civ 1054. On this aspect only of the second ground  to  the  First-
        Tier Tribunal, I grant permission.  The  other  challenges  do  not
        identify any properly arguable material errors of law."

 8. Thus the matter came before us.

 9. At the hearing Ms Howorth did make  an  application  to  re-open  those
    grounds upon which permission had been refused, concentrating  for  the
    most part on the underlying ground that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in failing to properly apply the ratio of the Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment in Hyatt. To that end Ms Howorth carefully took us through the
    judgment of Lord Justice Elias, drawing  particular  attention  to  the
    summary given therein to the effect of relevant decisions in this area,
    starting with the opinion of their Lordships House in Chikwamba  [2008]
    UKHL 40.

10. Having done so Ms Howorth submitted that the case law demonstrated that
    it would only be in exceptional circumstances that an applicant  should
    be required to leave the United Kingdom simply  in  order  to  make  an
    entry clearance application. Consequently, she  submitted,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's failure to pay regard to this line of authority must be
    an  error  that  was  capable  of  affecting   the   outcome   of   the
    determination.

11. It was then submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred by failing
    to take into account matters material to its consideration, such as (i)
    the length of time the appellant is likely to be outside of the  United
    Kingdom pursuing his entry clearance application and (ii) the fact that
    the appellant does not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    and thus that there is a real possibility that he would not be  granted
    entry clearance. Ms Howorth further asserted that on the facts  of  the
    instant appeal, and particularly given that the appellant does not have
    a poor immigration history, no sensible reason had  been  advanced  for
    requiring the appellant to leave the United Kingdom to  make  an  entry
    clearance application.

12. Ms Howorth finally noted that a child of the relationship had been born
    after the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  prior  to  the
    promulgation of the determination. She consequently submitted that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in failing to have regard to the  child's
    best interests when coming to its conclusions.

13. In response Mr Jack drew our attention to paragraph  51  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in Hyatt, submitting  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge had been correct to treat the fact of the appellant's  precarious
    immigration status at the time of marrying his now wife and  conceiving
    a child, as a weighty matter.

14. As to the decision in Hyatt, Mr Jack submitted that (i) the  principles
    derived therefrom are not applicable to the instant  case  because  the
    decision to require the appellant to  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance was not based on policy but on the fact  that  the  appellant
    did not meet a number of the requirements laid down in the  Immigration
    Rules.

15. Mr Jack finally  submitted  that  the  conclusions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were open to it for the reasons it gives.

16. We gave our decision at the end of the hearing, concluding that  First-
    tier  Tribunal's  determination  does  not  contain  an  error  of  law
    requiring it to be set aside. We now give our  reasons  for  coming  to
    this conclusion.

17. We turn first to the ground which formed the substance of the grant  of
    permission; the claimed failure of the First-tier Tribunal to  properly
    apply the ratio of the opinions of their Lordships House  in  Chikwamba
    and Court of Appeal's decision in Hyatt.

18. In Chikwamba their Lordships House  considered  the  interplay  between
    Article 8 and  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy,  expressed  through
    Immigration Rules, that those seeking leave to enter or remain  on  the
    basis of marriage or other relationships should obtain entry clearance,
    by applying for it whilst they are outside  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    uncertainty as to the extent of the decision in Chikwamba was addressed
    by the Court of Appeal in Hyatt.

19. The following passages are taken from  the  judgment  of  Elias  LJ  in
    Hyatt:-

         "11.     Lord Brown accepted that the maintenance  and  enforcement
             of immigration control was a legitimate aim. However,  he  was
             unpersuaded by the argument, accepted by Laws LJ  in  Mahmood,
             that others required to apply from abroad would feel it unfair
             if persons like the appellant who also fell within the  policy
             were permitted to have their cases  determined  without  first
             returning home. Consistency of treatment was not such a virtue
             that it dictated an unthinking enforcement of the policy. Lord
             Brown identified a  different  justification  for  the  policy
             (paras 41-42):


                  "Is not the real rationale  for  the  policy  perhaps  the
                  rather different one of deterring people  from  coming  to
                  this country in the first place  without  having  obtained
                  entry clearance and to do so by subjecting  those  who  do
                  come to the very substantial  disruption  of  their  lives
                  involved in returning them abroad?


                  Now I would certainly not say that such an objective is in
                  itself necessarily objectionable. Sometimes, I accept,  it
                  will  be  reasonable  and  proportionate  to   take   that
                  course....."


         12.  He then identified situations where  the  enforcement  of  the
             policy would  be  appropriate,  such  as  where  a  claimant's
             immigration history was poor, as in Ekinci. He also identified
             factors which might have  a  bearing  on  whether  the  policy
             should be implemented. For example, it would be relevant  that
             an applicant who had arrived illegally had good reason  to  do
             so, such as where he has a genuine asylum claim; in an Article
             8 family claim the prospective length and degree of disruption
             involved  in  requiring  the  applicant  to  return  would  be
             material; and it would be legitimate  to  enforce  the  policy
             where the entry clearance officer abroad was better placed  to
             investigate the claim.


         13.  Moreover, Lord Brown emphasised that the routine dismissal  of
             Article 8 cases on this basis was not consistent with a proper
             respect for Article 8 rights, and nor did  it  make  sense  in
             administrative terms (para 44):


                  "I am far from suggesting  that  the  Secretary  of  State
                  should routinely apply this policy in all but  exceptional
                  cases. Rather it  seems  to  me  that  only  comparatively
                  rarely, certainly  in  family  cases  involving  children,
                  should an article 8 appeal be dismissed on the basis  that
                  it would be proportionate and  more  appropriate  for  the
                  appellant to apply for  leave  from  abroad.  Besides  the
                  considerations already mentioned, it should  be  borne  in
                  mind that the 1999 Act introduced  one-stop  appeals.  The
                  article 8 policy instruction is  not  easily  reconcilable
                  with the new streamlined approach. Where a  single  appeal
                  combines (as often it does) claims both for asylum and for
                  leave  to  remain  under  article  3  or  article  8,  the
                  appellate authorities would necessarily  have  to  dispose
                  substantively of the asylum and article 3 claims.  Suppose
                  that these fail.  Should  the  article  8  claim  then  be
                  dismissed so that it can  be  advanced  abroad,  with  the
                  prospect of a later, second section 65 appeal if the claim
                  fails  before  the  ECO  (with  the  disadvantage  of  the
                  appellant then being out of the  country)?  Better  surely
                  that in most cases the article 8 claim be decided once and
                  for all at the initial stage. If it is well-founded, leave
                  should be granted. If not, it should be refused."


              ...

         18.  It may at first blush seem odd that Article 8  rights  may  be
             infringed by an  unjustified  insistence  that  the  applicant
             should return home to make  the  application,  even  though  a
             subsequent decision to refuse the application  on  the  merits
             will not. The reason is that once  there  is  an  interference
             with family or private life, the decision maker  must  justify
             that interference. Where what is relied upon is an  insistence
             on complying with formal procedures that may  be  insufficient
             to justify even a temporary  disruption  to  family  life.  By
             contrast, a full  consideration  of  the  merits  may  readily
             identify features which justify a refusal to  grant  leave  to
             remain.


         ...


         26.  ... Chikwamba provides  that  at  least  where  Article  8  is
             engaged, the decision  maker  should  not,  absent  some  good
             reason, fail to engage with the merits and dismiss  the  claim
             on the  ground  that  the  application  should  be  made  from
             abroad."

20.  Having considered a number of Court  of  Appeal  authorities  concerned
    with the application of Chikwamba, Elias LJ summarised  the  principles
    to be derived from them as follows:-
        "a) Where an applicant who does not have lawful entry clearance
        pursues an Article 8 claim, a dismissal of the claim on the
        procedural ground that the policy requires that the applicant
        should have made the application from his home state may (but not
        necessarily will) constitute a disruption of family or private life
        sufficient to engage Article 8, particularly where children are
        adversely affected.
        b) Where Article 8 is engaged, it will be a disproportionate
        interference with family or private life to enforce such a policy
        unless, to use the language of Sullivan LJ, there is a sensible
        reason for doing so.
        c) Whether it is sensible to enforce that policy will necessarily
        be fact sensitive; Lord Brown identified certain potentially
        relevant factors in Chikwamba. They will include the prospective
        length and degree of disruption of family life and whether other
        members of the family are settled in the UK.
        d) Where Article 8 is engaged and there is no sensible reason for
        enforcing the policy, the decision maker should determine the
        Article 8 claim on its substantive merits, having regard to all
        material factors, notwithstanding that the applicant has no lawful
        entry clearance.
        e) It will be a very rare case where it is appropriate for the
        Court of Appeal, having concluded that a lower tribunal has
        disproportionately interfered with Article 8 rights in enforcing
        the policy, to make the substantive Article 8 decision for itself.
        Chikwamba was such an exceptional case. Logically the court would
        have to be satisfied that there is only one proper answer to the
        Article 8 question before substituting its own finding on this
        factual question.
        f) Nothing in Chikwamba was intended to alter the way the courts
        should approach substantive Article 8 issues as laid down in such
        well known cases as Razgar and Huang.
        g) Although the cases do not say this in terms, in my judgment if
        the Secretary of State has no sensible reason for requiring the
        application to be made from the home state, the fact that he has
        failed to do so should not thereafter carry any weight in the
        substantive Article 8 balancing exercise."

21. The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  direct  itself  the  decisions  in
    Chikwamba and Hyatt; nevertheless we do not accept  that  its  decision
    offends the ratio of either  and  consequently  we  do  not  accept  Ms
    Howorth's  submission  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    contains an error of law in this respect which ought to lead us to  set
    such determination aside.

22. It is clear from paragraphs 12 and 13 of  Judge  Zahed's  determination
    that he did not form a concluded view on the substantive merits of  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim but instead found that this was a  case  in
    which there was justification for requiring the appellant to  make  his
    application from Morocco. It is for this reason that a  number  of  the
    claimed errors identified in the appellant's application for permission
    to appeal, but upon which permission was refused, do not bite.

23. Neither the opinions of the House in Chikwamba, nor the decision of the
    Court of Appeal in Hyatt, seek to set out a legal threshold as to  when
    it would be appropriate, in any given case, to require an applicant  to
    make an application  from  outside  the  United  Kingdom;  rather  each
    alludes to an  expectation  that  in  cases  whether  the  only  matter
    weighing in the respondent's side of the balance is the  public  policy
    of requiring a person to  apply  under  the  Rules  from  abroad,  that
    legitimate objective will usually be outweighed by factor's resting  on
    the appellant's side of the balance.

24. In the instant appeal Judge Zahed identified a number  of  features  of
    the appellant's circumstances relevant  to  the  consideration  of  the
    substantive  merits  and  also  to  the  question  of  whether  it  was
    legitimate to require  the  appellant  to  make  his  application  from
    Morocco. First, that as a person who was last admitted with a grant  of
    six months leave to enter as a visitor has no expectation that he would
    be eligible to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  relating
    to marriage; second, the appellant has  not  demonstrated  he  has  the
    required English language skills; third,  that  during  the  period  of
    separation, whilst the appellant is out  of  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    appellant's wife can rely on her sister for support and fourth,  during
    the period of physical separation contact  can  be  maintained  by  the
    appellant via Skype and telephone.

25. In our conclusion these were all relevant and cogent matters justifying
    the conclusion that Article 8 would not be infringed by  requiring  the
    appellant to return to Morocco and make an entry clearance application.
    To that list could also be added, although this was not a  point  taken
    by Judge Zahed, the fact that at the time the relationship started,  of
    the subsequent marriage and of the birth of the  child,  the  appellant
    had a precarious immigration status, it being within his knowledge that
    leave was conferred on him only until 30 May 2012.

26. In summary we do not accept that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    offends the ratio of the decisions in Chikwamba and Hyatt  and  neither
    do we accept that the conclusion reached by the tribunal was perverse.

27. We next deal with the submission that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    failing  to  consider  the  prospects  of  any  application  for  entry
    clearance made by the appellant; it being said that such prospects were
    poor and thus the consequences of requiring the appellant to leave  the
    country are very much more severe than those taken into account by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

28. We reject this submission. First, this  was  not  amongst  the  pleaded
    grounds, even those upon which permission was refused, and neither  was
    a formal, or indeed an informal, application made to amend the  grounds
    to include within them this point. It cannot be right  that  by  simply
    making a submission at a hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  a  legally
    represented  applicant  can  be  taken  to  have  impliedly   made   an
    application to amend her grounds.  Further,  no  explanation  has  been
    brought forward as to why this ground was only  raised  for  the  first
    time at such a late stage of the proceedings; indeed it  did  not  even
    feature in the skeleton argument produced by Ms Howorth on the  morning
    of  the  hearing.   We  therefore  do  not  admit   this   ground   for
    consideration. We come to  the  same  conclusion  in  relation  to  the
    assertion that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to identify the
    length of time the appellant would be out of the country whilst  making
    his entry clearance application.

29. In any event both grounds are entirely misplaced. As to the former, the
    Court of Appeal conclude in SB (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2007] EWCA  Civ  28
    that an Article 8 claim of a  person  resisting  removal  is  not  made
    weaker by strong prospects of success in a subsequent  application  for
    entry clearance; nor is it made stronger by weak prospects in  such  an
    application.  It found that it would be  proper  for  the  Tribunal  to
    exclude  the  prospects  of  success  altogether  when  assessing   the
    proportionality of removal. Such rationale was confirmed by  the  Court
    of Appeal shortly thereafter in HC (Jamaica) v  SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ
    371, and once again in SZ (Zimbabwe) [2009] EWCA 590. As to the  latter
    ground, there was not one iota  of  evidence  brought  forward  by  the
    appellant as to the length of time he  might  be  out  of  the  country
    whilst making his entry clearance application.

30. Turning to the final point, upon which permission was  refused  but  on
    which, without making any further application, Mr Howorth, nevertheless
    chose to make submissions i.e. that the Judge  would  have  been  aware
    that the birth of the appellant's child was imminent  and  consequently
    he erred in not specifically considering  the  best  interests  of  the
    child within his determination; we find that the judge's failure to  do
    consider the best interests of the child is not  an  error  capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the appeal.

31. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was sparse on  all  issues,
    but particularly so on the impact  that  requiring  the  appellant  the
    United Kingdom and make an entry clearance application  would  have  on
    his wife and child. It is to be recalled that the appellant's child was
    born after the date of hearing but prior to  the  date  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated its determination. There was  no  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal as to any adverse consequences the  appellant's
    wife and/or child may suffer,  whether  physical  or  emotional,  as  a
    consequence of the appellant being required to leave the UK and make an
    application for entry clearance.  It is plain the appellant's child, at
    only a few weeks old, would have no outlook on  life  himself.  In  our
    conclusion given the paucity of evidence before him,  the  judge  dealt
    with this issue adequately by concluding that  the  appellant's  wife's
    sister could provide  support  for  the  appellant's  wife  whilst  the
    appellant is making his entry clearance application  and  that  contact
    can be maintained during such period by way of Skype and telephone.

32. In our  judgment  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  does  not
    contain an error of law requiring it to be set aside, and  consequently
    the determination remains standing.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor                         Dated: 18 November
2013


































