
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA074152015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th May 2016                              |On 16th June 2016             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             ROGER ANTHONY HINDS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr L Rahman, Counsel, instructed by Immigration Law
Practice


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a  citizen  of  Barbados,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State to  remove  him
    from the UK under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge C A Parker allowed the Appellant's appeal and
    the Secretary of State now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The background to this appeal is that  the  Appellant  qualified  as  a
    nurse in Barbados and entered the UK on 30th July 2003 and was  granted
    leave to enter for six months as a visitor.  Before his  leave  expired
    he applied for leave to remain in the UK as a work  permit  holder  and
    his application was approved and he was granted leave to  remain  until
    13 August 2007.  Prior to the  expiry  of  his  leave  he  applied  for
    further leave to remain in the  same  capacity.  That  application  was
    granted and he was granted further leave to remain in the UK as a  work
    permit holder until 10th December  2012.   However  he  overstayed  his
    leave to remain and did not apply for further leave until 27th November
    2014.  The Respondent refused that application on 6  February  2015  on
    the basis that the Appellant did not qualify for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 134 of  the  Immigration  Rules  because  he  no
    longer held a work permit at the time of application.  The reasons  for
    refusal letter noted that on 9 July 2012  the  Immigration  Rules  were
    amended to unify consideration under the Rules  of  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  The reasons for refusal letter went on to say (at page 2 of 3):

         "Notwithstanding the above, we have given  careful consideration to
         all the circumstances of your situation  including  the  length  of
         your residence in the UK and the nature of your employment.  We  do
         not consider however that there  is  evidence  of  any  exceptional
         circumstances in your case warranting a grant of leave outside  the
         Immigration Rules."

 4. The notice of decision to remove the Appellant dated 11th February 2015
    advised him that he was entitled to appeal against this decision  after
    he left the UK.

 5. However the Appellant lodged a notice of appeal from within the UK  and
    his appeal progressed to the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge C
    A Parker.  The Secretary of State was not represented in the First-tier
    Tribunal. At paragraph 15 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    noted that the Grounds of Appeal submitted that  the  Appellant's  case
    established strong private life ties to the UK such as to make a  human
    rights claim implicit in his application of November 2014.  Accordingly
    it was submitted that the Appellant has an in-country right  of  appeal
    on the ground that the decision was unlawful  as  it  was  incompatible
    with his rights under the ECHR. The  judge  went  on  to  consider  the
    appeal on human rights grounds and he allowed the appeal on  the  basis
    that the Appellant's removal would be a  disproportionate  interference
    with his private life under Article 8.

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Rahman accepted that there was no reference
    in the application form submitted to the Home Office to human rights or
    private life but  he  submitted  that  the  covering  letter  dated  26
    November 2014 amounted to an implied application for leave to remain on
    the basis of the Appellant's right to private life.

 7. The Secretary of State relies  on  three  grounds  in  her  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  The first ground contends that there was no  jurisdiction  for
    the First-tier Tribunal to hear the appeal  because,  at  the  time  of
    application for leave to remain, the Appellant did not have  leave  and
    that the notice of decision informed the Appellant that he had  an  out
    of country right  of  appeal  only.   It  is  submitted  that,  as  the
    Appellant has not made a human rights claim while still in  the  United
    Kingdom, he cannot appeal from within the United Kingdom under  Section
    92(4) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   It  is
    submitted that the judge has not engaged with the jurisdictional issue.
    Whilst it is noted that the Appellant's representative  submitted  that
    there was  an  in-country  appeal,  it  is  submitted  that  the  judge
    continued to determine the appeal without any further analysis.

 8. The second ground contends that, even if the judge were correct to hear
    the case whilst the Appellant was  in  the  UK,  he  did  not  identify
    compelling circumstances for entering into  a  freestanding  Article  8
    assessment.  It is submitted that the judge did  not  engage  with  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  does  not  state  what  the
    compelling circumstances are in this case to venture into an Article  8
    proportionality assessment.

 9. The third ground contends that the judge gave insufficient reasons  for
    concluding at paragraph  49  that  discretion  under  paragraph  322(3)
    should have been exercised differently by the Secretary of State  given
    that the Appellant was clearly working in breach of his condition.

10. At  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  this  was  an
    application under the Rules for settlement under the work permit  route
    and that no human rights claim had been submitted.  Mr Rahman submitted
    that the covering letter of 26th  November  2014  raises  human  rights
    issues by implication.  He accepted that the letter  does  not  mention
    human rights but submitted that it is clear on the face of this  letter
    that reliance is placed on the Appellant's private  life.   The  letter
    concedes that the Appellant does not establish a case under  the  Rules
    but suggests that he comes under policy and he submitted that there  is
    enough private life outlined there for someone  who  is  familiar  with
    private life and Article 8 to realise that the Appellant had dealt with
    private life elements. He also submitted that the Reasons  for  Refusal
    letter acknowledges this where it states that the Respondent had  given
    careful consideration to the circumstances of the Appellant's case.  Mr
    Rahman further submitted that the judge was  alive  to  this  issue  as
    indicated at paragraph 15  of  the  determination  and  that  this  was
    sufficient to indicate that the judge had engaged with this issue.

11. I have considered the letter of 26 November 2014.   It  is  clear  from
    that letter  that  the  Appellant  was  not  relying  on  compassionate
    circumstances where it states "However the application that is now made
    does not have to rely on compassionate circumstances; it relies more on
    the policy and purpose of the Rules". The last paragraph states;

         "We submit that no particular purpose would be served by the  grant
         of just discretionary leave. Mr Hinds has already proved himself to
         this country through eleven and a half years of  loyal  service  to
         the NHS.  His immigration  record, although mishandled, contains no
         element of evasive conduct.   The  case  of  settlement  is  surely
         overwhelming."

12. In my view this letter is clearly an application for consideration  for
    settlement  within  the  Rules  making  no  reliance  on  compassionate
    circumstances.  As conceded by Mr Rahman the  application  form  itself
    makes no reference to other circumstances.

13. At paragraph 15 of the decision the judge refers to the submission that
    there was an implicit human rights claim in the letter of November 2014
    and refers to the submission that the Appellant had in-country right of
    appeal. However the judge made absolutely no  finding  in  relation  to
    this issue. The judge completely failed to address  the  jurisdictional
    point.

14. I have considered whether this was a  material  error  on  the  judge's
    part. It would not be material if there was a clear or clearly  implied
    application for leave to remain on human rights grounds  of  appeal  in
    the letter of 26 November 2014. However in my view  the  letter  of  26
    November was expressly not one relying on the Appellant's human  rights
    in  that  it  indicated  that  he  was  not  relying  on  compassionate
    circumstances and did not seek Discretionary Leave.  Accordingly  I  do
    not accept that the letter of 26 November 2014 amounts  to  an  implied
    application for leave to remain on the basis of human rights.

15. If jurisdiction does not exist in law  it  cannot  be  'conferred'  or
    'accepted'. In Virk &  Others  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  652  it  was  held  that,  although  the
    Secretary of State had failed to raise before the First-tier  Tribunal
    the issue of that Tribunal's jurisdiction to entertain an appeal,  the
    Upper Tribunal was entitled to dismiss the subsequent  appeal  against
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision on the basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had not had jurisdiction, notwithstanding that the point  had
    not been raised below.  The Court of Appeal said at paragraph 23;

         "Statutory  jurisdiction  cannot  be  conferred   by   waiver   or
         agreement; or by the failure of the parties or the tribunal to  be
         alive  to  the  point.  Although,  as  Longmore  LJ  pointed  out,
         decisions taken without jurisdiction  may  in  due  course  become
         irreversible, that point has not been reached  in  this  case.  It
         was, in my judgment, open to either the FTT or the UT to take  the
         point  about  jurisdiction  notwithstanding  the  failure  of  the
         Secretary of State to raise it herself."

16. In these circumstances I find that the Judge made a material  error  of
    law by failing to consider whether he had any jurisdiction to hear  the
    appeal before purporting  to  allow  it.  I  find  that  there  was  no
    jurisdiction for all of the reasons set out above and the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal is accordingly  set  aside  and  is  remade  by
    dismissing the appeal.




Conclusion:


The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.


There was no jurisdiction to hear the appeal and the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal is set aside and remade by dismissing the appeal for want of
jurisdiction.


No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date: 15 June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date: 15 June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

