








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07042/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 13 October 2014                           |On 7 November 2014           |
|Prepared: 6 November 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                              Ms Sylvia Ogbonna
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr R Layne, counsel (instructed by Greenland Lawyers
LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 7th January 1969.  She
      appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent   refusing   her
      application made on 14th July 2011 for leave to remain under Article 8
      ECHR. It was initially refused on the 25th August  2011.  Following  a
      reconsideration request it was finally refused  on  the  16th  January
      2014.


   2. The appeal against that refusal was dismissed by First  tier  Tribunal
      Judge Wiseman in a determination promulgated on 7th August 2014.


   3. He noted that the application was considered under Article  8  against
      the requirements to be met under Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE  of
      the Immigration Rules [9].


   4. He referred to the respondent's reasons for refusal. The appellant did
      not satisfy the eligibility requirements from  her  relationship  with
      her children. However for the sake of  completeness,  this  issue  had
      been looked at with regard to paragraph EX.1. It was  considered  that
      the children were at an age where they could adapt to life in  Nigeria
      and it was not unreasonable for them to have to return there with  the
      appellant and her partner [11].


   5. With regard to her private life claim, the appellant had been resident
      here for some nine years, more than eight of  which  had  been  as  an
      overstayer. She was 36 years old when she entered and thus  failed  to
      meet the requirements under paragraph 276ADE. In addition, she  failed
      to establish that she had  no  social,  cultural  or  family  ties  to
      Nigeria remaining. That was the country of her  formative  years.   It
      was  reasonable  to  expect  her  to  return  there.   There  were  no
      exceptional circumstances [12].


   6. The grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal asserted that  it
      was of fundamental importance for the Article 8 claim to be considered
      outside  the  immigration  rules  as  well:  there  were   exceptional
      circumstances applicable and it would be harsh to expect the  children
      to adapt to Nigeria where they had never lived and to which they  were
      not accustomed. The elder child was progressing well at school and was
      settled. The younger child suffered from a speech disorder  for  which
      he receives treatment and  his  removal  "may  cause  him  irreparable
      damage" [14].


   7. The Judge considered the appellant's witness  statement  presented  at
      the hearing. She gave evidence and was cross examined.


   8. When asked about the prospect of returning to Nigeria, she stated that
      the younger child needed treatment  here  otherwise  he  might  become
      unable to speak [25]. She wanted a better life for  her  children  and
      could not see how she could ever earn a living in Nigeria. She claimed
      not to have had any discussion with her partner about the  possibility
      of going back. They were just "hoping for the best." Her  partner  had
      never worked in the UK or indeed  Italy,  from  where  he  last  came.
      Nobody would be able to help her in Nigeria. She would be cut off.


   9. She said in answer to a question from the judge that although she came
      to the UK on a visit visa, it had  been  obtained  on  a  false  basis
      because she was always "happy to come to a better  country."  She  had
      never had any intention of returning and had just  settled  down  with
      her partner and in due course they had  the  children.  She  felt  she
      should apply for leave to remain for their sakes [26].


  10. Mr Layne who also appeared for the appellant  before  the   First-tier
      Tribunal accepted that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements
      of the rules in relation to family life, but "suggested" that she  did
      not really have any continuing  ties  with  Nigeria.  There  were,  he
      claimed, exceptional circumstances requiring consideration "even after
      Gulshan".  The  children  were  "innocent  victims."   It   would   be
      disproportionate to remove them. The whole family should be allowed to
      remain [31].


  11. In his reasons and findings, the Judge noted that she arrived here  on
      19th February 2005 on a visit visa, but had never had any intention of
      returning. She had now been here for some nine years without any right
      to be here for the vast proportion of that time.


  12. He found that the history of her partner was  even  more  obscure.  He
      chose not to attend the appeal hearing. There was no  contention  that
      he ever had the right to remain here. He too  is  a  Nigerian  citizen
      "and that is no doubt where the respondent would say he should  return
      to." There was no evidence as to whether any application had been made
      by him [33].


  13. From paragraphs 34 onwards,  the  Judge  noted  the  poor  immigration
      record of the appellant. He had regard to the fact that  the  children
      had been drawn into all these problems by the adults caring for  them.
      He noted that the younger child had received significant  professional
      help in relation to his  slow  development  thought  to  be  "possible
      social communication disorder... severe language  delay  and  moderate
      general (non verbal delay)... overweight." [35] The Judge stated  that
      he had read the reports in the bundle  including  the  report  of  the
      consultant paediatrician that  the  child  has  an  autistic  spectrum
      disorder. Much of the information that relates to classic autism  does
      not really apply to him [35].


  14. The Judge took into account and noted that the older  child  had  been
      living here for just  over  seven  years.  That  did  not  provide  an
      entitlement  for  him  to  continue   to   live   here   indefinitely,
      particularly as neither adult in his life had any  right  to  be  here
      either. The important thing for these children  is  that  they  remain
      "with hopefully both their parents" but certainly with  the  appellant
      as the main caring parent. [36]


  15. He stated on following Gulshan, that it was very doubtful whether  the
      circumstances in this case were  exceptional.  However,  he  found  it
      easier to treat this as "an uncertain point"  mainly  because  of  the
      length of time the children have been here and  the  problems  of  the
      younger child. Accordingly, the proportionality  decision  had  to  be
      made in any event [37].


  16. Judge Wiseman referred to the matters which he described as favourable
      to the appellant. However, the positive points that can be made  "pale
      into significance" (sic) against the overall interests of  immigration
      control in a case of this kind. He made comments as to how a  decision
      favourable to the appellant would simply be  inviting  individuals  to
      "wander into this country," stay for years and somehow expect  that  a
      miracle would happen and that they would be allowed to stay at a later
      stage, perhaps because they are  then  able  to  put  forward  a  case
      involving their children [38].


  17. He found that the children would settle back in Nigeria,  particularly
      with both their Nigerian parents who were familiar with  the  country,
      who would be able to help them. Although there may or may not  be  the
      level of professional help to assist the younger child there, this  is
      something he would have to cope with as best  as  he  could.  However,
      although they have been helped here, this is not  the  same  thing  as
      saying they should be allowed to stay here simply to access such  help
      [39].


  18. Even though it is prudent to sometimes look at  these  kind  of  cases
      outside the rules,  "for  completeness,  the  decision  was  not  even
      finally (sic) balanced" [40]. Having looked at the matters outside the
      rules, he found that the removal of the appellant and  inevitably  the
      children from the UK was proportionate in  the  overall  interests  of
      immigration control [40].


  19. He found that it is quite clear that the appellant brought  these  two
      children into the world in the UK in the full knowledge that  she  had
      no right to be here and  that  one  day  the  problems  that  she  was
      creating "would come home to roost." [41].


  20. He referred to the fact that she admitted at the hearing that she  had
      simply hoped that if  she  did  not  come  to  the  attention  of  the
      authorities for long enough she would find that the  respondent  would
      be prepared to allow her to stay [42].


  21. The Judge had regard to the letter to the appellant dated 25th  August
      2011 where the respondent stated that although it is accepted that the
      appellant has a family life  in  the  UK  with  her  partner  and  two
      children, she is satisfied that it is reasonable for the  family  unit
      to relocate together to Nigeria. She and her partner  have  spent  the
      vast majority of their lives in Nigeria; the children (at that  stage)
      were aged just four and one, and would  be  able  to  adapt  and  that
      '....the disruption for the lives of [the appellant] and  her  partner
      and two children would not go  beyond  mere  hardship,  difficulty  or
      obstacle,  nor  be  on  matters  of  choice  or  inconvenience.....any
      interference  with  their  private  lives  is  proportionate  to   the
      legitimate  aim  of  effective  immigration  control  and  there  will
      therefore no breach of their Article 8 rights....' [42].


  22. The Judge stated that he had reviewed the  situation  three  years  on
      from there and taken into account a number of other matters dealt with
      in the preceding paragraphs of  his  determination.  However,  he  has
      'independently' reached the same conclusion [43].


  23. On 21st August 2014, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Brennan  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal. The grounds in support submitted  that
      the Judge erred at paragraph 36 in that, having noted that  the  older
      child had been living here  for  more  than  seven  years,  failed  to
      appreciate the relevance of paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv). It was  arguable
      that in the light of this provision,  it  was  necessary  for  him  to
      consider whether it was reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
      UK. He failed  to  do  so.  Had  he  found  that  this  would  not  be
      reasonable, it might have led to a  different  outcome.  Further,  the
      ground asserting that the Judge failed to consider the best  interests
      of the two children and to treat them as a primary  consideration  was
      also arguable.


  24. Mr Layne relied on the grounds seeking permission. He  contended  that
      the elder child fell within the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(iv)  as
      he had lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  at  least  seven  years.
      Accordingly, he  became  eligible  for  leave  to  remain  under  that
      paragraph and the decision was unlawful as  he  failed  to  take  into
      account that the child had developed ties  and  relationships  outside
      his immediate family unit and is an individual in his own right.


  25. Mr Layne further contended that the Judge had during the course of the
      determination  "got  carried  away,  perhaps  irritated  by  the  main
      appellant's immigration history, and with respect  these  are  not  of
      laws"(sic). These issues allowed his judgment to become clouded and  a
      proper assessment was not undertaken, and made  his  finding  in  this
      case  "....discriminatory  and  bias"  (sic)  (paragraph  9a  of   the
      grounds). The specific paragraphs in this regard were 33, 35  and  28,
      which have been referred to above.


  26. Nor did the Judge  go  into  any  detail  when  considering  the  best
      interests of the appellant's children in accordance with s.55  of  the
      2009 Act. They would not have any concept of life outside the  UK.  He
      failed to have regard to their "fundamental rights"  as  children,  as
      emphasised by UNCRC, and as held in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD  [2011]  UKSC
      4.


  27. It was also wrong for the Judge to  devalue  what  is  in  their  best
      interests by something for which they should not be  held  responsible
      (paragraph 10(d) of the grounds).


  28. Nor could they be held responsible for the  moral  failures  of  their
      parents and "....their welfare as a minor  children  (sic)  should  be
      paramount" as held in EM and Others  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]
      UKUT 98 - para 10(e) of the grounds.   (However,  in  that  case,  the
      Tribunal held that when neither the children nor the parents have  the
      status of British citizens, the welfare of the children is  a  primary
      consideration in administrative  action  affecting  their  future  and
      accordingly the balance of competing interests under  Article  8  must
      reflect this factor as a consideration of the first order, albeit  not
      the only one).


  29. Finally, Mr Layne contended that the finding at paragraph 40 that  the
      removal of the appellant  and  the  children  from  the  UK  would  be
      proportionate in the overall interests of immigration control and  the
      best interests of others who are entitled to be here and  need  to  be
      able to access professional help,  is  fundamentally  flawed  and  the
      finding is perverse - para 11(a) of the grounds.


  30. In that respect he referred to the evidence relating  to  the  younger
      child at pages 84-85 of the appellant's bundle. The report  relied  on
      is dated 4th June 2013, and was thus prepared when the child was three
      years and three months old.  The  conclusion  was  that  he  had  some
      difficulties with social communication and interaction,  demonstrating
      some repetitive behaviour. He also has quite a severe  language  delay
      and his general (non  verbal)  development  currently  appears  to  be
      moderately delayed.


  31. With sufficient educational support, there is reason to hope  that  he
      will make good  progress.  The  plan  is  that  he  may  benefit  from
      additional  support  in  nursery,  and  in  particular  regarding  the
      implementation of advice from his speech and language therapist.


  32. In a later report, dated 6th February 2014, his  speech  and  language
      therapist noted that the child's understanding and use of language  is
      significantly below what would normally be expected for a child of his
      age. He has made  some  progress  in  communication  skills,  both  in
      therapy sessions and his educational environment (pages 94-95).


  33. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Duffy contended that the appellant had
      not in fact met the requirements under  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  of  the
      rules. The date of the application was 14th  July  2011.  Accordingly,
      the elder child had not been here for seven years.


  34. With regard to the "second limb" of  paragraph  276ADE(iv),  that  had
      been dealt with adequately.


  35. Further, the best interests of the children  had  been  considered  in
      some  detail  at  paragraphs  35,  36  and  39.  The  younger  child's
      developmental problems including the social communication disorder and
      language delay were considered. The Judge had regard  to  the  various
      reports and has summarised the key findings.


  36. He also had regard to the position of the elder child, who had been in
      the country for over seven years.


  37. Mr Duffy submitted that the Judge has considered the right factors. He
      goes on to state that their removal is "entirely proportionate" [40].


  38. The Judge has properly taken into account the  three  years  that  had
      passed since the respondent  concluded  in  August  2011  that  it  is
      reasonable for the family unit to relocate  together  to  Nigeria.  He
      took into account a number of other matters that he had dealt with  in
      the earlier paragraphs, and independently reached the same  conclusion
      [43].


  39. Mr Duffy also referred to the authority of EV (Philippines) and Others
      v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 (Court of Appeal),  and  in  particular  to
      paragraph 35, 37 as well as the comments of Lord  Justice  Lewison  at
      paragraph 49, where he stated that in the real world, the appellant is
      almost always the parent who has no right to remain  in  the  UK.  The
      parent thus relies on the best interests of his  or  her  children  in
      order to "piggyback" on their rights. Lord Justice Lewison  noted that
      in the case before the court of appeal, as no doubt  in  many  others,
      the Judge made two findings about their best interests:


     a) The best interests of the children are  obviously  to  remain  with
        their parents; and


     b) It is in their best interests that education in the UK is not to be
        disrupted.


  40. At paragraph 58, Lord Justice Lewison stated that  the  assessment  of
      the best interests of the children must be made on the basis that  the
      facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has no right to
      remain, but the other parent does,  that  is  the  background  against
      which the assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right  to
      remain,  it  is  the  background  against  which  the  assessment   is
      conducted.


  41. Thus the ultimate question will be, is it  reasonable  to  expect  the
      child to follow the parents with no right to remain in the country  of
      origin?


  42. Mr Duffy fairly noted that the facts in EV were not as advantageous in
      terms of the length of residence of the children in the UK as  in  the
      appellant's (Ms Ogbonna's) case.


  43. With regard to the contention that the older child had at the date  of
      decision been in the UK for seven years, he relied on the decision  in
      Azimi-Moayed and Others (Decisions affecting children; onward appeals)
      [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC).


  44. There the Tribunal stated that as a starting point, it is in the  best
      interests of the children to be with both their parents  and  if  both
      are being removed from the UK, then the starting point  suggests  that
      so should dependent children who form part of their  household  unless
      there are reasons to the contrary.   Further, it is generally  in  the
      interests of children to have both stability and continuity of  social
      and educational provision  and  the  benefit  of  growing  up  in  the
      cultural norms of the society to which they belong.


  45. The Tribunal further noted that lengthy residence in the country other
      than the state of origin  can  lead  to  the  development  of  social,
      cultural and educational  ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate  to
      disrupt, in the absence of compelling reasons to  the  contrary.  What
      amounts to lengthy  residence  is  not  clear  but  past  and  present
      policies have identified seven years as a relevant period.


  46. Mr Duffy specifically relied on paragraph 1(iv) of the headnote. Apart
      from the terms of published policies and  rules,  the  Tribunal  notes
      that seven years from age 4 is likely to  be  more  significant  to  a
      child than the first seven years of  life.  Very  young  children  are
      focussed on their parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.


  47.  In  reply,  Mr  Layne  submitted  that  there  has  been  no   proper
      consideration  to  the  s.55  best  interests  of  the  children.  The
      decision, he stated, was "finely balanced". However, the language used
      by the Judge "does not help."


     Assessment


  48. The assertions are that the Judge erred in not having proper regard to
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the rules in that the older child had  been
      living here for more than seven years, and failed to consider  whether
      it was reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK.


  49. However, it  is  evident  from  the  sub-paragraph  that  one  of  the
      requirements to be met by an applicant for  leave  to  remain  on  the
      grounds of private life in the UK is that at the date of  application,
      the applicant must be under 18 and has lived continuously  in  the  UK
      for at least seven years.  That was not the case here.    Accordingly,
      the elder child did not meet the requirements under that rule.


  50. It is contended that the Judge failed to consider the  best  interests
      of the two children and to treat them as a primary consideration.


  51. It is true that the Judge has not in his reasons expressly referred to
      the need to consider  their  interests  as  a  primary  consideration.
      However,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  whether,  as  a  matter  of
      substance, he has properly approached the assessment of the children's
      interests as a primary consideration.


  52. Judge Wiseman had regard to the contentions of the  appellant  as  set
      out in the notice of appeal [13] and [14]. There it had been contended
      that one of the considerations to be borne in mind was that  it  would
      be harsh to expect the children to adapt to a country they  had  never
      lived in or were accustomed to. The UK was the only place they knew as
      home. The elder child was progressing well at school  and  was  firmly
      established, and the second child suffered from a speech disorder  for
      which he was receiving treatment, and his  removal  accordingly  might
      cause him irreparable damage.


  53. The Judge also had regard to the  appellant's  own  signed  statement,
      adopted  at  the  appeal,  including  the  evidence  relating  to  the
      children. It was noted that the children had all their ties in the UK,
      being the only country they had ever known [14].


  54. In oral submissions, it was submitted by the  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer [28] that s.55 had been considered but that the  family  would
      be returning together, so that their best interests would be served by
      remaining with their close family. He referred to  EA  (Nigeria).  All
      four individuals involved in this case are nationals  of  Nigeria  and
      could equally remain together in Nigeria [28].


  55. In his skeleton argument before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Layne submitted
      at paragraph 8 that the Judge failed to  consider  properly  the  best
      interests of the two children under s.55. The contention is  that  the
      Judge failed to take into account that the  children  are  settled  in
      school; that it would be disruptive to  their  education  if  removed;
      that they have developed school friendships and family ties to the  UK
      and have never been to Nigeria. His ultimate contention  is  that  the
      Judge failed to consider s.55 of the 2009 Act.


  56. However, at paragraph 35, Judge Wiseman has referred to and summarised
      the problems facing the younger child in respect of slow  development,
      as set out in the reports from  which  he  quotes.  He  has  read  the
      reports, including the consultant paediatrician's who works  with  the
      younger child.


  57. He also had express regard to the fact that the elder  child  had  now
      lived in the UK for just over seven  years.   He  had  regard  to  the
      appellant's evidence that her elder child is in primary school and  is
      doing well in his second year. The younger child was not yet at school
      but would be starting in  September  2014.  He  also  noted  that  the
      children had all their ties in the UK which was the only country  they
      had ever known. He considered the appellant's  contention  that  their
      removal would have a devastating impact on them (paragraph 17 and 18).




  58. He noted that the fact that the older child had  now  lived  for  just
      over 7 years in the UK did not entitle him  to  continue  living  here
      indefinitely. He found that the "main important thing for  both  these
      children is that they remain with hopefully both  their  parents,  but
      certainly the appellant as their main caring parent."  [36].  He  also
      had regard to the fact that there may or  may  not  be  the  level  of
      professional help to assist the younger child in Nigeria, and that was
      something that would have to be coped with as best as possible [39].


  59. He found that the children have been drawn into all these problems  by
      the adults caring for them and noted (and accepted)  the  comments  at
      paragraph 31 made  by  Mr  Layne  that  the  children  were  "innocent
      victims."


  60. He had regard to whether it would be proportionate for the family unit
      to relocate together to Nigeria. He also referred to the  letter  from
      the respondent dated 25th August 2011 [42] in which she was  satisfied
      that it would be reasonable for the family unit to  relocate  together
      to Nigeria.  He came to the same conclusion independently despite  the
      fact that he was considering her appeal three years later [43]


  61. He considered the positive features favourable to the  appellant,  and
      balanced them against the overall interest of immigration control in a
      case of this kind. He did not find that the decision in this case  was
      even finely balanced [40].


  62. In  arriving  at  his  conclusions  he  properly  had  regard  to  the
      appellant's evidence that she had never had any intention of returning
      home after the expiry of her visit visa six  months  after  her  entry
      into the UK in February 2005. She  has  had  no  discussion  with  her
      partner about the possibility of going back. They  were  just  "hoping
      for the best". She told the Tribunal that although she had  come  here
      with a visit visa, it had been obtained on a false basis  because  she
      was always "happy to come to a better country." She had never had  the
      intention of returning and just settled down with her partner  and  in
      due course the children. They had started  school  and  she  therefore
      felt happy to apply for leave to remain "for their sakes" [26 and 32].


  63. The judge also noted that there  was  no  evidence  at  all  from  her
      partner who had not come to the hearing to explain his history.  There
      was no claim that he had a right to remain here.


  64. I have had regard to the Upper Tribunal decision in  Azimi-Moayed  and
      Others, supra. The Tribunal has noted that seven years from age  4  is
      likely to be more significant to a child than the first seven years of
      his life. Very young children are focused on their parents rather than
      their peers, and are adaptable.


  65. I have also had regard to EV, supra, and the need to assess  the  best
      interests of the children on the basis of the facts as they are in the
      real world. In this case, neither parent has the right to remain,  and
      accordingly that is the background against which the assessment is  to
      be conducted. The ultimate question is whether it would be  reasonable
      to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to  remain,  to
      Nigeria.


  66. Mr Layne's submission in the skeleton  argument  produced  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal was that the interests should be considered  as  a
      primary consideration.


  67. The Judge had to keep in mind the overall factors making up  the  best
      interests of the children. He concluded that "the main important thing
      for both these children is that they remain with hopefully both  their
      parents, but certainly the appellant as  their  main  caring  parent."
      [36]


  68. Although the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  might  have  given  a  more
      structured determination in respect  of  the  best  interests  of  the
      children, I am satisfied that he has in fact properly appreciated  and
      considered the significance of all  the  evidence  relating  to  their
      circumstances in the UK.


  69. Although  he  might  have  made  certain  unnecessary  and  irrelevant
      comments, for example at paragraphs 34 and 38, they did not affect his
      ultimate assessment of the children's  best  interests.  He  expressly
      noted that the children had been drawn  into  these  problems  by  the
      adults and that they  were,  as  submitted  by  Mr  Layne  during  his
      submissions [31]  "innocent victims."


  70. Having assessed the determination as a whole, I find  that  the  Judge
      has properly considered the best interests of the children as required
      and has concluded that in the circumstances it would be reasonable for
      them to return to Nigeria with the appellant and her partner,  or  the
      appellant alone. The findings were neither irrational or  perverse  as
      submitted.  He has given proper reasons for the conclusions reached.


     Decision


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  any
material error of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.





                               Signed   Date 6 November 2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



