
IAC-HX-DML-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07761/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 November 2014                  |On 2 March 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              RIMVYDAS UNDERIS
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis
For the Respondent:    In Person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Underis is a citizen of Lithuania born in 1970.  He appealed against
    a decision of the Secretary of State made on 29 January 2014 to  remove
    on the basis that Mr Underis was not  exercising  Treaty  rights  under
    Regulation 6 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.  The decision to remove was made in accordance with Section 10 of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act which applies by virtue  of  Regulations
    19(3)(a) and (c)  pursuant  to  Regulation  21B(2)  and  24(2)  of  the
    Regulations.

 2. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 19  August  2014  Judge  of  the
    First-tier M A Khan allowed the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

 3. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which was granted by
    a judge on 15 October 2014.

 4. Although in proceedings  before  me  the  Secretary  of  State  is  the
    Appellant and Mr Underis is the  Respondent,  for  convenience  I  will
    refer to parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, thus,  Mr
    Underis is the Appellant and the Secretary of State is the Respondent.

 5. The basis of the refusal by the Respondent was that the  Appellant  had
    not been exercising Treaty rights.  Indeed he  had  been  arrested  for
    begging offences.

 6. The judge noted the oral evidence of  the  Appellant  at  the  hearing,
    namely, that he came to the UK in September 2009 and had worked in  the
    construction industry.   The  last  time  he  worked  was  just  before
    Christmas 2013.  He had been receiving  job  seeker's  allowance  until
    August 2014.

 7. He had been arrested for begging in London  because  he  had  lost  his
    documents.   At  present  he  is  living  in  a  hostel  and   claiming
    jobseeker's allowance.  He gets housing benefit.  He had  done  courses
    in English language and skills.  He goes to the job centre regularly to
    find work and is attending job centre work programmes.  Once he finds a
    full-time job he will leave the hostel and find rented accommodation.

 8. He said he was getting help from a case worker at St  Mungo's  Broadway
    Outreach.  He had been sleeping rough but is now fixing his health.   A
    letter from the hostel shows the progress he has been making.  It  also
    states he has been attending IT classes at 'Connection'  at  St  Martin
    and that he is due to start an ESOL course in August 2014.

 9. The judge found that the Appellant had been "honest and frank"  in  his
    evidence.  He accepted his account of "activities and  progress"  since
    the period when he was sleeping rough  and  was  arrested  for  begging
    offences.

10. The judge concluded (at [27]):

         "... The Appellant has provided evidence which demonstrates that he
         has been  involved  in  activities  which  illustrate  that  he  is
         exercising  his  treaty  rights  under  Regulation  6  of  the  EEA
         Regulations 2006.  The Appellant is  regularly  attending  the  job
         centre looking for employment, he has  undertaken  and  intends  to
         continue taking courses to assist  him  with  future  prospects  of
         employment.  The Appellant is in receipt of job seekers allowances.
          These facts are supported by letters from the Out Reach  Team,  Mr
         Sadique and Karina Bendryn.  There are entries  to  show  that  the
         Appellant has been a  regular  attender  at  St  Martin's  Computer
         classes.'"

11. The judge further concluded (at [28]) that he was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant "has demonstrated that he is actually looking for  employment
    and that he has  undertaken  various  actions  to  secure  employment."
    Accordingly,  the  Appellant  was  exercising   treaty   rights   under
    Regulation 6.

12. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Jarvis sought to rely  on  the
    grounds.   The  judge  had  not  applied  the  requirements  stated  in
    Regulation 6(7) and (8).  On the Appellant's own evidence he could  not
    succeed.

13. The Appellant appeared with Mr Coombes a support worker who  I  allowed
    to assist him.  The Appellant was due shortly to attend  a  health  and
    safety test at 'Pearson'.  If he passed this would help him get a  work
    permit for the construction industry and would  put  him  in  a  better
    position to do full-time work in construction. He had  also  registered
    with 'Reed', an employment agency.

14. In considering this matter I found that the judge erred in law.  It  is
    not in dispute that the Appellant had  not  been  in  employment  since
    January 2014 after which it appears that for some or all of the time he
    has been receiving jobseekers allowance.

15. However, the judge failed to have proper regard to Regulations 6(7) and
    (8).

16. Regulation 6(7) and (8) reads:

         "(7) A person may not retain the status of  a  worker  pursuant  to
             paragraph (2)(b), or jobseeker pursuant to  paragraph  (1)(a),
             for longer than the relevant  period  unless  he  can  provide
             compelling evidence that he is continuing to  seek  employment
             and has a genuine chance of being engaged.

         (8)  In paragraph (7) 'the relevant period' means -

             (b)  in the case of jobseekers, 182 days, minus the cumulative
                  total of  any  days  during  which  the  person  concerned
                  previously enjoyed a right of residence  as  a  jobseeker,
                  not including any days prior to a continuous absence  from
                  the United Kingdom of at least 12 months."

17. In this case it is clear that the Appellant has been a jobseeker  since
    early 2014 and has thus  retained  this  status  for  longer  than  the
    relevant period of  six  months  (182  days).   He  thus  had  to  show
    "compelling evidence that he is continuing to seek employment and has a
    genuine chance of being engaged".

18. The judge noted that the Appellant had been attending the jobcentre and
    had undertaken some courses.  However, whilst he may have been  looking
    for work he also had to satisfy the requirement that he has  a  genuine
    chance of being engaged.  The judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  that
    requirement.

19. In failing properly to apply the law the judge materially  erred.   The
    result is that the decision is set aside to be remade which I proceeded
    to do.

20. The additional evidence to  which  I  was  referred  by  the  Appellant
    included a letter from 'Reed', which is an employment  agency  offering
    programmes to unemployed workers making the transition from welfare  to
    work. It is dated 11 November 2014 and required the Appellant to attend
    an interview in December 2014 "to discuss the support available through
    our services".  The letter states that failure without good  reason  to
    attend an adviser interview (the aim of  which  is  to  "enable  us  to
    continue to tailor our support and produce a realistic  and  achievable
    work focussed action plan") would result in his  jobseeker's  allowance
    being stopped or  reduced.  Mr  Jarvis  did  not  seek  to  attack  the
    Appellant's good intentions. Nor do I. I find that  his  attendance  at
    the job centre and his completing several courses and his intention  to
    cooperate with the agency amount to "compelling  evidence  that  he  is
    continuing to seek employment". However, even were  he  to  attend  the
    agency the fact that such would  hopefully  "produce  a  realistic  and
    achievable work focussed  action  plan"  does  not  greatly  assist  in
    satisfying the further requirement, namely,  that  he  "has  a  genuine
    chance of being engaged." I agree with  Mr  Jarvis  that  the  type  of
    evidence required in that regard would  be  for  example  specific  job
    applications or job interviews.'

21. The letter from 'Reed' together with his history of going  to  the  job
    centre and  doing  some  courses  comes  nowhere  near  satisfying  the
    requirements that the Appellant  has provided "compelling evidence that
    he...has a genuine chance of being engaged".

22. There was also a letter from 'Pearson', which is  a  test  taker  site,
    stating that the Appellant was booked to take a 45 minute test entitled
    'Operatives - Health, safety and  environment  test  for  operatives  -
    English-UK (ENG)'.  This does not assist him. It may well  be  that  he
    intended to take  the  test.  The  result  cannot  be  known.  Even  if
    successful where it might take him in his prospects  of  employment  is
    speculative.

23. On the evidence before me, applying the civil standard  of  proof,  the
    Appellant does not satisfy Regulation 6.

    The appeal thus fails.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal showed material error  of  law.   It
is set aside and remade as follows:

    The appeal is dismissed under the EEA Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 2 March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
