
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/07750/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 24th February 2016                  |      On 17th March 2016             |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                               ms baljeet kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan, Counsel instructed by S.Z. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant who is a widow
    aged 55 and a citizen  of  India.   She  challenges  the  Decision  and
    Reasons  of  Judge  O'Rourke  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was
    promulgated on 24th August 2015.

 2. The background to this case is that the Appellant has over  the  years,
    with the benefit of multi visit visas, spent a lot of time with her son
    and daughter-in-law in the United Kingdom.   Latterly  she  arrived  in
    June 2014 and within the currency of that six month  leave  period  she
    applied for leave to remain.  I think initially she applied  for  leave
    to remain as a parent but in fact this is more  properly  to  be  dealt
    with under Article  8.   The  case  came  before  the  judge  when  the
    Appellant was represented by Counsel.  The judge dismissed  the  appeal
    and permission to appeal was sought on the basis  that  the  judge  had
    taken no account of Section 55 of the 2007 Act and had  not  considered
    the best interests of the child concerned which is  the  Appellant's  6
    year old granddaughter.

 3. Permission was duly granted on that basis.  The Home Office  Presenting
    Officer, on behalf of the Secretary of State, has accepted that Section
    55 was not specifically referred to but her view is that any  error  in
    failing to specifically refer to it was not material because the  judge
    dealt with the substance of Section 55.   The  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer referred to paragraph 13 of the judgment where  the  judge  set
    out the Appellant's representative's submissions.

 4. The first is that the Appellant is a  woman  widowed  at  a  relatively
    young age with no emotional support in India and who could not cope  on
    her own anymore.  She required care it was said on a daily basis  which
    her only remaining relative, a daughter, was unable to provide.  She is
    taking prescription medication for  a  condition  which  I  believe  is
    depression which, it is said, will be aggravated if she were obliged to
    return.  It was submitted that she would be no  burden  on  the  public
    purse as the Sponsor could provide for her care living  with  him.   It
    was submitted she  had  no  other  close  family  members,  as  I  have
    indicated, apart from the daughter who could only visit her every  four
    to six months and that if the Appellant met  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules then there was no point in sending her back to  India  simply  to
    apply for entry clearance relying upon the case  of  Chikwamba  v  SSHD
    [2008] UKHL 40.

 5. At 13(vii) in particular the judge noted the submission  that  all  the
    evidence  indicated  a  strong  family  life  in  the  United   Kingdom
    particularly with her granddaughter and she has now been residing  with
    the Sponsor for  over  a  year  and  it  was  argued  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to her returning to India,  namely  the  bonds
    with family in the United Kingdom; her deteriorating health and lack of
    support in India and in an assessment of proportionality  there  is  no
    pressing social need to deprive her of leave to remain.

 6. The judge then commenced the findings at  paragraph  14,  finding  that
    there was nothing in the submissions as to the lack of  emotional  care
    in India and that any financial sponsorship  could  continue  from  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge noted the  medical  evidence  was  scant  or
    missing but that there was no indication that she could not continue to
    receive appropriate treatment in India.

 7. At paragraph 14(iii) the Judge said that there was scant evidence as to
    her requirement for daily care.  Indeed, I note that that  claim  seems
    to fly in the face of the other claim that she provides day-to-day care
    for her, no doubt lively, granddaughter.

 8. The judge then at paragraph 20 summarised his conclusions  in  relation
    to family life starting by saying that he found the interference to  be
    proportionate for the following reasons which he gave in three numbered
    paragraphs.  In the first paragraph he  noted  that  the  Secretary  of
    State is entitled to expect that when somebody is granted a visit  visa
    that they will return home at the end of that period and  not  seek  to
    remain and that allowing  persons  who  make  such  an  application  to
    succeed circumvented the process.

 9. Secondly,  he  noted  that  the  Appellant  had  maintained  an  active
    relationship with her family in the United Kingdom  by  lengthy  visits
    over several years  and  found  that  there  was  no  reason  why  that
    arrangement should not continue in the future and that she  could  with
    suitable arrangements have a family life  with  her  daughter  and  her
    family in India.  He referred to Chikwamba not being a trump card.

10. It is true to say that the judge has not given  detailed  consideration
    of the  best  interests  of  the  grandchild  and  whether  those  best
    interests required the Appellant  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    However, the evidence that was before the judge in relation to that was
    restricted to brief statements in the three written statements  of  the
    Appellant, her son and her daughter-in-law.

11. The Appellant's statement says at paragraph 16, "we have established  a
    happy family life and my granddaughter is particularly attached to  me.
    Any break-up of this close-knit relationship would impact adversely  on
    our family life."

12. Then her son in his statement says, at paragraphs 13 and 14:

         "My daughter is greatly attached to my mother.  My mother gives her
         good company.  My mother  is  also  very  attached  to  her.   This
         enabled me and my wife to work full-time.  That was good for family
         income.  We started living a happy family life.  My mother  remains
         happy with wife, my daughter and me.  My wife is fond of my mother,
         my daughter loves her grandmother.   My  daughter  is  so  used  to
         living with my mother she cannot even  live  without  my  mother  a
         single day."

13. There is then a statement from the Appellant's daughter-in-law who says
    at paragraph 9 of her statement, "we have established  a  happy  family
    life and the Appellant is particularly attached to  my  daughter.   Any
    break-up of this close-knit relationship would impact adversely on  our
    established family life."

14. I find that the evidence before the judge that the  best  interests  of
    this child requires the Appellant  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    simply does not stack up.  The evidence is scant  indeed.   As  pointed
    out by the  Presenting  Officer  before  me  there  is  no  independent
    evidence from anybody that this child requires her grandmother  in  her
    life and that she would suffer if she were not  a  daily  presence.   I
    have no doubt that grandmother's presence is of enormous benefit to her
    son and daughter-in-law because it saves them  the  cost  of  childcare
    allowing them both to work.  However, grandmother is  grandmother,  not
    parent, she is not the primary care giver and if she was not present on
    a daily basis the child could continue to  keep  in  contact  with  her
    grandmother by the various possible methods  of  communication  and  by
    visits continuing as they have in the past.   There  is  absolutely  no
    evidence that given the support of her parents she will suffer  at  all
    other than perhaps missing her grandmother in the short-term, certainly
    nothing that would warrant this appeal being allowed on  the  basis  of
    the best interests of the grandchild.  That being  the  case  the  fact
    that the judge has not specifically  referred  to  Section  55  in  the
    judgment does not in my view amount to  an  error  of  law  to  justify
    setting the Decision aside.  For that reason the appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                              Date 4th March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


