
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07391/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                       |          Decision & Reasons      |
|                                          |Promulgated                       |
|On 15th December 2015                     |          On 4th January 2016     |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               sophia ghartey
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Garrod instructed by Tamsons Legal Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Sophia Ghartey, whom I shall refer to as "the  Claimant",  sought  from
    the Secretary of State a residence card under the Immigration (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006, as the spouse of the  Sponsor,  Joseph
    Agyei, who is a citizen of The Netherlands.  The couple claimed to have
    been married by proxy in Ghana.

 2. The application was refused by the Secretary of State on  9th  February
    2015.  In the explanatory reasons letter  it  was  contended  that  the
    Claimant had failed to establish that the Ghanaian marriage certificate
    provided had been duly registered  in  accordance  with  the  Customary
    Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985.  Following the case of NA
    (Customary marriage and divorce - evidence) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009 it
    was considered that the conditions essential to  the  validity  of  the
    marriage in accordance with customary law had  not  been  demonstrated.
    In addition  Ghanaian  birth  certificates  for  both  parties  to  the
    marriage had not been  produced.   A  letter  from  the  Ghanaian  High
    Commission did not, it was said, establish that the marriage was valid.
     The decision letter went on to state that it had not been  established
    that the parties were in a durable relationship.

 3. The Claimant's appeal against that decision was heard before First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J S Law on 24th June 2015.  By the time of that  hearing
    some further documentation had been submitted, notably  a  letter  from
    the Ghanaian  High  Commission  in  London  which  confirmed  that  the
    marriage between the Claimant and sponsor was legally  valid  in  Ghana
    and a report from Dr Ian Curry-Sumner, who is qualified in  Dutch  law,
    in which he confirmed that the marriage would be regarded  as  a  valid
    marriage according to Dutch law.  The judge heard  oral  evidence  from
    the Claimant and from the Sponsor.  He found that the marriage by proxy
    had been compliant with Regulations in Ghana  and  that  based  on  the
    expert report from the Dutch lawyer he accepted that the  marriage  was
    accepted  as  valid  in  the  Netherlands.   The  Claimant's   position
    therefore met the requirements in Kareem (Proxy  marriages  -  EU  law)
    [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC).  The Claimant was thus entitled to a residence
    card and her appeal succeeded.  The judge went on (at paragraph  18  of
    his decision) to state that  whilst  no  reference  had  been  made  to
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules or paragraph 276ADE he found  that
    the Appellant had established a private  and  family  life  within  the
    United Kingdom and that requesting removal would be  a  breach  of  her
    human rights.  He therefore also allowed the appeal under  Appendix  FM
    and 276ADE of the Rules and Article 8 ECHR.  No anonymity direction was
    made and he made no fee award, giving reasons for his decision in  that
    respect also.

 4. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal, contending that the
    judge had erred in  considering  that  the  marriage  was  valid  under
    Ghanaian law, which cast doubt on its validity under  Dutch  law.   The
    initial declaration submitted, it was said, had been  insufficient  and
    that could not be  rectified  by  a  subsequent  statutory  declaration
    lodged with the Ghanaian authorities.  It was also said that the  judge
    had misdirected himself in  allowing  the  appeal  under  Appendix  FM,
    paragraph 276ADE and Article 8 as it was recorded that  no  submissions
    had been made by either party in that regard  and  they  had  not  been
    raised in the Grounds  of  Appeal.   Permission  was  granted  on  13th
    October 2015.  In a detailed response under  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
    Rule 24 it was contended that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  correctly
    applied the law and properly interpreted both Ghanaian and Dutch law.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Mills said that the case was a  little  out
    of the ordinary as there had been a report from a Dutch lawyer.  It was
    clear from Kareem that mere assertions as to the law in an EEA  country
    would not be enough.  The Secretary of State's position was  that  what
    was required was a statement from the state authorities in the relevant
    country but he accepted that that was not clear from Kareem.   He  said
    the question was whether the marriage was valid under Ghanaian law  and
    was the judge entitled to find that it was.  The  only  real  complaint
    was that the judge had not dealt with the point that the  Claimant  had
    produced  a  statutory  declaration  with  regard   to   the   original
    registration with  the  Ghanaian  authorities  and  then  a  subsequent
    declaration, which had given further information.

 6. Mr Mills accepted that  registration  of  a  customary  marriage  under
    Ghanaian law was now optional but if registration was  pursued  it  was
    necessary, he said, to  follow  the  correct  process.   The  statutory
    declaration in support was required to show the names of the parties to
    the marriage, the place of residence of the parties at the time of  the
    marriage and that the conditions  essential  to  the  validity  of  the
    marriage in accordance with  the  applicable  customary  law  had  been
    complied with.  The marriage was required to be shown to  be  supported
    by the parents of the spouses.  He said  that  the  original  statutory
    declaration did not have all of these elements.  Consequently a  second
    statutory declaration was required, subsequent to the application.  The
    issue was whether if the marriage was registered  on  the  basis  of  a
    defective statutory declaration it had been properly  registered.   The
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  letter  from  the   High
    Commission could paper over the cracks and his decision was  predicated
    on the marriage being lawful in Ghana.

 7. In response Mr Garrod referred to the Rule 24 response.  He  said  that
    the statutory declaration of 8th October 2013, made by  the  respective
    fathers of the parties to the marriage, did meet  the  requirements  of
    Ghanaian law.  In any event he said that the marriage  certificate  was
    conclusive.  That appeared to be clear from Section 13 of the Customary
    Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985 in force in Ghana.

 8. Mr Garrod went on to refer to the reported decision  in  NA  (Customary
    marriage  and  divorce  -  evidence)  Ghana  [2009]  UKAIT  00009.   At
    paragraph 18 of that decision was reported the  guidance  of  the  Home
    Office's own website to  the  effect  that  non-  compliance  with  the
    requirements for registration in the 1985 Ghanaian law  was  punishable
    by fine or imprisonment but the marriage would  still  be  regarded  as
    valid.  Thus he said that even if there had been a  failure  to  comply
    with the Regulations, which he did not accept, the marriage would still
    have been valid.  He accepted that the judge might have erred in  going
    on to consider the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR when  they  had
    not been in issue but that did not affect the outcome.   Mr  Mills  did
    not wish to respond at that point.

 9. Having considered the documentation and those submissions I came to the
    view that there had been no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Law.  The  judge  had  before  him  not  only
    evidence from the two parties to the  marriage  and  the  documentation
    previously before the Secretary of State but he  also  had  the  letter
    from the High Commission in London (pages E1 to E3  of  the  Claimant's
    bundle) in which the Counsellor for Consular Affairs confirmed that the
    marriage of the Claimant  and  Sponsor  was  legally  valid  in  Ghana.
    Furthermore the judge had the  specialist  report  of  Dr  Curry-Sumner
    (pages E5 to E11 of the bundle) which confirmed that the  marriage  was
    valid in Dutch law.  It has not been demonstrated to me that the  judge
    erred in his assessment of the evidence, given in particular those  two
    documents.   He  was  justified  in  finding  that  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this couple the marriage was valid  both  in  Ghanaian
    and in Dutch law and thus the Claimant  was  entitled  to  a  residence
    card.

10. Having regard to the recent reported decision of Amirteymour and Others
    (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC) and the judgment of
    the Court of Appeal in TY (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1233 it is
    arguable that the judge should not have considered  matters  under  the
    Immigration Rules or Article 8 ECHR, the more so as  these  issues  had
    not been pleaded in the Grounds of Appeal.  However that point  is  not
    relevant as to whether there was a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

There was no material error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal which shall stand.

No application was made for an anonymity order and none is made.






Signed                              Date 02 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
















