
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07928/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th May 2016                             |On 1st June 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between
               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                        MR EBENEZER OLADAOYE FARODOYE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Osifeso, a legal representative



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction


    1. In this appeal, the Secretary of State appeals against a decision of
       the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal  of  Mr  Farodoye  ('the
       claimant') against a decision taken on 9 February 2015 to refuse  to
       issue a residence card as confirmation of a right  of  residence  as
       the family member of a European Economic Area ('EEA')  national  who
       is exercising treaty rights.

Background Facts


    2. The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria. He was born on 16 March  1988.
       The claimant applied for a residence card as confirmation of a right
       of residence as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  who  is
       exercising treaty rights and who is dependent upon the claimant. The
       Secretary of State refused his application. The reasons for  refusal
       were that the Secretary of State was not satisfied that the claimant
       had provided evidence that his father was wholly dependent upon  him
       for his primary care, that his mother could  not  provide  care,  or
       that his father would be forced to leave the UK if the claimant  did
       not remain in the UK.

    3. The claimant entered the UK as a visitor on 22 September  2009  with
       leave until 21 February 2010. He was granted leave to  remain  until
       31 December 2012 as a Tier 4 student. On 5 July  2012  the  claimant
       submitted an application for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  his
       family and private life. That application was refused with no  right
       of appeal. The claimant requested reconsideration  of  the  decision
       which was again refused on 23 September 2013 with a right of appeal.
       The  appeal  was  unsuccessful.  On  8  January  2015  the  claimant
       submitted an application for a  derivative  residence  card  as  the
       primary carer of a British Citizen. The Secretary of  State  refused
       the application for the reasons set out in paragraph 2 above.

  The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

    4.  The  claimant  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
       determination promulgated on 20 October  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Adio ('the judge') allowed the claimant's appeal.

    5. The First-tier Tribunal made a number of findings of fact  the  most
       relevant of which were that the claimant is responsible for the care
       of his father, that the nature of the care provided by the  claimant
       cannot be  replicated  by  an  ordinary  carer,  that  removing  the
       claimant from the UK would affect the quality of life of his father.
       The judge found that the claimant satisfied the requirements of  the
       criteria for a derivative right of residence.

  The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    6. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal. There are 3 grounds of appeal. It is asserted in ground  1
       that  the  judge  had  misdirected  himself  by  failing  to  follow
       Deevaseelan, in ground 2 that the judge placed  undue  weight  on  a
       risk assessment carried out by Haringey council and in ground 3 that
       the judge misdirected himself in law by considering  that  the  only
       issue was whether the claimant was his father's primary carer and in
       so doing failed to apply the principles set out in the  case  of  C-
       34/09 Ruiz Zambrano v Office National de employ  [2011]  ECR  I-1177
       ("Zambrano"), and that the judge failed to give adequate reasons. On
       6 April 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler granted the  Secretary
       of State permission to appeal but  only  in  respect  of  the  third
       ground of appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

  Summary of the Submissions


    7. Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds of appeal in respect of ground 3. He
       submitted that the claimant gives assistance to his father but  that
       if he were not able to give assistance the local  authority  or  the
       health service would be mandated to provide the care if the claimant
       was not here. The care would have to be provided and therefore there
       is no requirement for the claimant  to  remain  to  look  after  his
       father. It is submitted that the  Zambrano  requirement  is  a  high
       hurdle. He referred to  paragraph  18  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       decision and submitted that the judge fell into error. He  submitted
       that the judge focused on the quality of the sponsor's life which is
       not the test to be applied.


    8. Mr Osifeso submitted that at paragraph 18 of the First-tier Tribunal
       decision from the findings of fact  what  is  crucial  and  what  is
       implicit in the decision is that the level  of  care  given  by  the
       claimant is not comparable to the level of the care that  the  local
       authority is able to give to  him.  In  light  of  his  degenerative
       condition it is not only the quality of the sponsor's life  but  the
       fact that if the claimant were to leave the UK it would  hasten  his
       death.  He  submitted  that  it  is  inherent  from  the  level   of
       seriousness of his father's medical condition. In general  terms  he
       submitted it  is  implicit  in  the  determination  that  the  local
       authority cannot provide any residential  care  and  that  the  care
       provided by the claimant cannot be replicated by ordinary  care.  He
       submitted that the judge considers the medical care  needs  provided
       by the claimant which go beyond the quality  of  life.  His  support
       helps the sponsor to live as long as possible. He submitted that the
       judge sums up at paragraph 18 and that you have to look at paragraph
       18 as a whole which includes essential  requirements  of  round-the-
       clock care of the sponsor which is crucial to his life. He submitted
       that it was not evidenced in paragraph  18  but  that  evidence  was
       given at the hearing that the council are not willing to  give  more
       care than is currently provided.


Discussion

    9. The core question is whether, if the claimant is  not  permitted  to
       remain in the UK, the sponsor (his father) would not, as a matter of
       practicality, be able to remain in the UK.

   10. Regulation 15A(4A) of the EEA Regulations, which was  inserted  with
       effect from 8th November 2012 by the Immigration (European  Economic
       Area) (Amendment)  (No.2)  Regulations  2012/2560,  provides  for  a
       derivative right of residence for primary carers of British citizens
       as follows: -

         "(1) A person ('P') who is not an exempt person and  who  satisfies
         the criteria in paragraph  (2),  (3),  (4)  (4A)  or  (5)  of  this
         regulation is entitled to a  derivative  right  to  reside  in  the
         United Kingdom for as long as P satisfies  the  relevant  criteria.
         ...

         (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

         (a) P is the primary carer of  a  British  citizen  ('the  relevant
         British citizen');

         (b) the relevant British citizen is residing in the United Kingdom;
         and

         (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside  in  the
         UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave".

   11. Regulation 15A(4A) was inserted to comply with the interpretation of
       the Court of Justice of the European Union ("CJEU") of Article 20 of
       the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU") in  the
       Zambrano case where the Grand Chamber of the CJEU held that  Article
       20 of the TFEU "precludes national measures which have the effect of
       depriving citizens of the European Union of the genuine enjoyment of
       the substance of the rights conferred by virtue of their  status  as
       citizens of the European Union" (paragraph 42).


   12. At paragraph 17 the judge identifies the issue as:

          "...Whether the appellant is the primary carer in the  sense  that
         he has primary responsibility for his father's car wash is  equally
         the responsibility for that persons with another person who is  not
         an exempt person."


           And at paragraph 18 as:


         "The only issue is whether the appellant is the primary  carer  and
         there is evidence to support it"


  13. The judge found that the claimant is the sponsor's primary carer
      finding that the care currently undertaken was as follows:


         ...This starts from helping his father to go to bed, to wake up, to
         feed,  to  bath,  to  give  medication,  to  take  into   different
         environments and to church. More importantly he helps his father to
         go to the toilet at night at a time when his father is in need of a
         special designed toilet. He helps his father with the cleaning  and
         the  cooking...  The  risk  assessment  and  support  plan  of  the
         appellant's father also indicates that it is the son that has taken
         full care responsibility. The evidence before me indicates that the
         appellant's father requires the care of the appellant in his  daily
         living..."


  14. However, it is clear from case-law that the requirement is that the
      removal would lead to the British citizen being unable to remain in
      the UK.

   15. In Hines v Lambeth London Borough Council [2014]  EWCA  Civ  660  at
       paragraph 19 the  court,  referring  to  the  case  of  Harrison  v.
       Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1736
       ("Harrison") set out:

          '...Elias LJ's starting point in that case was that  the  Zambrano
         principle did not extend to cover anything  short  of  a  situation
         where the EU citizen is forced to leave the  territory  of  the  EU
         (paragraph 63). Elias LJ then dismissed the notion that the CJEU in
         Zambrano was leaving open the possibility that the  doctrine  might
         apply "more widely and loosely" (paragraph Judgment Approved by the
         court for handing down. Hines v.  Lambeth  64).  In  paragraph  66,
         Elias LJ makes clear that Dereci v. Bundesministerium  f?r  Inneres
         (Case C-256/11) [2012] 1 CMLR 45  (paragraphs  67-72)  demonstrated
         that the reduction of the enjoyment of family life  by  the  family
         members who remain when non-EU citizens leave was not sufficient to
         engage EU law. At paragraph 67, Elias LJ explained  the  matter  as
         follows: -

             "... I accept that it is a general principle of  EU  law  that
             conduct which materially impedes the exercise of an  EU  right
             is in general forbidden by EU law in precisely the same way as
             deprivation of the right. But in my judgment it  is  necessary
             to focus on the nature of the right in  issue  and  to  decide
             what constitutes an impediment. The right of  residence  is  a
             right to reside in the territory of the EU. It is not a  right
             to any  particular  quality  or  life  or  to  any  particular
             standard of living. Accordingly, there  is  no  impediment  to
             exercising the right to reside if residence  remains  possible
             as a matter of substance, albeit that the quality of  life  is
             diminished ..." [emphasis added]

   16. At paragraph 8 the court effectively summarised that  the  court  in
       Harrison:

          '...held at paragraph 63 that the Zambrano principle did not cover
         anything short of a situation where the EU  citizen  is  forced  to
         leave the territory of the EU.'

   17. In DH (Jamaica) and others v SSHD 2012 EWCA Civ 1736  the  Court  of
       Appeal held at paragraph 63:

         'I agree with Mr Beal QC, counsel for the Secretary of State,  that
         there is really no basis for asserting that it is arguable  in  the
         light of the authorities that the  Zambrano  principle  extends  to
         cover anything short of a situation where the EU citizen is  forced
         to leave the territory of the EU. If the EU citizen, be it child or
         wife, would not in practice be compelled to leave  the  country  if
         the  non-EU  family  member  were  to  be  refused  the  right   of
         residence...'

   18. In the case of Jamil Sanneh v (1) Secretary of State  for  work  and
       pensions and (2) The Commissioners for  Her  Majesty's  Revenue  and
       Customs  [2013]  EWHC  793  (Admin)  ('Sanneh')  the  court   having
       considered the Zambrano case and subsequent  authorities  derived  a
       number of propositions from those cases at paragraph 19:

         ...
         iii) It is for the national courts to determine, as a question of
         fact on the evidence before it, whether an EU citizen would be
         compelled to leave the EU to follow a non-EU national upon whom he
         is dependent.

         iv) Nothing less than such compulsion will engage articles 20 and
         21 of the TFEU. In particular, EU law will not be engaged where the
         EU citizen is not compelled to leave the EU, even if the quality or
         standard of life of the EU citizen is diminished as a result of the
         non-EU national upon whom he is dependent is (for example) removed
         or prevented from working...'


   19. In MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside  EU)  Iran  [2013]  UKUT
       00380 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal when applying the EU  law  principles
       as summarised in Sanneh held at paragraph 56:

         'The right of residence is a right to reside in  the  territory  of
         the EU. It is not a right to any particular quality of life  or  to
         any particular standard of living (see Dereci at paragraph 68,  and
         Harrison at paragraph 67).'

   20. The above cases repeat and amplify that  there  is  no  right  to  a
       particular quality of life or standard of living and  nothing  short
       of actual compulsion or being forced to leave the UK as a result  of
       the removal of the carer will  engage  the  Zambrano  principles  as
       enacted in the EEA Regulations. Applying those  principles  to  this
       case it is clear what is required is that without the  care  of  the
       claimant the sponsor would be compelled to leave the UK.

   21. The focus of the judge's reasoning was on the quality of life of the
       sponsor. At paragraph 18 the judge records and finds:

         "... The father himself stated that the absence of his son  in  his
         life as a carer would affect his lifespan. I am  prepared  to  find
         that the nature of the care provided by the appellant to his father
         cannot be replicated by an ordinary carer. The appellant  virtually
         lives with his father and any carer would be required to  come  and
         as the father himself has stated the council does not see the  need
         to provide the sponsor with a carer bearing in mind  the  full-time
         assistance he is getting from his son.  In  view  of  the  bond  of
         father and son and the dependency of his father on  his  son  I  am
         prepared to accept that removing  the  appellant  from  the  United
         Kingdom would affect the quality of life  of  the  father  and  his
         standard of living  ...  In  effect  the  father  is  stating  that
         removing his son from the UK would not make the quality of life  he
         has improve, in fact it will reduce it. This is an important factor
         in considering the criteria under the Zambrano ruling ... The  only
         issue is whether the appellant is the primary carer  and  there  is
         evidence to support  it.  I  find  that  there  is  both  oral  and
         documentary evidence to support this fact ... I therefore find that
         the appellant satisfied the requirements  of  the  criteria  for  a
         derivative right of residence. I find that removing  the  appellant
         from the UK would  in  effect  be  removing  the  quality  of  life
         available to his father. As there is no one else looking after  him
         this would require the appellant's father to leave  the  UK  as  he
         will not have the same kind of care and treatment  and  bond  which
         would make life worth living for him ..."

   22. The judge did not refer to any of  the  case-law  cited  above.  The
       sponsor is a British Citizen. I accept Mr Talrow's  submission  that
       if his son were not  in  the  UK  the  Local  Authority  and  Health
       Authority would be required to provide a level of  care  that  would
       meet his needs. As the judge recorded 'the council does not see  the
       need to provide the sponsor with a carer bearing in mind  the  full-
       time assistance he is getting from his son,' That is not  a  finding
       that if the son were to leave the UK the Council would be  unwilling
       or unable to provide the care required. It  will  not  be  the  same
       level of care but that is not the entitlement under the Regulations.
       The judge's focus was on the Council being  unable  to  provide  the
       level  of  care  currently  provided  by  the  claimant.  The  judge
       considered 'As there is no one else looking  after  him  this  would
       require the appellant's father to leave the UK as he will  not  have
       the same kind of care and treatment and bond". As  set  out  in  the
       extracts of the case-law above  even  if  the  quality  of  life  is
       diminished nothing short of compulsion satisfies the requirements in
       the Regulations. It is not a right to any particular quality or life
       or to any particular standard of living. There is no  impediment  to
       exercising the right to reside if residence remains  possible  as  a
       matter of substance, albeit that the quality of life is diminished.

   23. In recording the oral evidence, the judge set out:

         9. "The appellant was asked why his father cannot have a carer. The
         appellant stated that he is his father's son and his father is used
         to him for the past five years in the UK.  A  different  carer  who
         does not know his father  would  be  a  downside  to  his  father's
         health... He does not agree that his father  can  stay  in  the  UK
         without him. His father will be  lonely  and  it  will  affect  his
         health. The carer will not be like him...

         10. Under re-examination stated that the council  propose  to  give
         his father a carer and he told them he does not need anyone...

         11. ... The Haringey Council told him in 2011 that  since  his  son
         was staying with him he did not need a carer. They cannot  consider
         a carer for him ...

         12. Under cross  examination  the  Sponsor  stated  that  the  last
         approach made by the Council to ask whether he needed a  carer  was
         three years ago ..."

   24. I find that the judge erred in failing  to  consider  correctly  the
       test to be applied by focusing on the quality of the Sponsor's  life
       if the claimant were to be removed and the current lack of provision
       of care which is, from the evidence, largely due to  the  fact  that
       the claimant is currently providing  that  care.  This  approach  is
       clear from the judge's conclusion "As there is no one  else  looking
       after him this would require the appellant's father to leave the  UK
       as he will not have the same kind of care and treatment  and  bond".
       The sponsor, as a British Citizen, is entitled to the level of  care
       he  requires  whether  that  is  support  in  his  own  home  or  in
       residential/nursing care. The sponsor  would  not  be  compelled  to
       leave the UK to receive the care he needs either now or even in  the
       future  on  the  basis  of  a  worsening  of  his  current   medical
       conditions. The sponsor quite understandably would  prefer  to  have
       his son care for him. However, the right under the  EEA  Regulations
       is not to a particular  quality  of  life  that  the  sponsor  would
       prefer.

    Conclusions

   25. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  involved  making  a
       material  error  of  law.  I  set-aside  the  decision  pursuant  to
       paragraph 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

   26. I re-make the decision. For the reasons set out  above  the  sponsor
       would not be compelled to leave the UK if the claimant  was  removed
       from the UK. He does not therefore satisfy the Requirements  of  the
       EEA Regulations.

   27. I have considered whether any parties require the protection  of  an
       anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously.
       Having considered all  the  circumstances  and  evidence  I  do  not
       consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law.  I set aside that decision.  I  re-make  the  decision  dismissing  the
claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State.





Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 30 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
