
                                    [pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07232/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th September 2016               |On 7th November 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               mr Ylber Alija
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Albania, who  was  born  on  29th
    February 1980.  He appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of  the  Respondent  dated  7th  February  2015  refusing  his
    application  for  a  permanent  residence  card  pursuant  to  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006.  The basis of the Appellant's  application  was  that
    the Appellant was married to  a  Swedish  citizen,  Miss  [N],  who  he
    married on 16th July 2007.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Widdup
    and promulgated on 21st March 2016.  In his conclusions, the judge made
    the following findings of fact.  First, that the parties  met  in  2006
    and married in July 2007.  Second,  that  the  Appellant  was  on  25th
    October 2009 issued with a five year residence card.  Third,  that  the
    parties were separated either on 30th June or early in  July  2012  and
    Miss [N] returned to live in Sweden.

 3. The judge went on to conclude that on a balance of probabilities,  Miss
    [N] had not visited  the  UK  since  the  separation  and  neither  the
    Appellant visited Miss [N] in Sweden.  He also observed  that  divorce
    proceedings were only started by the Appellant on 4th March  2016,  the
    day after his witness statement was signed (paragraph 42).

 4. The judge went on to conclude that Regulation  15(1)(b)  requires  that
    the family member should reside with the EEA national for a  continuous
    period of five year and that, "that period was  broken  with  Miss  [N]
    returned to Sweden in June or July 2012" (paragraph 45).

 5. Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

 6. In his Grounds of Appeal,  the  Appellant  set  out  two  propositions.
    First, that the judge erred in law in failing  to  recognise  that  the
    Appellant had accrued five years of being with a Swedish  national,  if
    one counted the date of the marriage.  Second, at paragraph 38  of  the
    determination the judge took the view that Miss [N] was not working  in
    2012 but failed to carry out  any  fact  or  finding  whether  she  was
    actually working or not.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on this basis.

 8. At the hearing before me on 29th September 2016, Mr Ahmed, appearing as
    a solicitor on behalf of the  Appellant,  turned  up  with  a  skeleton
    argument, and attached to this was  what  purported  to  be  a  Swedish
    divorce certificate.  Without any prior notice or  any  application  to
    change the Grounds of Appeal, Mr Ahmed submitted that it had just  come
    to the Appellant's notice that  Miss  [N]  had  actually  divorced  the
    Appellant in the Swedish courts as  far  back  as  December  2013.   He
    submitted that the period from June 2006 to October 2011  there  was  a
    five year period which  the  Appellant  could  appoint.   It  had  been
    accepted by the judge that Miss [N] exercised treaty rights during this
    time.  It followed that she was an individual who acquired a  right  of
    permanent residence.  Mr Ahmed now submitted that the  Appellant  could
    succeed under Regulation 10.  This was because given  that  Miss [N]'s
    marriage had ended in divorce, on the basis of a  untranslated  Swedish
    document that had been put before this Tribunal now for the first time,
    the Appellant ceased to be a family member of Miss [N].   If  Miss  [N]
    acquired a right of permanent residence in 2011, then the Appellant did
    not require her to be shown as being economically active in the UK  for
    the Appellant to satisfy Regulation 10(5)(b) which refers to him  as  a
    family member who has retained the right of residence because, "he  was
    residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with these Regulations  at
    the date of the termination".

 9. For his part, Mr Bramble, began by at first quite properly objecting to
    the submission of a untranslated document, which the Tribunal was asked
    to accept was a Swedish divorce certificate  which  the  Appellant  had
    only had brought to his attention recently, even though it purported to
    refer to  an  event  back  in  December  2013.   I  noted  that  it  is
    significant that the judge did not find Mr Ylber Alija to be a  witness
    of credibility in relation to his asylum claim which  he  purported  to
    put forward simply on the basis that he would have a better life in the
    United Kingdom.  He was not in attendance in court in any event.

10. Mr Bramble also then emphasised the fact that what was nevertheless not
    in dispute was that the Appellant's wife left the UK before the  expiry
    of the five year period.   Mr  Bramble  submitted  that  the  Appellant
    married the EEA national on 16th July 2007 (see paragraph  8)  and  the
    Appellant's relationship was broken in June or July 2012 and  therefore
    the necessary five years cannot have been acquired as the  judge  found
    (at paragraph 46).

11. Nor was there enough  evidence  to  show  that  the  EEA  national  was
    exercising treaty rights to 2012 (see paragraph 38).  It was not enough
    to say that Miss [N], from the period 2006 to 2011 had lived  here  for
    five years, and had exercised treaty rights during this time, such that
    she acquired a right of permanent residence.  The issue was not whether
    she acquired a right of permanent  residence.   The  issue  before  the
    judge had been in relation to Regulation 15(1)(b) whether the Appellant
    "has resided in the UK with an EEA  national  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations for a continuous period of five years".   At  paragraph  25
    the  judge  noted  that,  "the  Appellant  had  entered   the   UK   on
    9th September 2008.  The marriage broke down in June 2012".

12. The clock started on 9th September 2008 when the Appellant entered the
    UK.  Up to September 2013 the five year period  appears  to  have  been
    met, however, this five year period is now undermined by the fact that,
    as the judge observes at paragraph 37,  the  parties  separated  around
    July 2012.  Accordingly, the Appellant could not even  have  made  four
    years living with Miss [N].

13. In a reply, Mr Ahmed submitted that he would have to recognise that the
    judge had stated at paragraph 41 that  the  Appellant's  ex-wife,  Miss
    [N], was not in the UK.

No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are
    as follows.

15. First, there is no evidence of Miss [N] working  beyond  2011  and  the
    Appellant only entered the UK in September 2008.  Therefore, he  cannot
    establish that he has resided for a continuous period of five years  in
    accordance with the Regulations.

16. Second, if the Appellant married Miss [N] on 16th  July  2007  and  the
    relationship was broken around July 2012 then the necessary five  years
    have not been acquired.

17. I should add that there is nothing before me  that  suggests  that  the
    judge was wrong to have concluded (at paragraph 47) that, "I also  find
    that the Appellant cannot rely on 15(1)(f).  The Appellant has  resided
    in the UK for a continuous period of five years but he has not done  so
    in accordance with the Regulations because his wife was not  exercising
    treaty rights after 2011".

Notice of Decision

18. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

19. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss             5th November 2016

