
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07490/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 September 2013                           |On 30 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                            NADEZDA FAKHRUTDINOVA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:  Mr D O'Callaghan, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg
Pierce & Partners



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an oral determination.  Although  the  Secretary  of  State  is  the
appellant before me I will for  ease  of  reference  refer  to  her  as  the
respondent as she was the respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly  although
Ms Fakhrutdinova is the respondent I will refer to her as the  appellant  as
she  was the appellant before the First- Tier. The First-tier Judge  allowed
her appeal and the  Secretary of State appeals against that decision.

1.   The appellant  was born on 30 November 1983 and is Russian.   She  came
    to Britain in May  2003  for  a  work  placement  and  her  leave   was
    extended in that  capacity  until  June  2007.  She  then  received  an
    extension of stay until August 2008 as a student. In  August  2008  she
    married a British citizen, Mr Alex Evans,  and  applied  for  leave  to
    remain as a wife. That application was refused but when her appeal  was
    successful she was granted  36 months discretionary leave to remain.

2.   Her marriage broke down  because  of  domestic  violence.  Her  husband
    suffered from bipolar disorder. They were divorced in January 2012.  In
    April 2012 she applied for leave  to  remain.  It  is  clear  from  the
    application that what she was applying for was leave  to  remain  under
    the domestic violence provisions. That application was  refused  on  21
    February 2013 on human rights grounds.  I understand from  Mr  Saunders
    and Mr Callaghan that the reason that the application  was  refused  on
    human rights grounds rather than under the domestic violence provisions
    was because the Rules then granted leave to remain under  the  domestic
    violence provisions on the basis that an  applicant  had  been  granted
    leave to remain as a spouse for 27 months  whereas this  appellant  had
    been granted leave to remain for three years.

3.   The appellant appealed against the refusal and her appeal was heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Coutts on  16  July  2013.   He  heard
    evidence both from the appellant and from her  mother-in-law  and  from
    her employer.  He took into account details of  the  domestic  violence
    and the appellant's history here.   In  paragraph  16  onwards  of  the
    determination he set out his findings  and  reasons.   He  applied  the
    structured approach set out in the judgment of the House  of  Lords  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and accepted that it was  stated  when  he  dealt
    with the issue of proportionality that weight should be placed  on  the
    legitimate of the maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control.  He
    noted the arguments put forward by the Secretary of State.

4.   In paragraph 22 he stated that:


         "22. However I am not persuaded that this is a legitimate aim to be
             achieved here rather I am of the view that the legitimate  aim
             here is the  protection  of  women  who  are  the  victims  of
             domestic  violence.   Following  the  hearing  in   2009   the
             respondent granted  the  appellant  36  months'  discretionary
             leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a  spouse.   It  is
             incongruous and plainly wrong that having  done  so  that  the
             appellant should be placed in a worse  position  than  someone
             who was granted 27 months' leave or  less  and  who  would  be
             entitled  to  indefinite  leave  to  remain  once   they   had
             established domestic violence after that  time  free  to  live
             their life as they  wished  without  the  additional  upheaval
             burden of having to leave the United Kingdom.


         23.  The underlying purpose of the Immigration Rules is  to  ensure
             that victims of domestic violence are not faced with having to
             stay in  a  violent  and  abusive  relationship  in  order  to
             maintain their immigration status. That  is  now  the  settled
             position and in my  view  this  protection  should  have  been
             afforded to the appellant who suffered terribly at  the  hands
             of her husband and who  was  actually  granted  more  than  27
             months' leave by the respondent as a  spouse.   It  cannot  be
             said that  the  respondent  was  unaware  of  the  appellant's
             domestic situation because it was apparent at the time of  the
             2009 appeal hearing:  husband's mental health being a relevant
             factor why it was held that family life should  continue  here
             owing to his inability at that stage to relocate if  she  were
             removed.


         24.      In my view it is both unnecessary and disproportionate for
             the respondent to now say, once that relationship  has  broken
             down owing to domestic violence, that the appellant should  be
             granted no further leave and, if required, to leave the United
             Kingdom.  Whilst the breakdown of her marriage might have been
             anticipated, the effect upon her of  a  breakdown  could  have
             been and that, with due respect to the respondent, was why the
             Immigration Rules were drafted in order to afford  victims  of
             domestic violence a suitable protection; it is only right that
             the spirit of that protection should apply to the appellant."

5.   At the hearing before me Mr Saunders referred to the weight  which  the
    judge had put on the issue of legitimate expectation.  He  stated  that
    it appeared that the judge was really wanting the  Rules  to  be  other
    than they are (the reality, of course, is  that  the  Rules  themselves
    have now changed and would now, had the appellant applied  later,  have
    benefited her).

6.   Mr Saunders accepted the appellant's relationship with her  parents-in-
    law but stated that that did not meet the Kugathas test but was only an
    element of private life.  He indicated that he considered, or indeed it
    was argued in the  grounds,  that  inadequate  consideration  had  been
    placed on maintaining immigration control.

7.   It is my conclusion having read the  determination  that  in  fact  the
    judge did reach conclusions which were open to him.  He did  take  into
    account  the  legitimate  aim,  being  the  maintenance  of   effective
    immigration control, but weighed against that the terms of the domestic
    violence Rules.  He did not say that he was allowing the  human  rights
    appeal on the basis of the family life provisions but what he was doing
    was weighing up a large number of factors which he felt weighed in  the
    balance and  showed  that  the  removal  of  this  appellant  would  be
    disproportionate.

8.   That was a conclusion I consider which was open to  him.  The  Tribunal
    has been  repeatedly reminded by the Court of Appeal  in  a  number  of
    judgments, the central one of which I  consider  is  that  of  Mukarkar
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1045, that merely  because  a  judge  below  reaches  a
    conclusion which is different possibly from that of a judge in a higher
    court that is no reason to upset  the  decision  of  the  judge  below.
    Carnwath LJ  stated in his judgment  that "... the mere fact  that  one
    tribunal  has reached what  may seem to e an unusually  generous   view
    of the facts  of a particular case dos not mean  that it  has  made  an
    error  of law.."

9.   I place weight on the ratio in that judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal.
    I find no material error of law in the  decision of Judge Coutts and do
    not consider it appropriate to set aside the decision and therefore his
    decision allowing this appeal on human rights grounds shall stand.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

