
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07565/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 December 2016                           |On 23 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     H P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Shiraz Bhanji, Counsel instructed by Cranbrook
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND DIRECTIONS FOR REMITTAL


1.   The appellant, a citizen of India, challenges the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge N P Dickson dismissing her appeal  against  a
    decision made by the respondent on 3 February  2015  refusing  to  vary
    leave to remain and to remove her by way of directions.   This  was  in
    response to an application for ILR made by her on 24  October  2014  on
    the grounds of being the victim of domestic violence.  The respondent's
    refusal letter reviewed the evidence submitted by the  appellant  which
    included her own statement, a victim care card dated  5  October  2014,
    testimonials from friends and a psychological report dated  12  October
    2014 stating that the appellant was displaying symptoms of anxiety  and
    a co-morbid depression and that her symptoms had been precipitated by a
    difficult abusive marriage.  The respondent's letter stated:

     "Whilst you have submitted a  psychological  report  it  is  considered
         that in the  absence  of  further  corroborative  evidence,  police
         reports, MARAC [Multi-Agency Risk Assessment]  letters  or  letters
         from  a  domestic  violence  organisation  confirming  evidence  of
         domestic violence, it is not accepted that  your  relationship  was
         caused to permanently break down as a result of domestic violence."

2.   The respondent's refusal was principally under paragraph  289A  of  the
    Immigration Rules which provides:

         "289A. The requirements to be met by a person who is the victim  of
                domestic violence and who is  seeking  indefinite  leave  to
                remain in the United Kingdom are that:


               (i)    (a)  the applicant was last admitted to the UK for  a
                        period not exceeding 27 months in  accordance  with
                        sub-paragraph 282(a), 282(c), 295B(a) or 295B(c) of
                        these Rules; or


                  (b) the applicant was last granted leave to remain as the
                        spouse or civil partner  or  unmarried  partner  or
                        same-sex partner of a person present and settled in
                        the UK in accordance with paragraph 285 or 295E  of
                        these Rules, except where that leave extends  leave
                        originally granted to the applicant as the  partner
                        of a Relevant Points Based System Migrant; or


                  (c) the applicant was last granted leave to enable access
                        to  public  funds  pending  an  application   under
                        paragraph 289A and the preceding grant of leave was
                        given in accordance with paragraph 282(a),  282(c),
                        285, 295B(a),  295B(c)  or  295E  of  these  Rules,
                        except where that leave  extends  leave  originally
                        granted to  the  applicant  as  the  partner  of  a
                        Relevant Points Based System Migrant; and


                (ii)   the relationship with their spouse or  civil  partner
                    or   unmarried   partner   or   same-sex   partner,   as
                    appropriate, was subsisting at the beginning of the last
                    period of leave granted  in  accordance  with  paragraph
                    282(a), 282(c), 285, 295B(a), 295B(c) or 295E  of  these
                    Rules; and


                (iii)  is able to produce evidence  to  establish  that  the
                    relationship was caused to permanently break down before
                    the end of that period as a result of domestic violence;
                    and


                (iv)   DELETED


                (v)    DELETED".

3.   In his decision the FtT judge made a number of findings of  fact  which
    took the case in a somewhat different direction.  In particular at [40]
    he found that:

     -   the appellant's marriage had broken down and that her  husband  may
         have been responsible;

     -   he did not treat her well and may have insulted her;

     -   he also "forced her to have an abortion  which  would  have  had  a
         traumatic effect on the appellant";

     -   that the appellant had not suffered physical abuse.

4.   The FtT  judge  concluded  at  [46]  that:    "The  appellant  has  not
    established that her marriage  broke  down  as  a  result  of  domestic
    violence.  Any abuse that she received cannot fall within  the  meaning
    of domestic violence under the immigration rules."

5.   As regards the definition of domestic violence, it is settled law  that
    it is not necessary for such violence to be physical.  It can  also  be
    emotional.  The Home Office definition  in Guidance: Domestic  violence
    and abuse, 8 March 2016 is 'any incident or  pattern  of  incidents  of
    controlling, coercive, threatening behaviour, violence or abuse between
    those aged 16 or over who are,  or  have  been,  intimate  partners  or
    family members  regardless  of  gender  or  sexuality.  The  abuse  can
    encompass, but is not  limited  to:  psychological,  physical,  sexual,
    financial, emotional.' Despite noting at [38] that the  submission  was
    made to him that such violence  does  not  need  to  be  physical,  the
    judge's subsequent reasoning for finding there was no domestic violence
    can only be understood to rely on the  absence  of  physical  violence.
    That is because he accepts that  the  appellant  suffered  non-physical
    abuse.  Insofar as it could be suggested that the judge considered  the
    non-physical abuse to fall below the threshold  of  domestic  violence,
    (i) that was not stated in terms by the judge; (ii) some of the conduct
    of the husband accepted by  the  judge  clearly  did  fall  potentially
    within the ambit of the concept of domestic violence and to  cross  any
    necessary threshold, viz. coercing the appellant to have  an  abortion.
    Further, in assessing whether  there  was  domestic  violence,  it  was
    necessary for the judge to consider the various types of abuse accepted
    to have happened to her cumulatively.   Against  this  background,  the
    judge's findings at [46] that  "Any  abuse  she  received  cannot  fall
    within the meaning of domestic violence ..." denotes a clear  error  of
    law.

6.   As regards the issue of causation, it is difficult to follow  what  the
    judge's reasons were for his findings at [46] that the  appellant  "has
    not established that her marriage broke down as a  result  of  domestic
    violence".   Assuming  the  abuse  she  suffered  was   sufficient   to
    constitute domestic violence, then it was clearly capable of  having  a
    causative effect on the breakdown of the marriage.  There  was  medical
    evidence from Dr Halari which identified the cause of the breakdown  of
    the marriage as being caused by psychological abuse and  the  abortion,
    which her husband forced her to have.  Significantly, the judge nowhere
    states that he rejects Dr Halari's evidence.  If he intended to  reject
    it (as we must assume, to achieve consistency  with  his  conclusions),
    then it  was  incumbent  on  him  to  give  reasons.   If  the  judge's
    observation at [43]  was  intended  to  convey  a  rejection,  that  is
    problematic. The judge stated that:

         "43. While the abortion was a traumatic experience it  is  relevant
             that this occurred in 2010  and  on  23rd  February  2012  the
             Appellant submitted an application for leave to  remain  as  a
             spouse which was granted until 26th October 2014.  At the time
             of the  application  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  the
             Appellant was happy to continue living with her husband."

     However, paragraph 289 does not specify any  temporal  limitations  and
    the fact that a woman who has been  the  victim  of  domestic  violence
    chooses to continue living with her husband (and to go  on  to  make  a
    further application for leave to remain as a spouse) is  certainly  not
    per se proof of either happiness or lack of or a break  in,  causation.
    The fact that the medical report from Dr Halari was dated October  2014
    and that there was no more recent report is not  enough  in  itself  to
    explain why it was accorded no weight on the issue of causation,  since
    by October 2014 it would appear the marriage had  already  broken  down
    irretrievably.

7.   In my judgment the above errors on the part of the judge  constitute  a
    material error of law and necessitate that I set aside his decision.

8.   I would observe that my decision finding an error of law is not  to  be
    taken to indicate any particular view of the facts.  However,  whatever
    assessment is made must be one that takes into account the  appellant's
    account of the behaviour towards her not just of her  husband  and  his
    family (including the father-in-law's alleged inappropriate  behaviour)
    but also the behaviour of her own family.

9.   The above comment also stands as an explanation for why I have  decided
    to remit the case to the FtT.  The judge's errors appear to have arisen
    in part from a negative assessment of the  appellant's  credibility  in
    certain respects and that assessment  and  his  application  to  it  if
    incorrect legal criteria are inextricably  intertwined.   Hence  it  is
    impossible to preserve any of the judge's findings of fact.  To  ensure
    time is not wasted at the next hearing I  direct  that  the  respondent
    provide a statement to be sent to the appellant and her representatives
    and to the Tribunal at least 7 days before the hearing setting out what
    if anything she accepts as regards the appellant's adverse  experiences
    within her marriage.

10.  For the above reasons:

     The FtT judge materially erred in law and his decision is set aside.

     The case is remitted to the FtT to be heard by a judge other than  N  P
         Dickson.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date
              [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


