
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07482/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2015                           |On 12 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                 SAIF HASIB
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Acharjee, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

1.   I will refer the parties in this decision by their descriptions in  the
    First-tier Tribunal notwithstanding that their roles  are  reversed  in
    this Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is from Bangladesh and his date of birth  was  1  January
    1991. He entered the  UK  as  a  student.  The  respondent  refused  an
    application under the  points-based  scheme  but  it  was  subsequently
    renewed and, following  an  appeal  hearing  before  Judge  Elson  (the
    Immigration Judge)  on  12  September  2014,  the  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal of further leave to remain in the UK was  allowed.
    The reason for the Secretary of State's refusal was that the  appellant
    had not complied with the terms and conditions of his  entry  into  the
    UK. One such condition  was  introduced  by  Section  50  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  ("Section  50").  That  section
    allowed the Secretary of State to insert a condition  where  leave  had
    been given before the passing of that Act. One such condition  is  that
    an appellant is required  to  complete  his  studies  at  a  particular
    institution.  It appears that in this case the appellant  was  required
    to complete his studies at  Icon  College,  the  first  institution  he
    attended. It was a condition of his leave  to  enter  the  UK  that  he
    actually completed his course at that college.

The hearing

3.   According to Miss Isherwood who appeared  for  the  respondent  at  the
    Upper Tribunal hearing, the appellant only completed 6.9% of the  total
    available course work in Icon College. He was subsequently found to  be
    attending Ambassador College in apparent breach of  the  terms  of  his
    leave and that resulted ultimately in the curtailment of his leave.  No
    issue is taken before me over the validity or extent of the appellant's
    appeal rights. Therefore, I  will  assume  that  the  appeal  has  been
    validly brought.

4.   I considered this matter at a hearing on 22  December  2014,  at  which
    there was different representation for the  respondent.   I  considered
    that there was a material error of law but that it was  appropriate  to
    direct a further hearing at which proper analysis of the facts could be
    undertaken before the Tribunal ought to come to the conclusion that the
    studies that the appellant embarked on in Ambassador College  were  not
    in fact supplementary studies. The issue  before  me  is:  whether  the
    appellant is  in  breach  of  the  terms  of  the  sponsorship  licence
    requirements by effectively giving up his course at  Icon  College  and
    starting a course at Ambassador College?

5.   Although I allowed the parties to call any supplementary evidence  that
    was necessary to deal with any material developments since the original
    decision which might affect the ultimate outcome, they did not in  fact
    seek to do so.

6.   I have heard  submissions  by  both  representatives  at  the  convened
    hearing. Miss Isherwood explained the statutory background to me so  as
    to understand the context  of  Section  50.  She  said  that  where  an
    appellant wishes to change the course he is on he needs to make a fresh
    application. She referred me to the case of Bhimani [2014] UKUT 516,  a
    decision of Judge Allen in Upper  Tribunal.   That  case  supports  the
    proposition that she advances.

7.   In the light of the evidence that the appellant failed to complete  his
    course of study at the first institution, Icon  College,  and  evidence
    that he had in fact changed to  a different institution, undertaking an
    identical or very similar course, Miss Isherwood submitted that it  was
    quite clear that what had actually happened is that the  appellant  was
    not embarking on supplementary studies, as permitted by the  terms  and
    conditions of his licence, but had actually embarked on a  totally  new
    course for which he would have to make a fresh application.

8.   In support of the appellant's case  Mr  Acharjee  referred  me  to  the
    guidance that the respondent had issued. He pointed  out  that  it  was
    wider than the Rules appeared to suggest. Therefore,  he  pointed  out,
    the supplementary course may  be  embarked  on  without  the  need  for
    permission from a Tier 4 Sponsor.  The only limitation,  he  said,  was
    that the supplementary course did not in any way hinder an  appellant's
    studies on the main course.

9.   Following the above submissions the question before the Upper  Tribunal
    may be summarised as: whether the course that the appellant  signed  up
    to at the Ambassador College was supplementary to his  course  at  Icon
    College or had it in fact become his main course?

10.  Mr Acharjee also referred me to the favourable credibility findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and said that they were  sustainable.  However,
    as I had pointed out in  my  earlier  decision,  I  do  not  intend  to
    interfere with the fact findings of the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions

11.  Having carefully considered the matter I have  concluded  that  Section
    50 places a prohibition on the appellant  embarking  on  a  replacement
    course of study without making a fresh application.  That is clear from
    the section itself and  from  the  case  of  Bahimi  to  which  I  have
    referred.

12.  It is unfortunate that the appellant finds himself  in  this  position,
    possibly through no fault  of  his  own.  However,  he  obtained  entry
    clearance for a particular course.  The only way he  can  change  to  a
    different course is to make a fresh application.   The  first  college,
    Icon College, seems may have withdrawn sponsorship in this case and the
    appellant did not inform the Secretary of State or make  the  necessary
    application before embarking on a very  similar  course  at  Ambassador
    College. I find undertaking this second course to be a  breach  of  the
    requirements of his leave in that it could not clearly be  said  to  be
    supplementary to the original course.

Notice of Decision

13.  Following my finding that  the  First-tier  decision  made  a  material
    error of law, following the convened hearing, I have decided  that  the
    decision of the Secretary of State was lawful.

14.  Accordingly the respondent's appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision is allowed and I remake the decision which is to reinstate the
    Secretary of State's decision to dismiss the appeal.

15.  There was  no  application  for  a  fee  award  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I make no fee award.



Signed        Date 26 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

