

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
  Number: IA/07145/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |        Decision and Reasons         |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 13 January 2016                       |        On 2 February 2016           |
|                                         |                                     |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant




                                   And




                  MR WAWALA AKIKARAMGE DINENDRA ANAWARATNE

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Nasim of Counsel instructed by Chris Raja,
Solicitors.




                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This appeal has been brought by the Secretary of State (referred to  as
  the appellant in this determination) against the decision  of  the  First
  Tier Tribunal Judge Lal who following a hearing of the appeal at Richmond
  on 14 July 2015 allowed the appeal of the respondent, a national  of  Sri
  Lanka against the appellant's decision of 15 February 2015  refusing  him
  leave to remain on human rights ground.

2.   It is worthy of note that the Secretary of State  was  not  represented
  before the First Tier Tribunal. The same Counsel who appeared  before  me
  represented the  appellant.  Judge  Lal  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
  respondent and two witnesses who supported his appeal. Judge Lal said  in
  Paragraph 13 of his determination that he "accepts the Appellant and  his
  witnesses to be credible and the chronology is not in dispute."  He  then
  states his findings of facts  and  his  reasons  for  the  conclusion  he
  reached allowing the appeal.

3.  The  Secretary  of  State  (appellant  in  these  proceedings  )  sought
  permission to appeal against the decision of  Judge  asserting  that  the
  Judge had given weight to immaterial  matters,  he  had  failed  to  give
  adequate reasons on material matters  - Circumstances in  Sri  Lanka  and
  lastly that the Judge had failed to give  adequate  reasons  on  material
  matters - Article 8.

4.    Judge Colyer, a Judge of the First Tier Tribunal  gave  permission  to
  appeal for the reasons given in his decision of 28  October  2015.  After
  reciting  the  three  grounds  upon  which  the  appellant  was   seeking
  permission to appeal, Judge Colyer, somewhat unhelpfully  states  in  the
  last paragraph of his decision, "It is  arguable  the  judge  misdirected
  himself for the above reasons and the grounds submitted by the respondent
  are arguable. Permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  granted."
  Although the decision granting permission to appeal fails to address  the
  criteria for grant in that it neither addresses itself to what  error  of
  law stated in the grounds he found  to  be  arguable  as  establishing  a
  material error of law nor does it give any sound  reasons  for  grant  of
  permission.  However  Mr  Naseem  did  not  address  this  point  in  his
  submissions before me.

5.    It is also interesting that the appellant states  in  her  grounds  of
  appeal that the Judge has  erred  in  not  considering  the  decision  in
  Bensaid v UK [2001] ECHR 82. Having herself been absent from the hearing,
  it is somewhat ingenious to be critical  of  the  Judge  for  not  having
  considered something that he could not be expected to consider as in  any
  event the decision had limited value to the facts of the case before him.
  In the appellant's letter of 3  February  2015  giving  reasons  for  the
  decision to refuse and consisting of ten pages, the appellant has made no
  mention of the decision in Bensaid  but  has  referred  to  a  number  of
  decisions which she thought assisted her in the decision  to  refuse  the
  application. Judge Colyer mentions the case of Bensaid but does not state
  how the ratio decidendi could have arguably made a material difference to
  the outcome of the appeal.

6.  At the hearing before me I heard submissions  fro  m  Mr  Duffy  and  Mr
  Nasim. Mr Duffy said that although he relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal
  that enabled him to come before the Upper Tribunal,  there  was  only  on
  reason that he wished to focus on - that being that the decision  of  the
  Judge was inadequately reasoned. Mr Duffy argued that the Judge had  paid
  no regard to the Secretary of State's guidance on family or private life,
  drawing my particular attention to paragraph 18.  He  submitted  that  by
  failing to address what would happen if he were allowed to stay in the UK
  as far as reliance on public funds for the treatment was  concerned,  the
  Judge had made a material error of law. He argued that the conclusion  of
  the Judge did not  demonstrate  that  he  had  carried  out  a  balancing
  exercise between the rights of the appellant and those of the  public  at
  large. He conceded that if he had done so the outcome could have been the
  same but it could equally have gone the other way.

7.  Mr Nasim drew  my  attention  to  absence  of  representation  from  the
  Secretary of State at the First Tier Tribunal hearing.  He  also  pointed
  out tat none of the assertions made in the grounds of appeal to the Upper
  Tribunal had the appellant challenged or cast doubts  on  the  clear  and
  positive credibility findings made by Judge Lal. He  went  on  to  submit
  that neither the written grounds of appeal nor the oral submissions  made
  by her representative at the hearing even remotely established a material
  error of law in the decision made by Judge Lal. The Judge,  in  his  view
  had appraised all the relevant evidence and had given weight to  all  the
  elements in the evidence within the limits permitted  in  law.  Mr  Nasim
  drew attention to pages 39, 40, 44 and 45 of the report  from  Ms  Noble,
  which the Judge had carefully and meticulously appraised in paragraphs 13
  and 14 of his determination. He argued that the Judge had been  perfectly
  correct in law in the findings of fact that he made. The  Judge  mentions
  the evidence of Dr Simon Eccles in paragraph 20 of the determination.  He
  also noted that the treatment received by the respondent from  Dr  Eccles
  was free and that the respondent was living with his cousin who  supports
  him financially. Mr Nasim also pointed out that in the letter of  reasons
  for the  decision,  the  appellant  had  not  raised  the  issue  of  the
  consequences to the public purse where he allowed  to  remain.  Mr  Nasim
  asked that the appeal be dismissed.

8.    In his brief closing submission Mr Duffy repeated that Judge  Lal  had
  failed to carry out the  balancing  exercise  and  for  that  reason  his
  decision should be set aside.

9.    I have given careful  consideration  to  all  the  relevant  documents
  including the reasons for refusal, the determination of  the  First  Tier
  Tribunal, the grounds upon which permission was  sought  and  granted  as
  well as the oral submissions from Mr Duffy and Mr Nasim. As Judge  Colyer
  stated in his decision giving permission to appeal,  "Permission  may  be
  granted if I am satisfied that there may be a material error of law  that
  may have made a material  difference  to  the  outcome  of  the  original
  appeal. This could be due to adverse or irrational findings or a lack  of
  findings on core issues as established in the case of  R  (Iran  etc.)  v
  SSHD [2005] EWCA civ 982", I  respectfully  agree.  In  my  judgment  the
  findings made by Judge Lal are  neither  unreasonable  nor  perverse  and
  indeed it is not stated by the Secretary of State to be the  case.  I  am
  satisfied that the Judge looked at  all  the  evidence  and  applied  the
  correct criteria in drawing his conclusions that the appellant  qualifies
  to remain in the UK under the Immigration Rules as well as under  Article
  8 of the ECHR. Judge Lal referred to the five step approach  enjoined  by
  Lord Bingham in R v (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27  in  paragraph  17  of
  his determination. He found that "there would be significant obstacles to
  the Appellant reintegration back into Sri Lanka" and that finding of  his
  was well supported by the evidence presented to him. The Judge found that
  "he has no real ties with Sri Lanka as  he  has  now  been  out  of  that
  country for  13  years  and  that  because  of  the  particular  physical
  manifestation of his condition and length of time he has  been  away,  he
  effectively has no family ties either. The Tribunal ah no reason to doubt
  his evidence of social ostracisation in Sri Lanka even with  his  family.
  The Judge found the evidence of  three  witnesses  "to  be  credible  and
  compelling".

10.     I dismiss this appeal and for reasons given above  the  decision  of
    Judge Lal must stand.








      K Drabu CBE
      Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
      23 January 2016

