
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07441/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 06 January 2016                   |On 21 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SHAHIN SHAMS
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Behbahani, of Behbahani & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of Judge
       of the First-tier Tribunal Symes who, on 24 July  2015,  allowed  the
       appeal of Mr Shahin Shams against the Secretary of  State's  decision
       of 09 February 2015 to revoke his Indefinite Leave to Remain.





Background

    2. Mr Shams is a citizen of Iran whose date of birth is 01 May 1980.  He
       arrived in the United Kingdom on 03 April 1998 with  his  mother  and
       brother. Following an asylum claim by  his  mother  the  family  were
       recognised as refugees and were granted Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain
       (ILR) on 04 June 2001.

    3. On 21 September 2007 Mr Shams  was  convicted  of  kidnapping,  false
       imprisonment and possession of a prohibited weapon.  On  06  December
       2007 he was sentenced to  a  total  of  12  years  imprisonment.  The
       sentencing Judge also recommended him for deportation. On 12 February
       and 22 November 2008  the  Secretary  of  State  wrote  to  Mr  Shams
       indicating that she was considering deportation action  against  him.
       Mr Sham's previous solicitors made representations to  the  Secretary
       of State as to why he should not be deported (these  related  to  his
       own and his family's political activities  and  the  consequent  risk
       that his deportation  to  Iran  would  expose  him  to  ill-treatment
       sufficiently serious to breach Article 3 ECHR).

    4. On 04 July 2014 the Secretary of State  wrote  three  letters  to  Mr
       Shams informing him  that  deportation  action  would  not  be  taken
       against him in this instance, that his refugee status was  not  going
       to be withdrawn, but that it was intended to revoke his ILR.

    5. Mr Shams' previous solicitors responded  to  this  letter  by  making
       further  representations  on  21  July  2014.  These  representations
       contended, inter alia, that revocation ought not to occur as Mr Shams
       had not committed any further offence, that  he  had  taken  positive
       steps to maintain a lawful presence in the United Kingdom and was not
       at risk of future misconduct, and that the revocation would cause him
       'extreme difficulties' in finding employment and in 'finding a  place
       in  society'.  No  particulars  were  provided.  In  an  accompanying
       statement dated 08 July 2014 Mr Shams indicated that  he  built  good
       relationships with respectable friends and with the local  community.
       He indicated that, because of the expiry of his travel document while
       in prison, he encountered great  difficulty  in  finding  a  job.  No
       further details of this difficulty were provided. He  indicated  that
       he continued to attend training courses and was trying to  work  with
       the probation services to find employment. He then indicated that  he
       was in the process of setting up his own building company.  Mr  Shams
       stated, without giving particulars, that if his ILR were revoked this
       would hold him back from developing the life and positive  future  he
       was  working  so  hard  to  build.  The  representations  were   also
       accompanied  by  reference  letters  from  a  number  of  individuals
       including a case manager with Working Links (an organisation  helping
       ex-offenders), a friend who was soon to start a solicitors'  training
       contract, and someone who was described in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       determination as his former chemistry teacher.

    6. On 14 August 2014 Mr Shams was notified of the  possible  application
       of section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       which operated a presumption that, as he was sentenced to  More  than
       two years imprisonment, he  had  been  convicted  of  a  particularly
       serious crime and therefore  constituted  a  danger  to  the  public.
       Further representations from his previous solicitors  contended  that
       Mr Shams had obtained his CSCS card for construction and had obtained
       a Level 1 certificate in Electrical  Installation  and  had  attended
       mentoring  training.  It  was  claimed  that  the  probation  service
       significantly decreased his risk of re-offending  since  his  release
       from prison. A request was made for the Secretary of  State  to  make
       inquiries with the probation service and to note Mr Shams'  progress.



    7.  The  revocation  letter  of  09   February   2015   referenced   the
       recommendation for deportation made by the sentencing  judge  and  Mr
       Shams previous convictions and cautions for possession of  controlled
       drugs. The letter noted that, while Mr Shams' removal to  Iran  could
       lead to a potential breach of Article 3, he was still someone  liable
       to deportation.  The  letter  referenced  the  Secretary  of  State's
       earlier letter confirming that Ms Shams' refugee status was not being
       withdrawn. The revocation letter then considered whether the  section
       72 presumption applied to Mr Shams. The Secretary of State noted  the
       seriousness of Mr Shams' offending. The Secretary of State was of the
       view that Mr Shams posed a danger to the community in  light  of  the
       seriousness of his offending, the recommendation for deportation made
       by the sentencing judge, the absence of evidence of his attendance on
       victim awareness courses and Mr Sham's alleged lack of remorse. There
       was also said to be a lack of evidence that  Mr  Shams  had  actually
       followed up on his mentoring courses.

    8. In a witness statement prepared for the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal
       hearing Mr Shams indicated that he was remorseful and that he had not
       committed any further offences  and  had  not  been  in  any  further
       trouble with the police. He confirmed  that  he  had  approached  his
       probation officer to ask for a risk assessment report  but  was  told
       that one could only be provided on request by the  Home  Office.  The
       Home Office had ignored letters written by  his  solicitors  to  make
       such a request. Mr Shams  reiterated  that  he  was  facing  'immense
       difficulties' given that his residence permit and travel document had
       not been returned to him by the Home Office. He was  unable  to  seek
       employment or any form of official status in  the  absence  of  these
       documents. He claimed it was 'almost impossible' to seek to secure  a
       positive and settled future if his status were revoked  and  he  were
       instead given  temporary  residence.  No  further  clarification  was
       provided in respect of this last assertion.

The First-tier Tribunal hearing and decision

    9. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the Judge was  provided
       with further documents including a letter from the Secretary of State
       to the London Probation Service dated 31 March 2015 stating  that  Mr
       Shams' case was being reviewed, noting that he had been  assessed  at
       MAPPA category 2, level 1, and inquiring as to whether he  was  still
       at the same level.

   10. Mr Shams gave oral evidence at his hearing which  was  summarised  by
       the Judge at paragraph 16 of his determination. In his oral  evidence
       Mr Shams stated, inter alia, that it was very hard for  him  to  live
       without identification and he was unable to participate  in  everyday
       life. Submissions were made by both representatives  as  recorded  in
       paragraphs 17 and 18 of the determination.

   11. Having accurately set out the relevant provisions of sections 72  and
       76 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  the  Judge
       indicated that the  'broad  question'  before  him  was  whether  the
       revocation of  Mr  Shams'  ILR  was  conducive  to  the  public  good
       (paragraph 25). This question had to be considered, according to  the
       Judge, within the context of section 72 as the Secretary of State had
       put her case firmly in  reliance  on  this  section  in  her  reasons
       letter. The Judge noted, with reference to EN (Serbia) EWCA Civ  630,
       that any "danger to the community" within the terms of section 72 had
       to be 'real', but that if a person was convicted  of  a  particularly
       serious crime and there was a  real  risk  of  its  repetition,  that
       person was likely to pose a danger to the community.

   12. The Judge proceeded to consider the evidence before  him.  The  Judge
       deduced that an earlier  NOMS1  report  categorized  Mr  Shams  as  a
       violent offender but his level  1  status  meant  that  he  had  been
       assessed as not posing  a  high  risk  of  serious  harm.  The  Judge
       accepted that Mr  Shams'  solicitors  had  repeatedly  requested  the
       Secretary of State to obtain  an  updated  risk  assessment  and  was
       critical of the Secretary of State for failing to  do  so  (paragraph
       27). The Judge proceeded to consider the evidence before him relating
       to  Mr  Shams'  rehabilitation  including  the  character  references
       (paragraph 28). On the basis of this  evidence  the  Judge  found  Mr
       Shams had real prospects of finding work. The Judge noted the absence
       of any positive evidence that Mr Shams now  posed  any  risk  of  re-
       offending and rejected the Secretary of  State's  assertion  that  Mr
       Shams failed to show remorse (paragraph 29). Having  regard  to  this
       evidence the Judge found there was no real risk of the repetition  of
       Mr Shams' offending and concluded that  Mr  Shams  had  rebutted  the
       presumption that he posed a danger to the community.

   13. The Judge then considered whether the revocation of the ILR would  be
       conducive to the public good (paragraph 30). The Judge found that the
       revocation was not conducive to the  public  good  as  Mr  Shams  was
       "likely to continue to form closer links with  the  community  around
       him so will not find himself in a situation where he  consumes  drugs
       or socialises with those now who are criminally inclined,  which  are
       the only circumstances in which he might foreseeably reoffend."

   14. At paragraph 31 the Judge concluded that the less  stable  Mr  Shams'
       Leave To Remain, the more difficult it would be for  him  to  provide
       adequate assurance to employers and others that he is  present  on  a
       long-term basis. The Judge took into account public interest  factors
       other than risk of re-offending  (paragraph  31)  and  accepted  that
       those interested were relevant (paragraph 32). The Judge  found  that
       rehabilitation attracted  a  greater  significance  in  circumstances
       where an individual could not be  deported  for  legal  reasons.  The
       Judge found, were  Mr  Shams  to  face  "...  a  more  uncertain  and
       extended, indeed indefinite, period without settled status,  than  he
       has done so far, it is possible that he would no longer  be  able  to
       maintain the fortitude he has shown  so  far."  The  Judge  found  it
       'obvious' that Mr Shams rehabilitation  would  be  promoted  by  full
       participation in the community, and that it was not only Mr Shams but
       the broader community who would lose out if he were again "driven  by
       circumstances to the fringes of  society."  Noting  that  the  public
       policy  position  struck  in  the  reasons  letter  accompanying  the
       decision was predicated on a finding that Mr Shams posed a danger  to
       the community the  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  because  he  did  not
       consider that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  established  that  the
       revocation would be conducive to the  public  good  and  allowed  the
       appeal as the decision "was not in accordance with the  Human  Rights
       Convention."

The Grounds of Appeal

   15. The Grounds of Appeal contended that the Judge misdirected himself in
       law as the only thing he needed to consider was whether Mr Shams  was
       liable for deportation and the legal  reasons  for  being  unable  to
       deport him. It was submitted that the Judge  misdirected  himself  by
       looking at the public interest when considering whether the Secretary
       of State had made out her case under section 76. The Grounds  further
       contended that the Judge's  consideration  as  to  whether  Mr  Shams
       constituted a risk to the community was irrelevant for the purpose of
       the question section 76 posed.  The Secretary of State's reference in
       the reasons letter only added to the legal reasons as to why Mr Shams
       was not being deported rather  than  rendering  him  not  liable  for
       deportation. The section 72 certificate did not materially affect the
       outcome. The Grounds additionally argued that the Judge was  not,  in
       any event, entitled to find that Mr Shams did not pose  a  danger  to
       the community as he failed to properly assess  the  severity  of  the
       sentence in light of the statutory presumption and he applied a  test
       drawn from EN (Serbia) when the Court of Appeal had not set  out  any
       particular test. It was finally submitted that the  Judge  took  into
       account irrelevant factors such as the difficulties  Mr  Shams  would
       encounter in providing adequate assurance to  employers  that  he  is
       present on a long-term basis. This was said  to  be  irrelevant  when
       considered against  the  available  grounds  in  section  84  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Criticism was also made
       of the absence of reasons given by the Judge as to why  the  decision
       was not in accordance with the Human Rights Convention.

Submissions at the Hearing

   16. Mr Kandola adopted the Grounds and sought to amplify them. The  issue
       of whether Mr Shams constituted a danger to the community  under  the
       presumption in section 72 entailed,  it  was  submitted,  a  separate
       assessment from that under section 76 of the same Act. In response to
       my comment that, if the determination were to be read in the  context
       of the impact of the revocation on Mr Shams' Article 8 rights,  there
       was  no  reference  to  sections  117A  to  B  of  the   Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, Mr Kandola submitted that there  was
       no adequate assessment of the actual impact on Mr Shams' private life
       and the Judge was not entitled to speculate that Mr  Shams  would  be
       'driven' to the fringes of society.

   17. Mr Behbahani accepted that the structure of the determination  caused
       him problems as the Judge failed to  evaluate  his  factual  findings
       within the framework established by Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. The  Judge
       had nevertheless considered all that he needed to do.  The  Secretary
       of State's consideration of the public interest was  heavily  fuelled
       by the section 72 considerations. It could not therefore be said that
       the section 72 consideration was irrelevant. It was  highly  relevant
       when considering whether Mr Shams'  presence  was  conducive  to  the
       public good. It was submitted that the Judge's consideration in  this
       regard was not irrational. It was further submitted  that  the  Judge
       had properly  considered  the  consequences  of  revocation.  It  was
       submitted that an employer would be 'put off' by someone who only had
       limited leave.

Discussion

   18. The decision that is the subject  of  this  appeal  was  taken  under
       section 76 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This
       reads, in material part,

           'The Secretary of State may revoke a person's  indefinite  leave
           to enter or remain in the United Kingdom if the person -

             a) is liable to deportation, but

             b) cannot be deported for legal reasons.'

   19. Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 reads,
       again in material part,

           '(1)   This section applies for the purpose of the  construction
           and application of  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention
           (exclusion from protection).

           (2)    A person shall be presumed to have been  convicted  by  a
           final judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute
           a danger to the community of the United Kingdom if he is -

                (a)    convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

                (b)    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two
                years'

   20. Subsection 6 of section 72 states that a presumption  that  a  person
       constitutes a "danger to the community" is rebuttable by that person.
       The Court of Appeal in EN (Serbia) v Secretary of State for the  Home
       Department & Anor [2009] EWCA Civ 630 held[1] that the danger to  the
       community under section 72 must be 'real'.

   21. Also of some relevance is section 3(6) of the Immigration  Act  1971.
       This states that "a person who is not a British citizen shall also be
       liable to deportation from  the  United  Kingdom  if,  after  he  has
       attained the age of seventeen, he is  convicted  of  an  offence  for
       which he is punishable with imprisonment and  on  his  conviction  is
       recommended for deportation by a court empowered by this  Act  to  do
       so."

   22.  The  Grounds  of  Appeal  appear  to  argue  that  public   interest
       considerations are not relevant when assessing the decision to revoke
       an individual's ILR under section 76 of  the  2002  Act.  The  Ground
       contend that all the Judge needed to do was to  consider  whether  Mr
       Shams was liable for deportation and look at the legal reasons as  to
       why he cannot be deported. The grounds claim that consideration as to
       whether an individual  constitutes  a  danger  to  the  community  is
       irrelevant when assessing whether a decision taken under  section  76
       is lawful.

   23. I cannot accept this contention. The revocation of ILR  is,  for  the
       purposes of this appeal, an immigration decision under  s82(2)(f)  of
       the 2002 Act. At the date that the Secretary  of  State's  revocation
       decision was made it could be appealed under the grounds set  out  in
       section 84 of  the  2002  Act.  One  of  these  grounds,  at  section
       84(1)(c), is that the decision is unlawful under  section  6  of  the
       Human Rights Act 1998 as  being  incompatible  with  an  individual's
       Convention rights. An individual's private life under  Article  8  is
       one of the protected Convention rights. Article 8 is not  however  an
       absolute right. An interference with Article 8 can be  justified  if,
       inter  alia,  the  interference   is   proportionate   in   all   the
       circumstances. An assessment  of  proportionality  is  essentially  a
       balancing exercise where  the  impact  of  the  interference  on  the
       individual is weighed against the societal interest. This  being  the
       case, an assessment of all relevant public  interest  considerations,
       including the risk of harm that an individual poses  to  the  public,
       are highly relevant when considering the  lawfulness  of  a  decision
       taken under section 76.  The  requirement  to  take  account  of  all
       relevant  considerations  is  not   abrogated   merely   because   an
       individual's presence is regarded, by operation of  statute,  as  not
       being conducive to the public good. The question  whether  revocation
       of an individual's ILR is conducive to the public good is a  separate
       and distinct question.

   24. The determination does not identify Mr Sham's Article 8 private  life
       as being the ECHR right in play. This is an unfortunate omission. The
       Judge should have clearly identified what human rights were at  issue
       given that he allowed the appeal on the basis that the  decision  was
       not in accordance with the Human Rights Convention. The Judge  should
       have  also  clearly  structured  his  determination  to  reflect  the
       assessment he was required to undertake in line with  the  principles
       enunciated in Razgar. It is however tolerably clear  that  the  Judge
       had in mind Mr Shams' private life rights.  In  light  of  the  above
       assessment I find that the question whether the  revocation  decision
       breaches Mr Shams' Article 8 private  life  does,  to  a  significant
       extent, depend on whether he constitutes a danger  to  the  community
       because that is precisely what the Secretary of State, in her reasons
       letter, identified the principle public interest to be.

   25. I can detect no unlawfulness in the Judge's  finding  that  Mr  Shams
       rebutted the presumption that he poses a danger to the community. The
       Judge took into account the NOMS1 findings  and  properly  noted  the
       absence of any positive evidence that Mr Shams now poses any risk  of
       re-offending. For the reasons given the Judge was entitled to  reject
       the Secretary of State's assertion  that  Mr  Shams  failed  to  show
       remorse. Having given rational reasons for so  doing  the  Judge  was
       entitled to attach  the  weight  he  did  to  the  various  character
       references before him as well as  Mr  Shams'  oral  evidence.  It  is
       apparent from a holistic reading of the determination that the  Judge
       had regard to Mr Shams' conduct since his release from  custody,  and
       that he was acutely aware of the nature and seriousness of Mr  Shams'
       offending and the views of the sentencing Judge. While the Judge  may
       have been generous in his assessment it cannot be said that he failed
       to take account of any relevant considerations, or that  he  attached
       weight to irrelevant factors, or that his reasons were unclear or his
       conclusion one not within the range or reasonable conclusions open to
       him.

   26. Having found that the Judge was entitled to conclude, on the evidence
       before him, that Mr Shams did not pose a danger to the community,  it
       is now necessary to consider whether,  in  accordance  the  remaining
       grounds, the Judge's overall Article 8  conclusion  was  one  he  was
       entitled to reach.

   27. At paragraph 30 the Judge found that the revocation was not conducive
       to the public good as Mr Shams was "likely to continue to form closer
       links with the community around him so will not  find  himself  in  a
       situation where he consumes drugs or socialises with  those  now  who
       are criminally inclined, which are the only circumstances in which he
       might foreseeably reoffend."

   28. It is difficult to ascertain  from  the  Judge's  reasoning  how  the
       revocation of ILR would prevent Mr  Shams  from  continuing  to  form
       closer links with the community. He will still have lawful  residence
       in the United Kingdom, albeit limited to 6 months with the likelihood
       of renewal, and he would still be entitled  to  work.  There  was  no
       evidence before the Judge that the grant of limited leave  to  remain
       would lead to Mr Shams  finding  himself  back  with  the  criminally
       inclined.  There  was  no  other  identified   barrier   that   could
       conceivably prevent  Mr  Shams  from  establishing  closer  community
       links.

   29. I additionally find that there has been insufficient analysis of  the
       consequences and impact on Mr  Shams  of  the  provision  of  rolling
       grants of limited leave to remain (which would follow the  revocation
       of his ILR). While it has been recognised that the cumulative  effect
       of the restrictions on a person with six months leave can affect that
       individual's private life (R (C) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
       Department [2008] EWHC 2448 (Admin); Boroumand, R (on the application
       of) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2010]  EWHC  225
       (Admin)), the relevant cases do not indicate that  the  operation  of
       the system in general amounts to a disproportionate interference with
       an individual's private life.

   30. In Boroumand the Administrative Court held, (at [85]):

           "In principle, if the Secretary of State is entitled not to give
           a  person  humanitarian  protection  because  that  person   has
           committed  a  serious  crime  it  is  neither   irrational   nor
           disproportionate to limit the normal period of leave. Mr Southey
           accepted for the purpose of this  case  that  there  is  nothing
           incompatible with Article 8 in granting leave for periods of six
           months  provided,  however,  that  applications  are  determined
           promptly. That is clearly correct. As HHJ Jarman  QC  stated  in
           C's case:

                "... where, as here, the  claimant  has  committed  what  is
                undoubtedly a serious  offence,  has  been  the  subject  of
                deportation and the only reason he has not been deported  is
                the very commission of that offence, it is proportionate  to
                adopt and implement a policy of giving  discretionary  leave
                to remain for periods of six months in order to  review  not
                only the claimant's conditions but also  the  conditions  in
                the country to  which  deportation  might  be  sought."  (at
                [39])"

   31. I find further that the decision lacks any satisfactory assessment as
       to the degree of difficulty Mr Shams claims  he  would  encounter  in
       finding employment.  The evidence before the Judge suggested Mr Shams
       wished to become self-employed and had taken steps to  establish  his
       own company. If so, it is difficult to see  how  having  time-limited
       leave to remain would materially impact on his  ability  to  maintain
       his self-employment. Nor is there any satisfactory assessment  as  to
       why Mr Shams would be unable to obtain work as an employee. Any grant
       of limited leave to  remain  would  be  accompanied  by  a  condition
       entitling him to employment. Mr  Shams  produced  no  independent  or
       reliable evidence that he had, or would be refused employment as  the
       beneficiary of time limited leave. His concerns, as expressed in  his
       statement, relating to his inability to seek employment or a form  of
       official status, was occasioned by the absence of a residence  permit
       or travel document, not by the duration of any leave granted to him.

   32. Mr Shams has not otherwise identified how his private  life  has,  or
       will be, affected by the revocation decision. There was  no  evidence
       and no suggestion that Mr Shams' mental state would be  so  adversely
       affected by the revocation of his ILR and  the  subsequent  grant  of
       time limited leave such as to invoke his private life rights (in line
       with Bensaid v. United Kingdom (application 44599/98).

   33. Whilst I accept in principle the First-tier Tribunal Judge's comments
       that the issue of rehabilitation bears more  heavily  when  assessing
       the lawfulness of a revocation decision, I am not satisfied there was
       a sufficient evidential basis before the Judge such as to entitle him
       to find that Mr Shams would be unable to maintain  the  fortitude  he
       has thus far shown should his ILR be revoked. There was  no  evidence
       to support the highly speculative finding  that  Mr  Shams  would  be
       "driven by circumstances to the fringes of society". The  Judge  also
       engaged in an unwarranted degree of speculation when he found that it
       would be difficult for Mr Shams  to  provide  adequate  assurance  to
       employers and others that he is present on a long-term  basis.  There
       was  no  evidence  that  any  such  difficulties  that  may   present
       themselves would prevent Mr  Shams  from  becoming  self-employed  or
       obtaining employment. As has already been stated, the only difficulty
       in obtaining employment  identified  by  Mr  Shams  in  his  evidence
       stemmed from the absence of his residence  permit,  which  was  being
       held by the Secretary of State. But the grants of limited leave would
       be evidenced in suitable documentation indicating his entitlement  to
       work.

   34. I am satisfied that the Judge's conclusions in respect of the  impact
       of the revocation of ILR and the likely  subsequent  grant  of  time-
       limited leave to remain marred by unsupported speculation and without
       support in the evidence before him.  I  consequently  find  that  the
       Judge has materially erred in law.

   35. Pursuant to section 12(2) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement
       Act 2007 I set aside the decision. I must either remit the case  back
       to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  remake  the  decision  myself.  Mr
       Behbahani submitted that, in the event that  I  identify  a  material
       error of law, I should relist the appeal to enable  further  evidence
       to be provided in respect of Mr Shams' private  life.  I  decline  to
       follow  that  suggestion.  Mr  Shams,   and   certainly   his   legal
       representatives, should have been fully aware of the issues  at  play
       in  the  appeal  against  the  section  76  decision.  Mr  Shams  had
       sufficient opportunity to produce all material evidence at his appeal
       before the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Behbahani did  not  identify  what
       type of further evidence could be provided. In these circumstances  I
       deem it appropriate to remake the  decision  based  on  the  evidence
       before the First-tier Tribunal and the First-tier Tribunal's  factual
       findings.

   36. Following my assessment of the First-tier Tribunal's errors  of  law,
       and in particular, the absence of any satisfactory evidence  that  Mr
       Shams' ability to obtain employment or become self-employed would  be
       significantly inhibited by the revocation of his ILR and the grant of
       time-limited leave renewable at 6 monthly intervals, I  am  satisfied
       that the decision does not constitute a disproportionate breach  with
       his  private  life  rights.  In  reaching  this  conclusion  I   have
       considered the seriousness of  his  offending  as  disclosed  in  the
       overall sentence of 12 years imprisonment. I take  into  account  the
       First-tier Tribunal's finding that he does not constitute a danger to
       the community, the various character references, and the finding that
       he has real prospects of finding work. I also take into  account  the
       greater emphasis that can legitimately be  placed  on  the  issue  of
       rehabilitation. I take specific account of the factors identified  in
       sections 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,
       and note Mr Shams proficiency in English and the evidence  suggesting
       he is capable of being financially independent. I  am  not  satisfied
       however that there is a sufficient basis to indicate  that  Mr  Shams
       will feel himself so much more alienated  from  society  that  he  is
       'compelled to the fringes'. I also take into account the  fact  that,
       by operation of statue, his presence is not conducive to  the  public
       good, and, as stated by the First-tier Tribunal, the need to reassure
       the public that action will be  taken  in  appropriate  circumstances
       where a person has failed to respect the  law.   Having  weighed  all
       these factors in the balance I find that the revocation decision does
       not constitute a disproportionate interference with Mr Shams' private
       life.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law.
I remake the decision, dismissing Mr Shams' appeal on human rights  grounds.


No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]    19 January 2016
Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

-----------------------
[1] At [45]


