
S-T
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07177/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 16 January 2015                   |On 21 January 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          JORGE GONCALVES DA SILVA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Allan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The respondent to this appeal, Mr Goncalves Da Silva, is a citizen of
       Brazil born on 1 October 1962. The  appellant  is  the  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department, who has appealed with  the  permission
       of the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of a  panel  comprising
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McWilliam and Judge  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Bartlett,  allowing  Mr  Goncalves  Da  Silva's  appeal
       against the decision to remove him  to  Brazil,  having  refused  his
       application for a  variation  of  leave  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
       Immigration Rules, HC395.


    2. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as they were before the
       First-tier Tribunal. I shall therefore refer to Mr Goncalves Da Silva
       from now on as "the appellant" and the Secretary  of  State  as  "the
       respondent".


    3. I was not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.


    4. The appellant came to the UK in 2007 as a  visitor  and  subsequently
       claimed asylum. His application was refused  and  in  due  course  he
       became an overstayer. He was removed on 5 August 2010. He returned to
       the UK on 19 May 2011 and was detained. He made  an  application  for
       leave on  human  rights  grounds,  which  was  refused.  However,  he
       successfully appealed that decision to the First-tier  Tribunal.  The
       respondent then granted the appellant limited leave to remain from  3
       April 2012 until 3 October 2012. The decision now appealed arose from
       the appellant's application for further leave, which was  refused  on
       16 January 2014.


    5. The First-tier Tribunal identified three reasons for refusal:


       (i)    The presence of the appellant was not conducive to the  public
           good;
       (ii)   The appellant had not declared  all  his  convictions  in  the
           application form; and
       (iii)   The  appellant  had  not  satisfied  the   English   language
           requirement of the rules.


    6. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from  the  appellant  and  his
       wife, Mrs Adeola Da Silva, and also from PC Dollery, who was attached
       to Operation Nexus at New Scotland Yard. PC Dollery gave evidence  as
       to the appellant's convictions, which are listed in paragraph  10  of
       the determination. They are (a) possession of  a  bladed  Article  in
       2008, (b) criminal damage in 2012, (c) battery in May 2013,  and  (d)
       burglary in September 2013. She also gave evidence of the appellant's
       non-convictions history, which is set out  in  paragraph  11  of  the
       determination. The First-tier Tribunal considered  medical  evidence,
       described in paragraphs 31 and 32 of the determination, to the effect
       that the appellant had an established diagnosis of  severe,  enduring
       mental illness, namely F250 schizophrenic  disorder  manic  type  for
       which he was treated with antipsychotic depot injections every month.
       He had had at least four admissions to hospital. He was incapable  of
       taking an English language test.


    7. The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  the  appellant  and  Mrs  Da  Silva
       credible. The appellant had significant  mental  health  difficulties
       and these were the primary cause of his offending behaviour. Further,
       at the time of his offending, his health was  not  properly  managed.
       Since November 2013 he  had  received  his  medication  by  means  of
       injections and he was closely monitored. With this support  in  place
       plus the support of his wife, the risk of the appellant  re-offending
       was low. All but one of the appellant's convictions involved  Mrs  Da
       Silva rather than the public at large and she supported  his  appeal.
       The first-tier Tribunal found that it had not been  established  that
       the appellant's presence in the UKI was not conducive to  the  public
       good and allowed the appeal with respect to paragraphs S-LTR.1.5  and
       1.6 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.


    8.  On whether the appellant had failed to disclose  material  facts  in
       his application form, namely some of his convictions, the  First-tier
       Tribunal noted he had  disclosed  his  most  serious  conviction  and
       omitted the least serious one. They accepted there was no  dishonesty
       or intention  to  mislead  and  found  discretion  should  have  been
       exercised in his favour. The panel also found  the  appellant  had  a
       mental health condition which prevented him from meeting the  English
       language requirements of the rules. The Immigration Rules were met.


    9. The First-tier Tribunal found, in the alternative, that the  decision
       was not in accordance with Article 8.


   10. The  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  argue  the  First-tier
       Tribunal misdirected itself in law by failing to give the appellant's
       offending and the public interest in  his  removal  due  weight.  The
       grounds also argued the panel had erred in relation to Article 8.


   11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Andrew.


   12. The appellant is not legally represented and did not file a response.


   13. The  appellant  attended  the  hearing  with  his  wife.  As  he  was
       unrepresented, I explained to him the issues  for  decision  and  the
       procedure to be followed.


   14. I heard submissions as to whether the First-tier Tribunal had made  a
       material error of law. Mr Allan's submissions can  be  summarised  as
       follows. His first submission was that  the  Tribunal  had  erred  in
       making its findings under paragraph S-LTR.1.5. It  was  not  disputed
       that  the  appellant  had  committed  serious  offences  and  it  was
       erroneous to say that serious harm had not been caused. The appellant
       had repeatedly offended in a violent manner.  His  second  submission
       was that paragraph 48 of the Tribunal's decision contained a  factual
       error. In noting the appellant had not offended since June 2013  they
       had overlooked the fact he was only released from prison in September
       2013. Thirdly, the Tribunal had not  engaged  sufficiently  with  the
       separate  point  as  to  whether  paragraph  S-LTR.1.6  applied.  The
       Tribunal should have taken into account the fact the appellant had re-
       entered the country illegally.


   15. Mr Allan's fourth submission was  that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  its
       application of paragraph S-LTR.2.1 because the appellant  had  failed
       to disclose a material fact and whether that was dishonest or not did
       not come into it. If there was  discretion  to  be  reviewed  by  the
       Tribunal, its decision was not  sufficiently  reasoned.  Finally,  Mr
       Allan argued there was an important factual error in  the  Tribunal's
       consideration of Article 8 in paragraph 57 of its  determination.  In
       October 2008 the appellant was in the UK unlawfully.


   16. I have recorded the appellant's reply and also  the  observations  of
       Mrs Da Silva in the record of proceedings. Mrs Da Silva became  quite
       emotional. Mr Allan said the  Tribunal  had  fallen  into  error  and
       effectively excused the appellant's serious offending.


   17. I find  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
       decision. My reasons for this conclusion are as follows. They  follow
       the five arguments pursued by Mr Allan.


   18. Paragraphs S-LTR.1.5 and 1.6 read as follows:


           "S-LTR.1.5. The presence of the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
           conducive to the  public  good  because,  in  the  view  of  the
           Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious  harm  or
           they are a persistent offender who shows a particular  disregard
           for the law.

           S-LTR.1.6. The presence of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
           conducive to the public good because  their  conduct  (including
           convictions which do not fall within  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.3.  to
           1.5.),  character,  associations,  or  other  reasons,  make  it
           undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK."

   19. A careful reading of the whole of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
       leaves no  room  for  doubt  that  the  panel  fully  considered  the
       appellant's  criminal  record,  as  well  as  the  additional  "nexus
       evidence" called from PC Dollery. The Tribunal reminded  itself  this
       was not a deportation appeal but an appeal against the refusal of  an
       extension of leave to remain with a spouse. It was  significant  that
       the appellant was not a "foreign criminal",  as  defined  in  the  UK
       Borders Act 2007.


   20. The panel was aware of the earlier decision of Judge  Blair-Gould  in
       2012 which noted the appellant's conviction in 2008 of possession  of
       an offensive weapon. The appellant pleaded guilty in the Magistrates'
       Court and he was sentenced to  a  hospital  order  under  the  Mental
       Health Act 1983. Indeed, Judge  Blair-Gould's  decision  contained  a
       detailed account of the appellant's tendency towards violent  conduct
       in the context of his mental health problems. He  also  concluded  in
       paragraph 113 that the principal cause of the  appellant's  behaviour
       was his mental illness and, as long as he remained  at  liberty  with
       his (now) wife he would be likely to continue to take his  medication
       and there would be a considerably reduced risk of any repetition.


   21. The First-tier Tribunal chaired by Judge McWilliam was aware that the
       appellant had  three  further  convictions  after  Judge  Blair-Gould
       allowed his appeal. It directed itself correctly that Parliament  had
       not decided the appellant's removal was conducive to the public  good
       and it was therefore a matter for  the  panel  to  decide.  Mr  Allan
       challenged the panel's finding that the appellant's offending had not
       caused serious harm (see paragraph 47). He described  its  conclusion
       as "fundamentally flawed" because the panel had not taken  sufficient
       account of the public interest in removal. However,  I  find  it  was
       open to the panel to reach the conclusion which it  reached  in  this
       respect and its conclusion is adequately reasoned.


   22. The panel noted the relatively lenient sentences imposed and the fact
       that all but one of the convictions related to the appellant's  wife.
       Mr Allan is right that the fact Mrs Da Silva has forgiven her husband
       is not the issue because an objective assessment of serious harm must
       be made. However, what the panel was saying was that the  appellant's
       offending was confined to the domestic situation  and  his  offending
       was not therefore directly causing  harm  to  the  wider  public.  Mr
       Allan's argument that the harm is caused by  the  criminality  itself
       cannot  be  right.  The  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  look   at   the
       circumstances of the offences and the sentences imposed in  order  to
       make its own assessment.


   23. Mr Allan also challenged the panel's alternative conclusion that  the
       appellant was not  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a  particular
       disregard for the law (see paragraph 48). In this regard the Tribunal
       based its decision on the fact the appellant had not  offended  since
       June 2013. Mr Allan argued  this  conclusion  was  erroneous  on  two
       grounds. Firstly, he said there was an  error  of  fact  because  the
       Tribunal had overlooked the fact the appellant was not been  released
       from prison until September 2013. However, the  panel  had  noted  in
       paragraph 42 that the appellant was not released  from  prison  until
       September 2013, since when  there  had  been  no  further  offending.
       Furthermore, the appellant had resumed living with Mrs  Da  Silva  in
       January 2014. I see no error on the Tribunal's part.


   24. Secondly, Mr Allan argued the appellant was a persistent offender and
       the Tribunal's decision was not sufficiently reasoned. However, I  do
       not think the panel's conclusion on this was  unreasoned,  irrational
       or based on any misapprehension of the facts. It  took  into  account
       Judge Blair-Gould's decision and the events which  followed.  It  did
       not  diminish  the  importance  of  the  offences  committed  by  the
       appellant. It noted the timing of the offences. It  was  entitled  to
       place weight on the expert opinion of  the  appellant's  psychiatrist
       and also the evidence of Mrs Da Silva to the effect  the  appellant's
       condition was now far better managed.


   25. Mr Allan was unhappy with the  Tribunal's  record  that  he  did  not
       specifically refer to paragraph S-LTR.1.6 in his submissions. He said
       he had submitted that it  was  not  necessary  to  rely  strongly  on
       paragraph S-LTR.1.6 because the appellant's appeal  must  fail  under
       paragraphs S-LTR.1.5 and 2.2. He had expressly relied on the  reasons
       for refusal letter, which did refer to paragraph S-LTR.1.6.


   26. Paragraph S-LTR.1.6 is plainly designed to catch some persons who  do
       not  fall  into  paragraph  S-LTR.1.5  because  of   their   conduct,
       character, associations or other reasons. As noted, the  panel  heard
       "nexus evidence" from  PC  Dollery.  The  panel's  consideration,  at
       paragraph 50, was limited to noting the appellant was not part  of  a
       criminal gang.


   27. Mr Allan argued that such consideration  was  inadequate  because  it
       ignored other  factors.  The  other  factor  he  identified  was  the
       appellant's "illegal entry" in 2011.  He argued this did  not  appear
       in the Tribunal's reasoning.


   28. I find the Tribunal was entitled  to  regard  the  respondent's  case
       under paragraph 1.6 as secondary to its primary  challenge  based  on
       paragraph 1.5. The only reason given in the refusal  letter  on  this
       point was that the appellant had been  convicted  of  three  offences
       between September 2012 and June 2013 which  had  resulted  in  prison
       sentences and  harm  to  another  person.  These  issues  were  fully
       considered.  Rightly,  the  Tribunal  then  focused  on  whether  the
       evidence showed the appellant had undesirable associations, which  is
       often disclosed in "nexus evidence". The evidence did  not  show  the
       appellant was associated with a criminal gang.


   29. It  is  clearly  the  case  that  the  Tribunal  had  regard  to  the
       appellant's entry in May 2013, specifically noting that Judge  Blair-
       Gould  had  made  an  adverse  finding  in  this  respect  and,  more
       importantly,  setting  out  the  evidence  of  the  circumstances  in
       paragraph 23.  The appellant and Mrs Da Silva returned to the UK from
       Brazil and the appellant had not secured entry clearance, as  he  was
       required to do, with the result he was detained on  arrival.  He  was
       not an "illegal entrant".  Judge  Blair-Gould  had  been  hearing  an
       appeal against a decision to refuse to  grant  him  leave  to  enter.
       Following that appeal, the appellant was granted a period  of  leave.
       The Tribunal chaired by Judge McWilliam was hearing an appeal against
       a decision to refuse to vary leave and to remove under section 47  of
       the 2006 Act. I do not agree with Mr Allan that the Tribunal erred by
       overlooking this matter.


   30. I now turn to Mr Allan's fourth challenge. Paragraphs  S-LTR.2.1  and
       2.2 of the rules read as follows:


           "S-LTR.2.1. The applicant will normally be refused on grounds of
           suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.2.2. to 2.4. apply.

           S-LTR.2.2. Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -

           (a) false information, representations or  documents  have  been
           submitted  in  relation  to  the  application  (including  false
           information submitted to any person to obtain a document used in
           support of the application); or

           (b) there has been a  failure  to  disclose  material  facts  in
           relation to the application."

   31. The appellant submitted his application on 31 December 2012 at  which
       time he had two convictions. The  refusal  letter  recorded  that  he
       disclosed the earlier one in June 2007 but he failed to disclose  the
       conviction for criminal damage on 25 September 2012 for which he  was
       fined. The First-tier Tribunal  found  he  had  therefore  failed  to
       disclose  material  facts  in  relation  to  his  application   under
       paragraph S-LTR.2.2(b). No discrete issue  arose  under  subparagraph
       (a). Paragraph S-LTR.2.1 shows that discretion must be  exercised  in
       reaching a decision on this ground and the Tribunal was  entitled  to
       exercise that discretion itself.


   32. Mr  Allan's  argument  was  that  the  Tribunals'  decision  was  not
       sufficiently reasoned or clear. I disagree. The Tribunal was entitled
       to find there was no dishonesty or intention to deceive and that  the
       appellant had disclosed the more serious offence. The  decision  must
       be read as a whole and  it  is  clear  the  Tribunal  considered  the
       appellant's criminality should be viewed firmly in the context of his
       mental health problems. The Tribunal gave sufficient  reasons,  based
       on the evidence, for its  decision  to  exercise  discretion  in  the
       appellant's favour.


   33. Mr  Allan's  final  argument  concerned  the  Tribunal's  finding  in
       paragraph 57 that the appellant had been in the UK unlawfully when he
       started his relationship with  Mrs  Da  Silva.  It  is  not  strictly
       necessary to see whether the Tribunal's conclusions on Article 8 were
       vitiated by any error of law because I have found its findings  under
       the rules were sound. In any event, I do not see any  material  error
       in the wording of paragraph 57. In October 2008 the appellant was  an
       asylum seeker. As such had he not established  any  right  to  remain
       here but neither could he be  removed  pending  the  outcome  of  his
       application. The Tribunal correctly noted his status might well  have
       been "precarious".


   34. The First-tier Tribunal's decision does  not  disclose  any  material
       error of law and shall stand.


NOTICE OF DECISION

       The First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error on a  point  of
       law and its decision allowing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules
       shall stand.


       No anonymity direction has been made.






                               Signed   Date 19 January 2015


                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal
