

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/07686/2014
                                                               IA/07538/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 5th August 2015                         |On 14th August 2015        |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         ROGER MIGUELA URENA FLOREZ
                          ANA ISOBELLA URENA FLOREZ
                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr B Ali, solicitor Advocate, instructed by Kilic &
Kilic, solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of the Appellants. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings  this  appeal,  but
in order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to  as  they  were  in
the First Tier Tribunal. This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
against the decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge Iqbal  promulgated  on  13
April 2015 which dismissed both appellants' appeals  under  the  Immigration
Rules but allowed the appellants' appeals on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


Background

3     Both appellants are nationals of Venezuela. The  first  appellant  was
born on 2 September 2002. The second appellant was born on  30  March  2007.
Both appellants  entered  the  UK  as  visitors.  Their  parents  remain  in
Venezuela. They live with their grandmother in the UK. On 13  January  2012,
the first appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain  as  a  dependent
relative of his grandmother. That application  was  refused  on  22  October
2012. However, the first appellant was granted leave to remain  outside  the
Rules until 22 April 2013, specifically to facilitate arrangements  for  the
first appellant's return to Venezuela.

4     The second appellant entered the UK as  a  visitor.  She  applied  for
indefinite leave to remain on 10 August 2012 as the  dependant  relative  of
her grandmother (who lives in the UK). That application was  refused  on  29
May 2013 but she too was granted leave to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
Rules until 28 November 2013 to  allow  arrangements  to  be  made  for  her
return to Venezuela.

5     On 12 April 2013, the first appellant made a further  application  for
leave to remain in the UK. On 25 November 2013, the second appellant made  a
further application for leave to remain in the UK.  Both  applications  were
refused by the respondent on 30 January 2014.

The Judge's Decision

6     The appellants both appealed to the First Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Iqbal ("the judge") dismissed the appellants'  appeals  under
the Immigration Rules but allowed both  appellants'  appeals  on  Article  8
ECHR grounds (outwith the Immigration Rules).

7     Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  16  June  2015,  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Reid granted permission to appeal, stating inter alia:


           "It is arguable that at [37] and [38], the judge  did  not  give
           adequate  reasons  for  her   findings   in   respect   of   the
           grandmother's evidence  relating  to  the  appellants'  father's
           imprisonment and  their  mother's  illness  given  the  lack  of
           reliable documentary evidence. Moreover, it is arguable that  in
           the Section 117B assessment,  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
           account the extent to which the appellant's had already been  in
           receipt of an education in the UK at public expense."


The Hearing

8     Mr Avery submitted that the judge gave inadequate reasons  to  support
a finding that the appellants' grandmother was a credible witness  and  that
there is an inconsistency in the judge's  findings  in  fact,  which  should
have prevented the judge from finding the appellant's grandmother  to  be  a
credible or reliable witness. That (he said) amounts to a fundamental  flaw.
The second ground argued by Mr  Avery  was  that  the  judge's  approach  to
Section 117B of the 2002 Act was an inadequate balancing exercise  and  that
there are insufficient findings  in  fact  to  demonstrate  that  a  correct
assessment of proportionality has been carried out.

9     Mr Ali, Counsel for both appellants, submitted  that  credibility  was
an issue for the judge at first  instance  and  that  the  first  ground  of
appeal,  the  respondent  was  simply  trying  to  re-litigate  because  the
respondent was dissatisfied with the conclusion reached  by  the  judge.  Mr
Ali's position is that there are adequate findings  in  fact  and  that  the
conclusions reached by the  judge  are  supported  by  the  evidence  placed
before the  judge,  that  the  judge's  findings  are  fact  based  on  that
evidence. Mr Ali took me through the determination  paragraph  by  paragraph
and argued that a careful assessment of  proportionality  had  been  carried
out, with the necessary Section 117B  exercise  a  prominent  part  of  that
assessment.

Analysis

10    The respondent's first challenge is to credibility. The judge  clearly
found that the appellants' grandmother was a  credible  witness  and  placed
reliance on  the  evidence  of  the  appellants'  grandmother.  The  judge's
findings in fact  are  not  clearly  set  out  but  they  are  contained  in
fragments of [37], [38], [40], [41] and [44]. In the final phrase  of  [37],
the judge says "...I believe the evidence  in  relation  to  the  background
which has led the children to be in the UK". The  judge  commences  [37]  by
stating that  she  finds  the  appellant's  grandmother  to  be  a  credible
witness.

11    It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration  Judge  to  give
too little weight or too much weight to a factor,  unless  irrationality  is
alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to  deal
with every factual issue under argument. Disagreement with  an  Immigrations
Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence or assessment  of
credibility, or his evaluation of risk does not give rise  to  an  error  of
law.

12. Credibility assessments by first instance fact  finding  Tribunals  will
normally be challengeable only on the basis of irrationality: Edwards - v  -
Bairstow [1956] AC 14. Credibility is  a  matter  for  the  judge  at  first
instance.

13    The second ground of appeal is that the judge did not  properly  apply
the provisions of Section 117B of the 2002 Act. It is argued  that  failings
there taint the decision  in  relation  to  proportionality.  In  short,  an
inadequate balancing exercise has been carried out.

14    The judge rehearses the provisions of Section 117B of the 2002 Act  at
[42] and at [43]. The judge finds the decision to  be  disproportionate  but
the judge does not  set  out  a  reason  for  finding  the  decision  to  be
disproportionate. In [44], the judge refers to two of  the  sub-sections  of
Section 117B and draws the conclusion  that  because  the  appellants'  have
financial  support  from  the  sponsor  (their  maternal  uncle)  they   are
financially independent.

15    I find that the proportionality  exercise  and  the  consideration  of
Section 117B of the 2002 are inadequate.  The  reasoning  at  [44]  contains
flawed logic. Both appellants are young children. They are  not  financially
independent.  The  judge  has  taken  account  of  the  sponsor's  financial
independence rather than the financial independence of  the  appellants.  It
is  the  financial  independence  of  the   appellants   which   falls   for
consideration in terms of Section  117(3).  The  judge's  findings  in  fact
indicate that the appellant are not financially independent.

16.   I therefore find that the decision is tainted by a material  error  of
law and must be set aside.

The Facts

17    The facts of the case are that the appellants both entered the  UK  as
visitors. They were brought to  the  UK  by  the  sponsor  (the  appellants'
grandmother) when the sponsor discovered that they were being cared  for  by
a neighbour because  their  father  was  imprisoned  and  their  mother  was
struggling to cope.

18    Since arriving in the UK, the appellants have been cared for by  their
grandmother. The respondent has granted discretionary  leave  to  remain  to
enable them to return to Venezuela and a family decision has been  made  not
to return the appellants to Venezuela, but  to  make  repeated  applications
for leave to remain in the UK.

19    Both children now  attend  school  in  the  UK.  Both  children  speak
English. Neither of the appellants have been adopted by  their  grandmother.
The children have been entrusted to their grandmother.

20    The appellants live  with  the  sponsor  in  a  three  bedroom  rented
property. The sponsor is in employment and receives council tax benefit  and
working tax credit. The sponsor has indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

Analysis

21    No challenge is taken  to  the  finding  that  the  appellants  cannot
succeed in terms of the Immigration Rules. For the sake of  completeness,  I
note that because the  appellants'  parents  are  both  in  Venezuela,  they
cannot fulfil the requirements of Appendix FM.

22    The  appellants  cannot  meet  Paragraph  276ADE(iii),  (iv)  and  (v)
because of their ages and because of the length of time they  have  been  in
the UK. They cannot meet Paragraph 276ADE(vi) because (as  the  decision  in
this case was 30 January 2014) they have not lost all ties to their  country
of origin.

23. I am mindful of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
Act 2009, and the case of ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.

24    The appellants live with their grandmother, but their grandmother  has
not adopted them. Their parents remain in Venezuela and they were cared  for
in Venezuela after their father's imprisonment. It  is  not  suggested  that
there are inadequate care facilities or reception  facilities  for  children
in Venezuela.

25     The  determinative  issue  in  this  case  is  the  consideration  of
proportionality  weighed  against  the  principles  of  Section  117B.   The
starting point is that the maintenance of  fair  and  effective  immigration
control is in the public interest. Neither of the appellants are  qualifying
children, so that Section 117B(6) does not apply.

26     Taking  account  of  the  appellants'  immigration   history,   their
immigration status is quite clearly precarious. Each of the appellants  were
granted limited leave to remain for a specific purpose. The purpose was  not
fulfilled because those caring for the appellants did not take advantage  of
the opportunity presented. Throughout the time they have  been  here  (since
22 April 2013 for the first appellant and 28 November 2013  for  the  second
appellant) their stay in the UK  has  been  in  the  shadow  of  uncertainty
because initially, they were awaiting for  their  application  to  be  dealt
with, then their application was refused, and  since  then  they  have  been
engaged in the appeals process.

27    The appellants both speak English. Section  117B(2)  weighs  in  their
favour; but neither of the appellants are  financially  independent  and  as
the respondent argues at appeal, they have  benefitted  from  education  and
health care in the UK. Section 117B(3) weighs against the appellants.

28    Sections 117B(1), (3) and  (5)  weigh  against  the  appellants.  Only
Section 117B(2) is in  their  favour.  Sections  117B(4)  and  (6)  are  not
relevant to these appeals.

29    There are therefore more matters weighing against the appellants  than
in their favour. The respondent's decision must therefore be  proportionate.


Decision

30    The decision of the First Tier Tribunal Judge promulgated on 13  April
2015 is tainted by a material error of law and must be set aside.

31    I remake the decision and substitute the following decision.

32    The appeals are dismissed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.





Signed                                                              Date 7
August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

