

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/07635/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 July 2015                      |On 15 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKIC
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                              MRS ELSA McCRORY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Joshi, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier  Tribunal.  We  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Brazil.  She appeals under regulation
         26 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
         ("the EEA regulations") against  the  respondent's  decision  dated
         28th January 2014 refusing to issue her a  residence  card  as  the
         family  member  of  her  EEA  sponsor,  Mr  Patrick  McCrory  ("the
         sponsor").  The sponsor is a dual British/Irish national.

      2. The appellant entered the UK on 6th April 2011 with 6 months' leave
         to enter.  On 13th December 2011, she was granted 6 months' further
         leave.  On 3rd March 2012, she applied for a residence card as  the
         family member of the sponsor ("the first application").  The  first
         application was not decided by the respondent until 13th March 2013
         ("the first decision").  The first application was refused  as  the
         respondent was not satisfied  that  the  sponsor  was  a  qualified
         person because he had failed to provide sufficient evidence that he
         was actively trading as a self-employed person.  Meanwhile, on 19th
         June 2012, the  respondent  amended  the  EEA  Regulations  by  The
         Immigration (European Economic Area) (Amendment)  Regulations  2012
         ("the amending order").  The effect of  the  amending  order  which
         impacted on the appellant was that an EEA national was redefined to
         exclude a person who was also a  UK  national  (paragraph  1(d)  of
         Schedule 1).  The amending order, though, contained, at Schedule 3,
         transitional provisions to which we return below ("the transitional
         provisions").

      3. The appellant did not appeal the first decision even though she was
         given  the  opportunity  to  do  so.   Instead,  she  made  another
         application on 20th May  2013  ("the  second  application").   That
         application  was  refused  on  28th  January  2014   ("the   second
         decision").  The second decision is the subject of this appeal  but
         the timing of the first decision continues to have relevance to the
         appeal for reasons which we set out below.

      4. The appellant's appeal was dismissed by First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Hollingworth in a Decision promulgated on 9th  October  2014.   The
         appellant sought permission to appeal on two grounds: -

             Ground 1

             The respondent's failure to make a decision on the application
             for a residence card within the 6 months prescribed by the EEA
             regulations rendered the  second  decision  unlawful  and  the
             Judge erred by failing to find that the decision  was  not  in
             accordance with the law (paragraph 17 of the Decision);

             Ground 2

             The  appellant  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the  transitional
             provisions so that the respondent was wrong to find  that  she
             could not  succeed  under  the  EEA  regulations  because  her
             sponsor was a dual national who was no longer recognised as an
             EEA national by the date of the second decision (paragraphs 22-
             33 of the Decision).

      5. Permission to appeal was granted by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Pickup on 17th February 2015 on Ground 2; permission was refused on
         Ground 1 on the basis that it was of little merit.   The  appellant
         did not pursue Ground 1 further.  A rule 24 response was  submitted
         by the respondent on 4th March 2015 accepting  that  there  was  an
         error of law in the Judge's Decision as the Judge had  applied  the
         wrong subparagraph of the transitional provisions.  The  respondent
         submitted however that the error was  not  material  as  the  Judge
         would  have  dismissed  the  appeal   by   applying   a   different
         subparagraph of the transitional provisions.

      6. The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal to determine whether the
         First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law
         so that it should be set aside.

    The transitional provisions

      7. The relevant paragraphs of the amending order are as follows:-

             Commencement

               2. (1)  Subject to paragraph (2) these Regulations will  come
                  into force on 16th July 2012

                  (2)  Paragraph 1(d) of Schedule  1  to  these  Regulations
                  will come into force on 16th October 2012

             Amendment  of  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
             Regulations 2006

             3.  The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
                  are amended as set out in Schedule 1

             Consequential amendments and transitional provisions

             4.  Schedule  2  (consequential  amendments)  and  Schedule  3
                  (transitional provisions) have effect.

             SCHEDULE 1

             Regulation 2 (general interpretation)

             In regulation 2(1) -

                  ...

               d) in the definition of "EEA national" after "a  national  of
                  an EEA State" insert "who is not  also  a  United  Kingdom
                  national"

                  ...

             SCHEDULE 3

             Transitional Provisions

             Amendments to the definition of EEA national

             2.  (1)   Where the right of  a  family  member  ("F")  to  be
                  admitted to, or reside in, the United Kingdom pursuant  to
                  the 2006 Regulations depends on the  fact  that  a  person
                  ("P") is an EEA  national,  P  will,  notwithstanding  the
                  effect  of  paragraph  1(d)  of  Schedule   1   to   these
                  Regulations, continue to be regarded as  an  EEA  national
                  for the purpose of the 2006 Regulations where the criteria
                  in subparagraph (2), (3) or (4) are met and for as long as
                  they remain satisfied in accordance with subparagraph (5).

                  ...

               3) The criteria in this subparagraph are met where F -

                        a) was on the 16th July 2012 a person with  a  right
                           to reside in the United Kingdom  under  the  2006
                           Regulations; and

                        b) on the 16th October 2012 -

                            i) held a  valid  registration  certificate  or
                               residence  card  issued   under   the   2006
                               Regulations;

                           ii) had  made  an  application  under  the  2006
                               Regulations for a  registration  certificate
                               or  residence  card  which  had   not   been
                               determined; or

                          iii) had  made  an  application  under  the  2006
                               Regulations for a  registration  certificate
                               or residence card which had been refused and
                               in  respect  of  which   an   appeal   under
                               regulation 26 could  be  brought  while  the
                               appellant   is   in   the   United   Kingdom
                               (excluding the possibility of an appeal  out
                               of time  with  permission)  or  was  pending
                               (within the meaning of section  104  of  the
                               Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum   Act
                               2002)

                  ...

                  (5)  Where met, the criteria in subparagraph (2), (3)  and
                      (4) remain satisfied  until  the  occurrence  of  the
                      earliest of the following events -

                      (a)   the date six months after an EEA family  permit
                           has been issued if F has not within  that  period
                           been admitted to the United Kingdom;

                      (b)   the date on which an appeal against a  decision
                           referred to in subparagraph (3)(b)(iii) or (4)(b)
                           can  no   longer   be   brought   (ignoring   the
                           possibility  of  an  appeal  out  of  time   with
                           permission)  where  no  such  appeal   has   been
                           brought;

                      (c)   the date on which any appeal against a decision
                           referred to in subparagraph 3(b)(iii)  or  (4)(b)
                           is  finally  determined,  is  withdrawn   or   is
                           abandoned (within the meaning of section  104  of
                           the 2002 Act) (save  where  the  outcome  of  the
                           appeal process is that the document  in  question
                           falls to be granted;

                      (d)   the date on which F ceases  to  be  the  family
                           member of an EEA national; or

                      (e)    the  date  on  which  a  right  of   permanent
                           residence  under  regulation  15  of   the   2006
                           Regulations is lost in accordance with regulation
                           15(2) of those Regulations

      8. It appears that the purpose of the transitional  provisions  is  to
         allow a person who is a family member of a person who would, before
         the changes, have fallen within the definition of an  EEA  national
         to have the opportunity to preserve  that  status  and  not  to  be
         refused a further residence  card  on  the  ground  that  the  dual
         citizen is no longer to be treated as an EEA national.   As  stated
         in  the  Explanatory  Notes,  the  purpose  of   the   transitional
         provisions is "to address the position of persons who have acted in
         reliance  on  the  previous  definition".  To  benefit   from   the
         transitional provisions, the family member must have the  right  to
         reside under the EEA regulations as at 16th July 2012 when the  EEA
         regulations were amended and continue to be able to rely  on  their
         status as the family member of the dual national  at  16th  October
         2012.  The issue of when the transitional provisions cease to apply
         (sub-paragraph 2(5) of Schedule 3) is at the heart of this appeal.

    Submissions

      9. There is a substantial agreement between the parties on  the  issue
         which we  are  required  to  determine.   It  is  accepted  by  the
         respondent that the transitional provisions applied  to  the  first
         application and first decision directly.  It is accepted  that  the
         relevant criteria in sub-paragraph 2(3)(a) and (b) applied  to  the
         appellant as at 16th July 2012 and 16th October 2012  respectively.
         It is agreed that  the  appellant  fell  specifically  within  sub-
         paragraph  2(3)(b)(ii)  as,  on  16th  October  2012,   the   first
         application had been made and the first decision was not made until
         13th March 2013.  It is accepted that sub-paragraph 2(3)(b)(ii)  is
         an alternative to sub-paragraph 2(3)(b)(iii) at least so far as the
         specific  criteria  in  that  sub-paragraph  apply.    It  is  also
         accepted  by  the  respondent  that  the  issue  of   whether   the
         transitional provisions apply  continues  to  be  relevant  to  the
         appeal against the second decision notwithstanding the transitional
         provisions cannot, on any view, apply to the second application and
         second decision directly.

     10. Where the parties diverge is in  relation  to  which  of  the  sub-
         paragraphs apply in relation to the cessation of  the  transitional
         provisions  (sub-paragraph  2(5)  of  Schedule  3).   As  noted  at
         paragraph [5] above, the respondent accepts  that  the  Judge  fell
         into error when noting at [32]  that  the  transitional  provisions
         ceased to apply when the appeal  against  the  first  decision  was
         determined so that sub-paragraph 2(5)(c) operated to  bring  to  an
         end the appellant's reliance on the transitional provisions.  It is
         common ground that the appellant did not appeal the first decision.
         The respondent submits however that sub-paragraph 2(5)(b)  operated
         to bring the appellant within the transitional provisions once time
         had expired for the bringing of an in-time appeal.   On  any  view,
         that was before the making of the second decision  and  the  appeal
         against that decision so that the error of law was not material.

     11. Ms Joshi for  the  appellant  submits  that  neither  sub-paragraph
         2(5)(b) or 2(5)(c) (on which the Judge had relied) applied so  that
         the earliest event which could occur to suspend  the  operation  of
         the transitional provisions was the appellant  ceasing  to  be  the
         family member of the sponsor.  That had not occurred at the time of
         the second application and therefore the appellant was entitled  to
         rely on her relationship with the sponsor who would continue to  be
         an EEA national for the purposes of the  EEA  regulations  (as  the
         transitional provisions would  continue  to  apply).   She  submits
         therefore that the respondent could not refuse to issue a residence
         card on the basis that the sponsor was no longer  an  EEA  national
         for the purposes of the EEA regulations.  The Judge  had  therefore
         materially erred in law in dismissing the appeal on the basis  that
         the transitional provisions ceased to apply.

     12. Ms Joshi's submissions as to why sub-paragraph 2(5)(b) and  2(5)(c)
         cannot apply can be shortly stated.  She  draws  attention  to  the
         reference in those sub-paragraphs to the words "a decision referred
         to in sub-paragraph 3(b)(iii)".  On that basis, she submits that it
         is only where an applicant fell within sub-paragraph  3(b)(iii)  as
         at 16th October 2012 that the transitional provisions  would  cease
         to operate by the bringing and determination  of  an  appeal  or  a
         failure to appeal in  time.   She  reinforces  that  submission  by
         arguing that, if that were not  the  position,  then  sub-paragraph
         2(5)(d) would be otiose as it could never apply.  She also  submits
         that the appellant only finds herself in the difficulties  she  now
         faces because the respondent did not take the first decision within
         the 6 months prescribed time limit.  If a decision had  been  taken
         on the first application within  the  6  month  period,  then  sub-
         paragraph  2(3)(b)  could  not  have   been   satisfied   and   the
         transitional provisions would not have applied at all.

     13. Mr Bramble submits that the  transitional  provisions  need  to  be
         applied in stages.  The trigger for the transitional provisions  to
         apply is whether one of the criteria in  sub-paragraph  2(3)(b)  is
         met as at 16th October 2012.  When one comes to consider the  point
         at  which  the  transitional  provisions  cease  to  operate  under
         paragraph 2(5), however, the  sub-paragraphs  of  2(3)(b)  need  to
         looked at as 3 stages in the process, rather than  alternatives  to
         each other.  Once  that  is  understood,  then  the  relevant  sub-
         paragraph bringing the transitional provisions to an end is when an
         in-time appeal could be brought but  has  not  been  (sub-paragraph
         2(5)(b)) or when  an  appeal  is  brought  but  either  determined,
         withdrawn or abandoned (sub-paragraph 2(5)(c)).

    Decision and reasons

     14. Having considered the grounds of appeal and the submissions of  the
         parties we are not satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  decision
         involved the making of a material error of law on the operation  of
         the transitional provisions.  The Judge clearly did make  an  error
         of law in finding that the operative sub-paragraph in  relation  to
         the cessation of  the  transitional  provisions  was  sub-paragraph
         2(5)(c) as the appellant did not exercise her right  of  appeal  in
         relation to  the  first  decision.   However,  we  agree  with  the
         respondent that this was not  a  material  error  of  law  as  sub-
         paragraph 2(5)(b)  applied  so  that  the  transitional  provisions
         ceased to apply once an appeal against the first decision could  no
         longer  be  brought.   Accordingly,  by  the  time  of  the  second
         application, the appellant could no longer rely on the transitional
         provisions and since the sponsor was a dual British/Irish national,
         he was no longer an EEA national for the purposes  of  the  amended
         EEA regulations.

     15. At first glance, it might appear that Ms Joshi has a good  argument
         that sub-paragraphs 2(5)(b) and 2(5)(c) can only apply  where  sub-
         paragraph 3(b)(iii) applies and has no application to a case where,
         as here, sub-paragraph 3(b)(ii) is the relevant trigger.   However,
         we consider that this argument is misconceived  for  the  following
         reasons.

     16. Firstly, the wording of sub-paragraph 5(b) and 5(c)  refers  to  "a
         decision referred to in sub-paragraph 3(b)(iii)".  It does not  use
         the wording "the decision referred to in  sub-paragraph  3(b)(iii)"
         (our emphasis).  We  consider  that  the  drafting  of  these  sub-
         paragraphs is deliberate.  It is only  necessary  to  consider  the
         implications of Ms Joshi's argument to  see  why  her  construction
         cannot be correct.  On her analysis, if a person has an application
         pending as at 16th  October  2012  (as  did  the  appellant),  that
         application cannot be refused on the basis that the EEA national is
         a dual national and also a British  citizen.   It  can  however  be
         refused on other grounds (as  it  was  in  the  appellant's  case).
         However, on Ms Joshi's analysis, that person would continue to have
         status as a family  member  of  an  EEA  national  for  all  future
         purposes (even if the family member appealed  against  any  refusal
         and the appeal were dismissed) unless and until that person  ceased
         to be a family member of the dual national or  lost  the  right  to
         permanent residence (applying sub-paragraphs 2(5)(d)  or  2(5)(e)).
         Of course, if the pending application were decided  in  the  family
         member's favour, the family member could continue to  rely  on  the
         status derived from the EEA national who would continue as such for
         those purposes.  However, on Ms Joshi's case, if  a  family  member
         had already received a decision on an application by  16th  October
         2012 but was still within the period to appeal that decision,  that
         family member would lose the ability to rely  on  the  transitional
         provisions once time had expired for any appeal or the  appeal  had
         been brought  and  dismissed.   There  is  no  sensible  reason  to
         distinguish between those  two  scenarios  in  terms  of  when  the
         transitional provisions cease to operate.

     17.  Secondly,  we  consider  that  the  drafter  of  the  transitional
         provisions has used the words  "a  decision  referred  to  in  sub-
         paragraph 3(b)(iii)" as shorthand for the relevant  decision  under
         appeal.  We consider that  the  transitional  provisions  therefore
         fall to be analysed on the basis that the relevant  criteria  under
         sub-paragraph 2(3) have to be met at the relevant dates.   However,
         when it comes to assessing the  point  at  which  the  transitional
         provisions cease to  have  effect  under  sub-paragraph  2(5),  the
         criteria at sub-paragraph 2(3)(b) have to be read as  a  continuing
         process.  Thus, if a person has an extant application  as  at  16th
         October 2012 (sub-paragraph  2(3)(b)(ii)),  that  will  lead  to  a
         decision (sub-paragraph 2(3)(b)(iii)).   If  that  decision  is  to
         refuse to issue a residence card, then the transitional  provisions
         continue until such time as an in-time appeal  can  be  brought  or
         until  such  time  as  that  appeal  is  withdrawn,  abandoned   or
         determined.

     18. Thirdly, we consider that this interpretation is in line with  what
         we consider to be the purpose of the transitional provisions namely
         that applicants should not lose the benefit of existing  status  as
         the family member of a person who, until  16th  October  2012,  was
         considered to be an EEA national.   The  benefit  is  preserved  by
         allowing persons who have that status to continue to rely on it  in
         any outstanding application or appeal  but, if that application  or
         appeal is refused on  some  other  basis,  those  persons  have  no
         continuing  right  to  rely  on  the  EEA  regulations.    If   the
         application is granted, then the family member would only lose that
         status in the event that they cease to be a family member (so  that
         sub-paragraph 2(5)(d) applies) or they lose the right to  permanent
         residence (so that sub-paragraph 2(5)(e)) applies.   That  is  also
         the answer to Ms Joshi's submission that sub-paragraph  2(5)(d)  is
         of no effect unless her submission is accepted.

     19. We also disagree with Ms Joshi that the appellant finds herself  in
         a difficult position  because  the  respondent  failed  to  make  a
         decision  within  6  months  or  due  to  the  operation   of   the
         transitional provisions.  In  fact,  the  appellant's  difficulties
         arise because she  was  unable  to  meet  the  EEA  regulations  in
         relation to her  first  application.   If  she  had  been  able  to
         demonstrate at that point in time that the sponsor was a  qualified
         person who was exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  UK,  the  first
         decision would presumably have been to issue her with  a  residence
         card.  That would have been the case whether the first decision was
         made before or after 16th  October  2012.   Thereafter,  she  could
         continue to rely on her status as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
         national unless and until she ceased to be a family member or  lost
         a right to permanent residence.  It was of course open  to  her  to
         appeal the first decision but for whatever reason she  did  not  do
         so.  Thereafter, there is no reason why the amended EEA regulations
         should not apply to her in the same way as they would  apply  to  a
         person who made an application after the  amended  EEA  regulations
         came into force.

    DECISION

     20. The First-tier Tribunal decision did involve the making of an error
         on a point of law in relation to the finding that the  transitional
         provisions  were  brought  to  an  end  by  sub-paragraph  2(5)(c).
         However, we have found that the error is not one which necessitates
         the setting aside and remaking of the  decision.   Accordingly,  we
         uphold the decision to dismiss the appeal.

Signed      [pic]      Date 15 July 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
