
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
IA/07266/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                 Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On the 1st  April  2016                                                   On
20th April 2016

Before:
                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL MCGINTY
Between:
                           MS JOAN AMERIA KASEMERA
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal
Representation:
For the Claimant: Miss Shaw (Counsel)
For the Secretary of  State:  Ms  Everett  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Davey promulgated on the 30th September  2015,  in
      which he allowed the Claimant's appeal  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
      Regulations 2006.



   2. Within the Grounds  of  Appeal  it  was  argued  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge had failed to resolve a conflict of evidence and failed
      to give adequate reasons and it was argued that the  Judge  failed  to
      address the concerns of the Secretary of State  regarding  whether  or
      not the EEA sponsor had  been  exercising  Treaty  Rights  within  the
      United Kingdom for a continuous period of five years  whilst  employed
      or self-employed, and failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  in  respect
      thereof.  A list of the concerns which was said to have been  set  out
      within the refusal letter were contained within the Grounds of  Appeal
      in respect of the sponsor's employment and self-employment in the UK.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Andrew
      on the 11th February 2016, who found that it  was  arguable  that  the
      reason of the First-tier Tribunal Judge regarding whether or  not  the
      sponsor has been exercising Treaty Rights for a continuous  period  of
      five years was insufficient.

   4. At the oral appeal hearing before the Upper Tribunal, it was initially
      agreed by both parties that there was no reason for the Judge to  have
      made an anonymity order in this case  and  that  anonymity  should  be
      discharged.  I therefore discharged  the  anonymity  order  previously
      made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey.

   5. I pointed out to  both  parties  at  the  appeal  hearing  that  there
      appeared to have been two separate and different reasons  for  refusal
      letters in this case, both said to be in respect of the Claimant  Joan
      Ameria Kasemera whose date of birth was the 10th March 1983, with both
      reasons for refusal letter being written by M Burgess  and  dated  the
      4th February 2015.  However the reasons set out in the two reasons for
      refusal letters, although  reaching  the  same  conclusion,  was  very
      different, and whereas one fully set out the concerns of the Secretary
      of State regarding the sponsor's employment and  self-employment,  the
      other did not set those concerns out in full.

   6. Miss Shaw conceded that even though she had been Counsel at the First-
      tier Tribunal hearing, she had not  spotted,  nor  seemingly  had  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge  that  there  were  in  fact  two  different
      refusal notices in respect of the same  Claimant,  and  that  the  one
      contained  within  the  Claimant's  bundle  was  different  from  that
      contained  within  the  Secretary  of  State's  bundle.   Both   legal
      representatives agreed that it was entirely unclear  having  read  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey, which of the two  refusal
      notices he had based his decision upon. It was agreed  by  both  legal
      representatives that the existence  of  two  separate,  but  different
      refusal notices containing a different reason, albeit  with  the  same
      conclusion, did mean that the decision by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Davey which did not specify  which  refusal  notice  he  was  actually
      referring to or indeed  even  to  clarify  which  refusal  notice  the
      Secretary of State  was  seeking  to  rely  upon,  was  based  upon  a
      procedural irregularity,  meaning  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Davey was unsafe.  Both  legal  representatives  agreed
      that the decision thereby did contain a  material  error  of  law  and
      should be set aside.

   7. On that basis, I did find that the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Davey was unsafe, as a result of procedural irregularity, on the
      basis that there were in fact two separate  refusal  notices  both  in
      respect of the same Claimant, both of the same date and signed by  the
      same person Mr M Burgess, and dated the 4th February 2015,  but  which
      had substantially different reasoning, and  that  the  Judge  had  not
      seemingly noted within his  decision  that  there  were  two  separate
      refusal notices, or clarified which refusal notice he  had  based  his
      decision upon, and that I therefore find that the decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Davey is unsafe on that basis as a result of  this
      procedural irregularity, and should be set aside in its entirety.

   8. Having set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Davey,  Ms
      Everett withdrew both decisions made by Mr Burgess on the 4th February
      2015.  In light of her  having  withdrawn  both  decisions,  there  is
      currently no valid decision to remit back to the First-tier  Tribunal,
      such that it remains for the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a  fresh
      decision in the case.  Both legal representatives were happy with this
      course of action and for Ms Everett  to  withdraw  the  decisions,  in
      order that a proper single decision could be made, in order  that  the
      same error is not simply repeated if the matter were remitted back  to
      the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Davey  did  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside.

The Secretary of  State  having  withdrawn  both  decisions  dated  the  4th
February 2015, after I indicated that the decision of Judge  Davey  was  set
aside, there  is  no  valid  decision  to  be  appealed  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal, such that the case does not need to be remitted back to the First-
tier Tribunal, but it remains for the Secretary of State  to  make  a  valid
decision in respect of the Claimant's application.

Signed
[pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty                             Dated
3rd April 2016
