
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07253/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2016                            |On 14th July 2016             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                             MR EMMANUEL BAYIHA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S Unigwe, Instructed by TM Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Frazer promulgated on 15th September 2015, in which she dismissed the
       appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
       Department of 17th February 2015, to refuse the  appellant  leave  to
       enter the UK.


Background


    2. The appellant is a national of Cameroon.  On 17th February  2015  the
       appellant sought admission to the UK as the family member of  Armelle
       Dassong, a French national with a  right  to  reside  in  the  United
       Kingdom under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
       2006.   The  appellant  was  refused  leave  to  enter  because   the
       Immigration Officer was not  satisfied  that  Armelle  Dassong  is  a
       qualified person in accordance with  the  Regulations  and  that  the
       appellant is the family member of an EEA national  with  a  right  to
       reside in the United Kingdom under those Regulations.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


    3. The appellant attended the hearing of his appeal  before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal.  He was not  represented.   The  Judge  sets  out  the
       background to the appeal before her at paragraphs [1] to [5]  of  her
       decision.  The appellant applied for an adjournment.   At  paragraphs
       [7] and [8] of her decision, the Judge records:


             "7.  The Appellant went on to say that  the  lawyers  had  his
             files containing  documentation  which  showed  proof  of  his
             wife's work and her address.  He  had  seen  his  lawyers  the
             previous Friday who had advised him to seek an adjournment  in
             the interests of justice. The Appellant was unable to give any
             adequate explanation as to why he had not requested copies  of
             the documents so that he could produce them  at  court  today.
             The Appellant indicated that  he  would  definitely  be  in  a
             position to pay for representation on the next occasion if the
             hearing were adjourned. He said that  his  parents  just  have
             money to pay for their bills and food back in Cameroon.


             8.   The Appellant presented a divorce certificate  in  French
             which was sealed by the Ministry of Justice  in  Cameroon  and
             which was dated 18th August 2015. The  Appellant  stated  that
             the divorce had now been finalised.


    4. The Judge refused the application for an adjournment.   At  paragraph
       [9] of her decision she states:


          "9. I declined the application.  The  Appellant  had  presented  a
             certificate of divorce from Cameroon in relation to  his  wife
             and it was unclear what the basis for  his  appeal  would  be.
             There was no guarantee that the Appellant would be able to pay
             for his lawyers on the next occasion. The Appellant  was  able
             to articulate himself well in front of  me.  I  was  therefore
             satisfied that he would be able to present his case and a lack
             of representation would not unduly prejudice him. There was no
             adequate explanation for why he could not  have  obtained  any
             relevant documents, or  at  least  copies  thereof,  from  his
             lawyers for the hearing today. I determined that it was in the
             interests of justice to proceed.


    5. Having refused the application for an adjournment, the Judge went  on
       to consider the appeal.  The evidence of the appellant is set out  at
       paragraph [10] of the decision.  At paragraphs [12] to  [17]  of  her
       decision, the Judge sets out the legal framework  and  at  paragraphs
       [19] to [22] she sets out her conclusions.  The Judge states:


             "19. I am not satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  spouse  is  a
             'qualified' person within the meaning of Regulation  6.  There
             is no evidence that she is now present in the  United  Kingdom
             or that she is working here. The evidence from  the  Appellant
             suggests that  she  left  the  United  Kingdom  in  2014.  The
             Appellant has produced a certificate  of  divorce  dated  18th
             August 2015 and sealed by the Yoko court in Cameroon.


             20.   At the time of the divorce the  Appellant  was  not  the
             family member of a qualified person. The information that  was
             before the Respondent on 17th February 2015 from the Appellant
             was that the Appellant's spouse was not in the United Kingdom.
             No evidence was produced by either the Appellant or his spouse
             regarding her work or employment status in the United Kingdom.




             21.  I am satisfied therefore that at the time of  entry  into
             the United Kingdom  the  Appellant  was  not  joining  an  EEA
             national in the  United  Kingdom  or  that  the  EEA  national
             (namely Armelle Dassong) had a right of  residence  under  the
             Regulations. At the time of entry therefore he  did  not  meet
             the requirements of Regulations  19(2)(b)  and  11(2)  of  the
             Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.


             22.  Consequently at the time the divorce  was  pronounced  on
             18th August 2015 the Appellant  could  have  had  no  retained
             right of residence under Regulation 10(5) of  the  Immigration
             (EEA) Regulations 2006 as he was not then the family member of
             a qualified person.  His spouse had left the United Kingdom to
             institute divorce proceedings in Cameroon. Further, he has not
             retained a right of residence in accordance with the ruling in
             Singh as  his  wife  left  the  country  to  commence  divorce
             proceedings in Cameroon."


    6. The appellant appeals the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       to refuse the application for an adjournment.  The  appellant  claims
       that the refusal to grant an adjournment was to deprive the appellant
       of his rights to a  fair  hearing;  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
       [2014] UKUT 418.  The appellant states that the Judge misapplied  the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006,  and  that  the  appellant  is  a
       qualified person under regulations 11 and 15.


    7. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Hollingworth on 28th January 2016. The  matter  comes  before  me  to
       consider whether or not  the  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Frazer involved the making of a material error of law,  and  if
       so, to remake the decision.  The  respondent  has  filed  a  Rule  24
       response in which she confirms that the appeal is opposed.








The hearing of the appeal before me


    8. The appellant attended the hearing that  was  listed  for  10am.  The
       appellant was expecting to be represented and so I put the hearing to
       the back of my list.  The matter was called on at 12:50pm  but  there
       was still no appearance by the appellant's representatives.  I  spoke
       briefly to the appellant  who  confirmed  to  me  that  he  had  been
       expecting his representatives to attend the hearing.  At my  request,
       the Tribunal clerk made a  telephone  call  to  the  offices  of  the
       appellant's representatives, TM Legal Services, to establish why they
       had not attended the hearing.  The Tribunal clerk was able  to  speak
       to a clerk at the offices of the appellant's representatives, and was
       told that the person with conduct of this matter is away on  holiday,
       and would not be back for a week or so. They had instructed  somebody
       to attend the hearing before me, but they were unable to identify who
       had been instructed.


    9. I explained the outcome of the Tribunal's enquiries to the appellant.
         The appellant confirmed that he had spoken to  his  representatives
       on 22nd of March 2016 and had paid them �850 for the  preparation  of
       the appeal,  and  representation  at  the  hearing  before  me.   The
       appellant had not been told who would  be  representing  him  at  the
       hearing. The appellant was not  aware  of  any  steps  taken  by  his
       representatives in preparation and readiness for the  hearing  before
       me.  The appellant confirmed that  he  wished  to  proceed  with  the
       hearing of the appeal without his representatives.


   10. Given the time, and in fairness to the  appellant,  I  adjourned  the
       matter to 2pm.  I informed the appellant that I was  concerned  about
       the lack  of  any  communication  from  his  representatives  and  in
       particular, their inability to identify who it was,  that  should  be
       attending the hearing to represent the appellant.   I  was  concerned
       about the conduct of the appellant's representatives and  I  informed
       the appellant that I would adjourn  the  matter  until  2pm  for  the
       appellant to consider  whether  he  wishes  to  proceed  without  any
       representation, given the history of the matter and in any event, for
       the appellant's representatives to appear and explain their  conduct.
       The Tribunal clerk  telephoned  the  appellant's  representatives  to
       inform them that I required their attendance before me, at 2pm.


   11. Shortly after 2pm, Mr Sylvester  Unigwe  attended  to  represent  the
       appellant.  I returned at 2.15pm and Mr Unigwe explain to me that  he
       had been instructed at 1:55pm and that he had not previously seen any
       papers relating to the appeal.  He had been shown  some  papers  upon
       his arrival at the Tribunal by Mr Whitwell, but he had  not  had  any
       opportunity to properly consider the papers. He was unable to provide
       any explanation for the failure of the appellant's representatives to
       attend at 2pm as I had directed.  Equally he had no information as to
       who the appellant's representatives  had  instructed,  to  appear  on
       behalf of the appellant at the hearing  that  was  listed  for  10am.
       Further calls made by Mr Unigwe to those  instructing  him  were  not
       being answered and were  going  straight  to  voicemail.   Mr  Unigwe
       confirmed to me that he has been  provided  with  copies  of  various
       documents by Mr Whitwell.  He had been provided with  copies  of  the
       documents before the Tribunal:


        a. a copy of the Notice of Refusal of leave to enter;


        b. a copy of the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fraser


        c. a copy of the grounds for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal;


        d. a copy of the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth
           granting permission to appeal;


        e. a copy of the respondent's Rule 24 response;


   12. I again adjourned the matter for a short period to enable  Mr  Unigwe
       to read the papers that he had been provided with, and to obtain  his
       clients instructions.


   13. The hearing before me commenced at 2:50pm.  There was no  application
       by Mr Unigwe to adjourn the  hearing  to  another  date.   Mr  Unigwe
       submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  should  have  adjourned
       the matter because the appellant had provided an adequate explanation
       for the lack of representation. He submitted that the  appellant  has
       been denied justice by the failure of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       to grant an adjournment. He submits that the appellant is entitled to
       a full presentation of his case and that the Judge  had  been  proved
       wrong, because the appellant has managed to pay  for  representation.
       He relied upon the matters set out  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
       relies upon the decision in Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]
       UKUT 418, although he did not have a copy of that  decision  for  me.
       He  has  not  himself  read  that  decision,  but  relies   upon   it
       nonetheless.


   14. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response  dated  4th  March  2016.
       The respondent opposes the appeal and submits that the Judge directed
       himself appropriately. The respondent submits  that  the  Judge  gave
       adequate reasons for reasons for  refusing  the  adjournment  request
       including the fact that the appellant had  since  divorced  from  his
       wife.  The respondent submits that even if the appellant was able  to
       obtain the documentation, it was clear on his own evidence  that  his
       partner had left the UK and had not been exercising treaty rights  at
       the relevant time - namely the  date  of  divorce.  As  such  it  was
       submitted the refusal of an adjournment was fair on the facts of this
       case.


   15. Mr  Whitwell  adopts  the  Rule  24  response  and  submits  that  at
       paragraphs [6] to [9]  of  her  decision,  the  Judge  gave  adequate
       reasons for refusing the application for an adjournment.  He  submits
       that when stopped by an immigration officer the  appellant  told  the
       immigration officer that his wife has not worked  in  the  UK  for  a
       period of 3 to 4 years between 2011 and 2014.   He  submits  that  an
       adjournment would not have assisted the appellant because there is no
       evidence that the appellant's wife was working or  exercising  treaty
       rights in the UK  at  the  time  that  the  appellant  and  his  wife
       divorced.








Error of Law decision


   16. The issue of fairness in the context of adjournments  was  considered
       by the Upper Tribunal in the case of Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)
       [2014] UKUT 418.  The President gave the following reminder;


             "7. If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment request,
             such decision could, in principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in
             several respects: these include a failure to take into account
             all    material    considerations;    permitting    immaterial
             considerations to intrude; denying the party concerned a  fair
             hearing;  failing  to  apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
             irrationally. In practice, in most cases the question will  be
             whether the refusal deprived the affected party of  his  right
             to a fair hearing. Where an adjournment refusal is  challenged
             on fairness grounds, it is important  to  recognise  that  the
             question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  FtT  acted
             reasonably.  Rather,  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
             fairness: was there any deprivation of  the  affected  party's
             right to a fair hearing? Any temptation to review the  conduct
             and decision of the FtT through  the  lens  of  reasonableness
             must be firmly resisted, in order to avoid a  misdirection  in
             law. In a nutshell, fairness is the supreme criterion.


             8.  The  cardinal  rule  rehearsed  above  is   expressed   in
             uncompromising language in the decision of the Court of Appeal
             in  SH  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284, at [13]:


                       "First,  when  considering  whether  the  immigration
                  Judge ought to have granted an adjournment, the  test  was
                  not irrationality. The test was not whether  his  decision
                  was properly open to him or was Wednesbury unreasonable or
                  perverse. The test  and  sole  test  was  whether  it  was
                  unfair".


             Alertness to this test by Tribunals at both tiers  will  serve
             to prevent  judicial  error.  Regrettably,  in  the  real  and
             imperfect world of contemporary litigation,  the  question  of
             adjourning a case not  infrequently  arises  on  the  date  of
             hearing, at the doors of the court. I am conscious, of course,
             that in the typical case the Judge  will  have  invested  much
             time and effort in preparation, is understandably  anxious  to
             complete the day's list of cases for hearing and may well feel
             frustrated  by  the  (usually)   unexpected   advent   of   an
             adjournment request. Both the FtT and the Upper Tribunal  have
             demanding   workloads.   Parties   and    stakeholders    have
             expectations, typically elevated  and  sometimes  unrealistic,
             relating to the throughput and output of cases in the  system.
             In the present era, the spotlight on  the  judiciary  is  more
             acute than ever before. Moreover, Tribunals must  consistently
             give effect  to  the  overriding  objective.  Notwithstanding,
             sensations of frustration and  inconvenience,  no  matter  how
             legitimate, must always yield to the parties' right to a  fair
             hearing. In determining applications for adjournments,  Judges
             will also be guided by focusing on the  overarching  criterion
             enshrined in  the  overriding  objective,  which  is  that  of
             fairness."


   17. I have no hesitation in saying that the  Judge  acted  reasonably  in
       refusing the application for an adjournment.  I  note  in  particular
       that the  appellant  had  not  submitted  any  witness  statement  or
       documents  in   readiness   for   the   hearing.    The   appellant's
       representatives did not inform the Tribunal that they  would  not  be
       attending the hearing, and that they had in their possession  a  file
       of documents capable  of  demonstrating  the  wife's  employment  and
       address in the UK.


   18. The application to adjourn was not made at the earliest  opportunity,
       but left  to  the  morning  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  The application was speculative, and in the absence of any
       confirmation from  the  appellant's  representatives,  there  was  no
       reasonable basis to presume that  the  evidence  that  the  appellant
       claimed exists, does exist, or could be produced within a  reasonable
       period.  The application did not show that anything material would be
       achieved by the delay.  At noted at paragraph [6]  of  the  decision,
       since the appellant had come out of detention  he  had  not  received
       money from his parents to pay his lawyers on time in  order  at  they
       could  attend  and  represent  him  at  the  appeal   hearing.    The
       appellant's parents had not been able to find the money for him to be
       represented at the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
       appellant had attempted to find money from friends, but to no avail.


   19. The Judge refused the application having noted the appellant's  claim
       that his representatives had his files containing documentation which
       showed proof of his wife's work and her  address.   The  Judge  noted
       that the appellant was unable to give any adequate explanation as  to
       why he had not requested copies of the documents  so  that  he  could
       produce them at the hearing.


   20. I pause here to note that following the grant of permission to appeal
       to the Upper Tribunal, directions were issued to the  parties  making
       it clear that the parties shall prepare for the  forthcoming  hearing
       on the basis that, if the Upper Tribunal decides  to  set  aside  the
       determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  any  further  evidence,
       including supplementary oral evidence, that the  Upper  Tribunal  may
       need to consider if it decides to re-make the  decision,  can  be  so
       considered at that hearing.  The parties were reminded of the need to
       make an application pursuant to rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure
       (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  where  appropriate,   and   of   the
       requirements of that rule.  The  appellant  has  failed  to  make  an
       application under  Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008 identifying the nature of the evidence that  the
       appellant seeks to adduce or explaining why  such  evidence  was  not
       submitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   If  as  the  appellant  had
       previously claimed, evidence in support of his appeal  exists,  there
       is no explanation for the absence of an application under Rule 15(2A)
       before me.


   21. In all of the circumstances it is easy to understand  why  the  Judge
       refused the application for an adjournment.  However, I remind myself
       that the decision  in  Nwaigwe,  makes  it  clear  that  the  crucial
       question is not whether the decision  of  the  First-tier  Judge  was
       reasonable, but whether the refusal deprived  the  appellant  of  his
       right to a fair hearing.


   22. In my judgement, what appears to have been fatal to  the  application
       for an adjournment is the divorce certificate sealed by the  Ministry
       of Justice in Cameroon, and dated 18th August 2015.  The Judge states
       at paragraph [9]:


             "9.  The Appellant had presented a certificate of divorce from
             Cameroon in relation to his wife and it was unclear  what  the
             basis for his appeal would be..."


   23. The Judge very clearly had in mind the decision of the European Court
       of Justice in Singh and Others -v- Ministry of Justice  and  Equality
       [2015] EU ECJ C-218/14 that is referred to  at  paragraphs  [17]  and
       [20] of the Judge's decision.  The European  Court  of  Justice  held
       that Under  Directive  2004/38,  a  third-country  national  who  was
       married to an EU citizen residing in a Member State  other  than  the
       citizen's own State, could no longer enjoy a right  of  residence  in
       that  State  where  the  EU  citizen  left  that  State  before   the
       commencement of divorce proceedings.  The Court observed that,  where
       divorce proceedings were started and the marriage had lasted  for  at
       least three years before the commencement of the divorce proceedings,
       including at least one year in the host  Member  State,  the  foreign
       spouse may, subject  to  certain  conditions,  retain  the  right  of
       residence in that State on the basis of art.13(2) of  the  directive,
       both during the divorce proceedings and after the decree of  divorce,
       provided that at the date of commencement of those proceedings he  or
       she was resident in that  State  as  the  spouse  of  an  EU  citizen
       accompanying or joining the citizen in that State.  It  follows  that
       the EU citizen must reside in the host Member  State,  in  accordance
       with art.7(1) of the directive, up  to  the  date  on  which  divorce
       proceedings are commenced.  The appellant's own case before the First-
       tier Tribunal was that the appellant had lived  in  London  with  his
       wife between 2008  and  2015,  but  he  was  unable  to  provide  any
       addresses.


   24. As set out at paragraph  [22]  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, the appellant's spouse had left the UK to institute divorce
       proceedings in Cameroon and  so  the  appellant  could  not  claim  a
       retained right  of  residence.   The  appellant  lost  his  right  of
       residence at the time of his former spouse's departure from  the  UK.
       The appellant's former spouse, an EU citizen was not residing in  the
       UK in accordance with art.7(1) of the directive, at the date on which
       divorce proceedings were commenced.  Against that background, it was,
       as set out by the Judge, unclear what the basis for  the  appellant's
       appeal would be.


   25. In the circumstances, I am satisfied the Judge took  account  of  all
       material considerations in her decision to refuse the application for
       an adjournment and I am satisfied that the appellant did not lose his
       right to a fair hearing.  There was in  my  judgement  no  procedural
       unfairness in the decision to refuse to grant the adjournment.


   26. It follows that the appeal is dismissed


Notice of Decision


   27. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       stands.


   28. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.

Signed                                  Date: 14 July 2016



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD


The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no  fee  award.   I  have   dismissed   the
appellant's appeal and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Signed                                  Date: 14 July 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
