
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07311/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th September 2015                        |On 29th September 2015        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

                            arsalan pervaiz butt
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe instructed by D & A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The background of this appeal is that the Appellant's  application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his  marriage  to  the  Sponsor  Ramsah
    Ahmed, who is a British citizen, made whilst he had  extant  leave  was
    refused on 21st January 2014 and a decision made to  remove  him.   His
    appeal against that decision was dismissed following a  hearing  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk, in a determination promulgated on  18th
    September 2014.  The Judge's primary finding was that the Appellant had
    failed to meet the requirements of paragraph EX.1 to Appendix FM to the
    Immigration Rules as there were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    couple continuing family life outside the United Kingdom.   The  appeal
    was dismissed both under the Immigration  Rules  and  under  Article  8
    ECHR.

 2. The Appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   The  grounds  are
    fourfold.  It was said that the judge had erred in failing properly  to
    assess the Appellant's Article 8 claim.  The consideration  under  EX.1
    had not  exhausted  the  claim  and  there  should  have  been  a  full
    assessment under Article  8  but  the  findings  in  that  regard  were
    inadequate.  Secondly it was said that the judge had failed to give any
    adequate consideration to  the  rights  of  the  spouse  as  a  British
    national.  It was then said that the judge had misdirected  herself  in
    her consideration of insurmountable obstacles and the problems that the
    Appellant and his wife might suffer from the Appellant's father-in-law.
     In referring to there being  no  physical  threat  or  danger  to  the
    Appellant or his wife she had applied too high a test as insurmountable
    obstacles did not require such  a  level  of  ill-treatment,  reference
    being made to MF (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  and  Izuazu
    (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC).  Finally  it  was
    said that the judge had failed to consider material matters namely  the
    problems which the spouse  had  faced  in  the  past.   The  letter  of
    application set out that she had had to obtain consular support as  she
    believed she was going to be forced into a marriage by her  father  and
    these difficulties had led the couple to marry early  to  obviate  that
    risk.

 3. Permission was granted on all grounds  on  30th  October  2014.   In  a
    response under Upper Tribunal Rule 24 the  Secretary  of  State  argued
    that the judge had directed herself  appropriately  and  there  was  no
    material error of law.

 4. At the commencement of the hearing it was clarified that there  was  no
    issue as to the relationship between the  Appellant  and  Sponsor.   Mr
    Pipe said that the issues arose under EX.1 to Appendix FM to the  Rules
    and then  under  Article  8.   Both  representatives  agreed  that  the
    relevant version of EX.1 was the version  which  did  not  include  the
    explanatory statement at EX.2, which was only  introduced  with  effect
    from 28th July 2014, well after the date of decision under appeal.  The
    grant of permission had included a reference to MM (Lebanon) and Others
    v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 having overturned the decisions  in  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) and  R
    (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC (Admin) 720.  Mr Pipe accepted that  MM  had
    simply clarified what the other cases had meant.  Mr Smart for his part
    relied on the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Singh  v  SSHD  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 74, a copy of which he supplied, and Mr Pipe supplied  a  copy
    of the reported Tribunal decision in Forman  (ss117A-C  considerations)
    [2015] UKUT 412 (IAC), concerning the application of  Section  117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. Mr Pipe then addressed me on the  substantive  issues.   He  said  that
    looking at the determination the  Appellant  had  been  in  receipt  of
    extant leave when the application was made and was not here unlawfully.
     The evidence had been recited at paragraphs 5 and 6 of  the  decision.
    The Appellant had been employed developing automotive  design  and  the
    Sponsor had hoped to go on to an apprenticeship or to university.   The
    judge found that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph EX.1.  The judge referred to the Sponsor's expressed fear  of
    her father on her return to Pakistan but Mr  Pipe  submitted  that  the
    judge had not properly assessed the insurmountable  obstacles  but  had
    regarded the test as in the nature of Article  3  ECHR.   In  the  past
    there had been threats to the Appellant's wife,  who  was  British,  to
    marry her against her wishes and she had returned to the United Kingdom
    and married the Appellant in October of 2013 as a protective mechanism.
     That was set out in the statements, although he  had  to  accept  that
    there was not very much detail about the reference to consular  support
    being requested.  The proper test was not of risks but of obstacles  or
    difficulties.  He submitted that the judge's consideration of EX.1  was
    flawed. She had not considered the correct approach  to  insurmountable
    obstacles but had focused on risk, shutting out other considerations.

 6. He continued that in any event the judge should have gone  to  consider
    Article  8  substantively.   It  appeared  at  paragraph  16   of   the
    determination that she had regarded her findings under the Rules  as  a
    gateway but she then went on to  consider  the  Razgar  questions.   In
    considering proportionality he said that she had erred.  The  Appellant
    had been in the United Kingdom for some time  with  leave.   The  whole
    time he had been lawful and he  had  been  working.   She  should  have
    considered all of the elements of Section 117 of the 2002 Act.   Family
    life would carry weight because he had not been  here  unlawfully.  The
    application of EX.1  of  the  Rules  had  not  carried  out  the  whole
    assessment.  He said it was an odd determination as at paragraph 16  it
    appeared  that  the  judge  was  shutting  the  door  on  any   further
    consideration but then she went on to make such an assessment.

 7. In response Mr Smart said that the Court of Appeal  judgment  in  Singh
    touched on the first and last Grounds of Appeal.  It was apparent  from
    paragraph 63 and 64 of that judgment that there was no need for a  full
    examination beyond the Rules if all issues had  been  considered  under
    the Rules.  He submitted that the Appellant's  assertion  that  a  full
    Article 8 assessment  was  required  was  not  right.   There  were  no
    compelling considerations and therefore the judge was  right  to  apply
    that test.

 8. With regard to the second ground he said that the judge had  considered
    all of the evidence and had made proper findings.  There had been  more
    consideration than there had in the case of Agyarko and  Others,  R,  v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440.  As to the third ground the  judge  had  made
    findings upon the opposition of the father to the marriage.   The issue
    of consular assistance had not been covered in the statement of  either
    of the parties to the marriage and there was  no  evidence-in-chief  or
    cross-examination on the point.  There had  been  a  reference  in  the
    letter accompanying the application but it was unclear as  to  who  had
    sought consular support and the assertion was distant hearsay.

 9. In response Mr Pipe, who was aware of the  judgment  in  Agyarko,  said
    that it was a stringent test but in reaching her findings the judge had
    equated the test with physical risk.  He accepted that the evidence  of
    consular support was not strong but the couple had taken steps  to  get
    away from the father to  marry  early  to  avoid  the  risk  of  forced
    marriage.  He submitted that the judge had not  taken  account  of  all
    these matters.  Factors to be considered under the Rules formed part of
    an Article 8 assessment but there had to be a  finding  on  matters  in
    totality.  Asked by me as to what issues in Section 117B the judge  had
    failed  to  consider  he  said  it  was  financial  independence,   the
    Appellant's ability in English and his family life.   There  were  also
    the rights of the wife under Article 8.  It had been  a  bold  move  to
    defy her father, leave Leeds and join  the  Appellant.   There  was  no
    evidence the judge had had regard to both sides of the argument.

10. Having heard those submissions I reserved my decision which I now give.
     I find that the judge did not err in her approach to paragraph EX.1 of
    Appendix FM to the Rules in any material way.  It  is  correct,  as  Mr
    Pipe indicated that in the  final  sentence  at  paragraph  13  of  her
    decision she referred to the father's disapproval as not  amounting  to
    or being the same as a physical threat or danger to  the  Appellant  or
    his wife.  However that must be read in the context of the paragraph as
    a whole and the following paragraph, in which the judge  addresses  the
    obstacles which might be faced.  I will set out those two paragraphs in
    full:

         "13. The Appellant and his wife state that  they  fear  her  father
             upon return due to  his  opposition  to  their  marriage.   He
             states at paragraph 7 of his statement that the country is not
             the problem but that the family are a problem  and  what  they
             could do to them.  Neither witness was able to expand upon  or
             elaborate upon how the wife's father has such great power  and
             influence and what is the source of his great power.   Without
             any such details I  cannot  find  that  his  influence  is  so
             prevalent and so strong in Pakistan that the Appellant and his
             wife could not settle elsewhere in  Pakistan  than  where  the
             wife's father lives.  I find that there is no evidence  as  to
             what in reality he could do or  would  be  capable  of  doing.
             They both gave an impression of  concern  and  foreboding  but
             were unable to provide anything more  substantial  than  that.
             Both have referred to threatening calls by him but no  details
             were given as to what he said that he would do and to whom.  I
             do not find that this amounts to anything more than  a  parent
             who is very unhappy with the marriage and disapproves strongly
             but this does not amount to or is the same as  there  being  a
             physical threat or danger to the Appellant or his wife.

         14.  I find that the Appellant works and is a  fit,  able  educated
             male who would be able to find work in Pakistan.   He  resided
             there until about six years ago and so would be familiar  with
             the language and culture of Pakistan.  His wife has also lived
             in Pakistan until recently and she would not be  returning  to
             live with her father but her husband.  The  Appellant  accepts
             that if his wife remains in the UK she will have  the  support
             of his father and uncle so that she is not left alone  in  the
             UK."

11. Those two paragraphs do not indicate to me that the judge was  in  fact
    applying an Article 3 test as was submitted.  She found that there  was
    no substance in the alleged threats but she also found that the  couple
    were familiar with Pakistan, could return to a  cultural  climate  with
    which  they  were  familiar  and  to  an  area  other  than  where  the
    Appellant's father lived and that the Appellant would be able  to  find
    work in order to support them both.  That the test  of  "insurmountable
    obstacles" is a stringent one is made clear in Agyarko.  In my judgment
    the judge adequately assessed the  evidence  of  this  element  of  the
    appeal, made reasoned findings and applied the correct test.

12. There remains the question of the judge's approach to Article 8 outwith
    the Rules.  As Mr Pipe commented the determination  of  Judge  Birk  is
    somewhat odd in that  paragraphs  16  and  17  might  be  perceived  as
    indicating that a decision had been made that there was no need  to  go
    on to consider Article 8 beyond the Rules.  In this case  I  would  not
    have agreed with that approach.  The definitive guidance on  the  issue
    is now set out by Lord Justice Underhill in Singh.  At paragraph  66(2)
    he stated "If the decision-maker's view is straightforwardly  that  all
    the Article 8 issues raised have  been  addressed  in  determining  the
    claim under the Rules all that is necessary is, as Sales J says, to say
    so."  In  the  current  case  the  judge  found  that  there  were  not
    insurmountable obstacles  to  the  couple  continuing  family  life  in
    Pakistan.  As is pointed in Agyarko that is by  the  application  of  a
    stringent test,  arguably  not  consistent  with  a  simple  Article  8
    assessment.

13. The judge did, notwithstanding what she said at paragraphs 16  and  17,
    then refer to R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and went on to  consider
    proportionality.  In doing  so  she  stated  that  she  had  regard  to
    Sections 117A and 117B of  the  2002  Act.   Her  final  assessment  on
    proportionality is succinct.  She said at paragraph 20,

         "I find that the Appellant does speak English, he works and he made
         this application during the duration of his  legitimate  leave.   I
         take into account the findings that I have made in paragraphs 12 to
         17 above and having balanced all of the various factors I find that
         the  decision  to  refuse  the   Appellant's   application   is   a
         proportionate one and there is no breach of Article 8."

    Although that proportionality assessment is  notably  brief  the  judge
    clearly took account of the fact that some of the  factors  in  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act were met, namely sub-paragraphs (2) and (3).   She
    was aware that the Appellant had been in this country lawfully and  had
    been working.   She  was  aware  that  the  wife's  father  disapproved
    strongly of her marriage but found that the couple could go to live  in
    Pakistan  together,  where  the  husband  was  likely  to  find   work.
    Alternatively she found that the wife could  remain  in  this  country,
    where she would  have  support  from  other  family  members,  and  the
    Appellant return to Pakistan from where he could seek entry  clearance.
    That approach is consistent with the guidance of the European Court  of
    Human Rights in Jeunesse v Netherlands (2015) 60 EHRR 17.  There are no
    children in this case and there are no exceptional circumstances  which
    might have rendered that approach inappropriate. Although there is much
    to be said in favour of this  young  couple  in  that  they  are  in  a
    legitimate relationship, built up whilst  the  Appellant  was  in  this
    country lawfully, that the Appellant has been working in a  significant
    occupation and that they married  notwithstanding  parental  opposition
    the judge was aware of all of these factors in reaching her decision on
    proportionality.  The fact  that  the  Appellant  met  several  of  the
    elements of Section 117B of the 2002 Act does not in itself render  the
    proportionality assessment unsafe - see, amongst  other  cases,  Forman
    and  AM  (Section  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  00260  (IAC).   In  the
    circumstances,  although  the  judge's  assessment  of  proportionality
    might, with advantage, have been expressed more fully,  she  did  refer
    back to her earlier findings  which  were  not  concerned  solely  with
    issues under EX.1. The judge accepted that the relationship was genuine
    and had been formed when the Appellant was in the country lawfully  but
    the first premise of Section 117B of the 2002  Act  is  that  effective
    immigration control is in the public interest. By statute that  element
    is implicit in any proportionality  assessment.  Something  substantial
    was required to outweigh that consideration and the judge  clearly  did
    not find  that  established.  In  the  circumstances  the  decision  is
    adequately, if economically, reasoned and not materially flawed in law.
     The appeal is therefore dismissed.

Notice of Decision

There was no material error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal and the appeal therefore stands dismissed.

There was no application for an order for anonymity and none is made.


Signed                              Date 29 September 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

