
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/07450/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14 January 2016                   |On 15 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                                     oi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Reuben Solomon, Counsel, instructed by Jein
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Wilson) dismissing the appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision
    taken on 9 February 2016 to  refuse  the  appellant's  application  for
    further leave to remain in the UK and to remove the appellant from  the
    UK.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  in  1979.  She  had  been
    working in Spain for a number of years and has an EU residence card for
    Spain that is valid until August 2019. She was issued with a visit visa
    for the UK valid from 2 November 2012 to  2  May  2013.  She  was  then
    issued with another visit visa valid from 29 May 2013 to 29  May  2015.
    Her child, a baby boy, G, was born in the UK on  8  September  2013  in
    Croydon. She applied for leave to remain in the UK as a parent of a  UK
    citizen child on 5 December 2014. She had met the father when he was in
    holiday in Barcelona and had come to the UK to have her child. However,
    it transpired that the father had another family although he saw G four
    or five times a week and objected to the appellant leaving the UK.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  appellant's   identity   and
    nationality but concluded that  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules were not met and  there  were
    no exceptional circumstances. The appellant could apply  for  leave  to
    enter from abroad to continue family life with the father and G.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Richmond on 1 July 2015. She was represented by Mr  Solomon.
    The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant had sole care of G but
    with the father having regular contact. That was in the best  interests
    of G. The appellant could not meet the Rules because she entered the UK
    as a visitor. It was unlikely that the father could successfully  apply
    for an order from the family court to prohibit  G  from  being  removed
    from the UK and to grant him primary  responsibility.  Removal  of  the
    appellant would mean G leaving the UK and that would be an interference
    with the family life between the father and G and would be against  G's
    best interests. The best interests of  G  favoured  regulation  of  the
    appellant's position in the UK.  However,  the  father  could  keep  in
    contact if the appellant and G went to Spain although  there  would  be
    practical difficulties. Removal was proportionate.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in that  the  judge
    failed to consider section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act and failed  to  make
    any finding as to whether it was reasonable for  G  to  leave  the  UK.
    Given the accepted facts the only finding reasonably open to the  judge
    was that it would not be reasonable to expect G to leave the UK.

 7. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McClure on 29 October 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge materially erred  in  law  by  failing  to  consider  section
    117B(6).

 8. In a rule 24 response dated 5 November 2015  the  respondent  submitted
    that the failure to mention section 117B(6) was not a  material  error.
    The judge considered the circumstances of the mother, child and  father
    in the decision and the conclusion that it  was  reasonable  for  G  to
    leave the UK could be implied from the conclusions.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

10. Mr Solomon submitted that if the judge had  applied  the  correct  test
    then it was not reasonable to expect G to leave the UK. The child is  a
    UK citizen. The decision under the Immigration Rules was not disputed.

11. Ms Holmes submitted that  the  judge  had  effectively  considered  the
    reasonableness issue and  paragraph  13  of  the  decision  takes  into
    account the clear interference in family life.

12. I have considered Forman (ss117A-C considerations)  [2015]  UKUT  00412
    (IAC). The public interest in firm immigration control is  not  diluted
    by the consideration that a person pursuing a  claim  under  Article  8
    ECHR has at no time been a financial burden on the state  or  is  self-
    sufficient or  is  likely  to  remain  so  indefinitely.  The  list  of
    considerations in section 117B is not  exhaustive  and  a  tribunal  is
    entitled to take into account additional considerations  provided  that
    they are relevant in the sense that they properly bear  on  the  public
    interest question. The judge was not simply required to take account of
    the statutory provision but was also obliged to have regard to  all  of
    the considerations. That required identification and analysis  of  each
    of the provisions concerned. In cases where the provisions  of  section
    117B arise the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  must  demonstrate
    that they have been given full effect.

13. There was no dispute as to credibility in this appeal. The  judge  made
    various positive findings of fact and correctly reached  the  stage  of
    considering proportionality but then failed to consider section 117B in
    general and section 117B(6) in particular. I reject the submission that
    consideration  of  section  117B  can  be  inferred  merely  from   the
    proportionality decision. That flies in the face of  decided  authority
    and would largely nullify the provisions of section 117B. I  find  that
    the judge materially erred in  law.  Thus,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal under Article 8 involved the
    making of an error of law and its decision cannot stand.

14. The judge made extremely clear findings of fact at paragraphs  7-10  of
    the decision, summarised at paragraph 5 above. The crucial findings are
    that it was in the best interests of the child to maintain the  current
    regular contact visits from the father which would not be possible if G
    left the UK, it was  in  the  best  interests  of  the  child  for  the
    appellant's position in the UK to be regularised in order that  contact
    with the father was not closed off, the decision would cause very clear
    interference to family life between G  and  the  father,  the  father's
    contact with G  would  be  very  severely  breached  if  the  appellant
    returned to Spain or Nigeria and the father  would  not  accompany  the
    appellant and maintain a separate household elsewhere in the EEA.

15. On the  basis  of  those  findings  of  fact,  I  accept  Mr  Solomon's
    submission that the only course reasonably open to  the  judge  was  to
    find that it would not be reasonable to require the child to leave  the
    UK. There is no dispute that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with G under section 117B(6)(a) of the  2002  Act
    or that G is a  qualifying  child  under  section  117D  as  a  British
    citizen. I give appropriate weight to the best interests of  the  child
    and find that the public interest  does  not  require  the  appellant's
    removal because under section 117B(6)(b) it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK. The appeal therefore  succeeds  under
    Article 8.

Decision

16. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    remake the decision as follows;

      i) The appeal is allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.


Signed   [pic]    Date 10 February 2016

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
