
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07442/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                           Mr Fazlurrehman Ansari
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Noor, Counsel instructed by Imperial Visas
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of Judge  Asjad,  who  dismissed
    the appeal of Mr Ansari against the Secretary of State's decision of  5
    February 2015 deciding to remove him  from  the  United  Kingdom  under
    section 10 of the 1999 Act.  It concerned  a  claim  on  the  basis  of
    family and private life.

2.   The challenge to the decision was essentially twofold, first  that  the
    judge had failed to make a finding of fact as  to  whether  or  not  Mr
    Ansari is married to  Mrs  Ansari  and  secondly  whether  the  judge's
    finding in relation to the alternative basis upon which the  claim  was
    put that the couple had lived together for at least  two  years  during
    the relevant period, two years up to 13 December 2012, was  a  decision
    that the judge properly came to bearing in  mind  documentary  evidence
    that had been provided and there is reference also, which I shall later
    touch on, to a letter from previous representatives  referring  to  the
    fact that the couple had been separated but had become reconciled.

3.   The  judge  who  granted  permission  to  appeal  essentially  I  think
    embraced all the points made in the grounds and therefore all was  open
    for argument.  The first point  to  consider  is  the  question  as  to
    whether or not the judge erred in not deciding the point of whether  Mr
    and Mrs Ansari are married.  At paragraph 3 of  her  determination  she
    said that it  was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  his
    application fell to be considered on the basis that he is  the  partner
    of Mrs Ansari under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules because  there
    was no evidence of marriage and paragraph 276ADE.

4.   As against that Mr Noor, who also appeared below,  points  among  other
    things to his skeleton argument where he referred at paragraph 8 to the
    genuine and subsisting relationship with  Mrs  Ansari,  with  whom  the
    appellant had been married since 4 November 1977, although it  is  fair
    to say that the bulk of the argument in that regard was related to  the
    provisions in the Rules relating to requirements for limited  leave  to
    remain as a partner.  My scrutiny of the judge's Record of  Proceedings
    does not provide a clear indication if there was any concession in this
    regard and neither does Mr Jarvis' reading of the Presenting  Officer's
    notes, which recall the cross-examination only.

5.   So there is I think an issue here about the question of marriage  which
    is, it is argued, not an immaterial one even though the judge  went  on
    to consider the situation with regards to the two years under the Rules
    but would at least have implications for a consideration of  Article  8
    outside the Rules.  I will come back to that.

6.   The second point, as I say, is the argument that  the  judge  erred  in
    her assessment of the evidence concerning the relationship  between  Mr
    and Mrs Ansari as I have referred to.  There  was  a  letter  from  the
    previous solicitors Marks &  Marks,  referring  to  the  couple  having
    separated at one point.  It was denied by Mr Ansari and by his son  who
    gave evidence that they had given this information to  the  solicitors.
    That was not accepted by the judge.  Mr Noor argues that in  any  event
    it is irrelevant because the relevant period is this two year period to
    December 2012.  A lot of evidence was produced in relation to that  and
    I agree that that is not a decisive point although it  is  relevant  of
    course in the judge's assessment of credibility as a whole.

7.    The  judge  gave  quite  detailed  consideration  to  the  documentary
    evidence.  At paragraph 7 in particular she noted various ways in which
    the appellant's name was recorded on various documents and the range of
    variations that existed and her concern that the reference  might  just
    as easily be a reference to his son, given that they could be  said  to
    share the same initials being Mr F R Ansari.

8.   Also, at paragraph 10 she went on to look in some detail at  particular
    documents which she found did not bear out the claim that the  evidence
    showed that the couple were living together in a relationship  akin  to
    marriage or civil partnership.  She said for example that there was  no
    evidence of joint  finances,  only  fleeting  references  on  documents
    relating to bank accounts, and she cited particular documents.  One  of
    these is one upon which Mr Noor relies and  that  is  to  be  found  at
    paragraph 64 of the bundle.  This is a  letter  from  Essex  &  Suffolk
    Water which is addressed to Mr Fazal Ansari but it refers to  the  bank
    account name of Ansari F S & S F and one of  the  points  made  by  the
    judge here was that F S is not Mr Ansari's name in fact  but  the  bank
    account number and the bank sort code are both provided.

9.   At page 97 of  the  bundle  there  was  a  letter  which  was  in  fact
    addressed to both Mr and Mrs Ansari and that has the account number and
    the sort code which is the one referred to in the Essex & Suffolk Water
    document and there are other documents from  the  water  company  which
    again refer to that same sort code and account even though the  letters
    are addressed to Mr Ansari only but the letter at page 97  I  think  is
    quite important in as it were tying them together to this joint account
    which is referred to in any event on the other documents being in  both
    names.  That one gets Mr Ansari's name right and I think that there  is
    force in what Mr Noor says about typographical errors having been as it
    were interpreted against the appellant because it  is  clear  that  the
    NatWest account regard it as being Mr F R and Mrs F S  Ansari  although
    the water company referring to that  same  account  certainly  got  his
    initials wrong.

10.  I think, looking at the evidence of the documents as a whole,  while  I
    take Mr Jarvis' point that one could not ordinarily expect a  judge  to
    delve  into  the  kind  of  detail  that  has  been  gone  into   here,
    particularly since these matters were not only addressed in  detail  by
    the judge setting out at least in Mr Noor's skeleton argument though he
    may well  have  gone  into  it  in  detail  in  his  oral  submissions.
    Nevertheless, though the judge has gone into the kind of  detail  which
    she did here I think that there are  concerns  about  the  findings  to
    which she came although again I see Mr Jarvis' point that the  evidence
    has to be considered as a whole and there are aspects of  the  findings
    which had not been challenged where the judge came to an  adverse  view
    on credibility.

11.  I do have sufficient concern about the two issues  in  this  case,  the
    failure to address the question of the couple  being  married  and  the
    relevance of that for the rest of the appeal and also the  scrutiny  of
    the documentation although admittedly there was a lot of it.  In that I
    think the judge in both respects did materially err.  As a consequence,
    as I see it, the matter has to be revisited.  I think that Mr Noor  was
    right that the degree of detail is such that the remaking needs  to  be
    made in the First-tier Tribunal and so it  will  actually  be  remitted
    back to a judge in Birmingham again.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
