


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/07455/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 March 2013                              |On 16 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between


                              HOKAN KHAN OMERZY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Mohammed, with Kingstons solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson,  Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born in 1978 and now  35  years
   old.  He  appeals  against  the  respondent's  refusal  to  grant  him  a
   Residence Card as confirmation of his  right  to  reside  in  the  United
   Kingdom as the spouse of an Accession State citizen.  His application  is
   based on his relationship with Ms Jana Sestakova, a citizen of the Slovak
   Republic.  Ms Sestakova has a child with cerebral palsy,  now  age  about
   16, but not the appellant's child.

2. The parties entered into an Egyptian Urfi (customary)  marriage  contract
   on 2 November 2010 by proxy, with Ms Sestakova present in Egypt  and  the
   appellant on the end of a telephone from the United Kingdom.   His  proxy
   for the contract in Egypt was his brother, who is also  said  to  be  his
   wife's employer in the United Kingdom.

3. The appellant has been  in  the  United  Kingdom  since  2008.   When  he
   entered the United Kingdom, he had a wife and child in  Afghanistan.   It
   is his case that he has long since divorced that wife, but no evidence of
   that divorce is before me.   There were a number  of  other  applications
   before the present application, including an application under Article  8
   ECHR, all of which failed.

First-tier Tribunal determination

4. On 2  August  2012,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Trotter  dismissed  the
   appellant's appeal, holding, in  a  fully  reasoned  determination,  that
   there was no valid appeal before him; that an Urfi or customary  marriage
   is not valid in United Kingdom law; that even if it were,  the  appellant
   and sponsor had not entered into such a marriage; that if  they  had,  it
   was a marriage of convenience; and that to the extent that the  interests
   of the sponsor's child were relevant, no reason had been put forward  why
   it was not in the child's best interests for the appellant to be  removed
   to Afghanistan.  He declined to make an anonymity order.

Grounds of appeal

5. The appellant appealed.  He challenged the determination on a  number  of
   bases:

          a) that the  First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in finding that there
             was no in country right of appeal, and  had  failed  to  engage
             with paragraphs 10-19 of the skeleton argument prepared for him
             in this respect, with particular reference to JH  Zimbabwe  and
             Abdullah;

          b) that the appellant had adduced sufficient  proof  of  the  Urfi
             proxy marriage contract in Egypt and that it should be accepted
             as valid in United Kingdom law;

          c) that the Tribunal's criticism of the translation  of  the  Urfi
             contract was erroneous since all the essential information  was
             properly recorded therein;

          d) that the absence of the appellant's brother from the First-tier
             Tribunal proceedings (he had returned to Pakistan because of  a
             family  bereavement)  should   not   damage   the   appellant's
             credibility and that the Tribunal  judge  had  showed  bias  in
             considering that it did;

          e) that the  First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  considering  that
             Ms Sestakova was still required to comply  with  the  Accession
             Agreement, which had come to an end as of May  2011,  the  case
             being determinations in August 2012;

          f) that in any event, she had completed a year's  registered  work
             by 1 December 2011;

          g) that the respondent had not cross-examined the appellant on the
             'marriage of convenience' point and that it was not open to the
             judge to find the  marriage  to  be  such  without  giving  the
             parties an  opportunity  to  deal  with  that  submission;  and
             overall

          h) that the determination was tainted by 'systematic failure'  and
             the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's   bias   and   pre-conceived
             assumptions.

Permission to appeal

6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Easterman
   on 17 August 2012 on the basis that the allegations made were so complex,
   and so serious, that they required a  hearing  and  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal judge who dealt with the appeal should be permitted  to  comment
   thereon.   That has not happened:  directions were  given  by  the  Upper
   Tribunal to clarify  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the  matters  therein
   alleged.

Directions

7. On 22 October 2012, the Upper Tribunal standard directions were  sent  to
   the parties and in addition,   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  King  directed  as
   follows:

    "1)    Permission to appeal was given on 17  August  2012.   The  judge
    granting leave found the lengthy grounds and skeleton  argument  to  be
    difficult to read and to interpret.  Much of the complaint centres upon
    the approach taken by the First-tier Tribunal judge to  the  status  of
    the Urfi marriage and whether the parties are lawfully married.

    2)     Those acting for the appellant shall set out concisely the  main
    issues to be raised, identifying by schedule  and  paginated  reference
    the documents to be  relied  upon  to  progress  each  issue.   Such  a
    schedule shall be served together with a paginated bundle no less  than
    7 days before the hearing.

    3)     If the Tribunal finds there to be an error of law it  is  likely
    to determine the appeal  at  that  same  hearing.   The  appellant  and
    sponsor should attend and, in those circumstances,  an  interpreter  in
    the Pushto and one in the Slovakian language is required. "

Rule 24 Reply

8. On 4 March 2013, the respondent served a reply  under  rule  24,  stating
   that 'in summary, the respondent will submit inter alia that the judge of
   the First-tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately'.

9. No further documents were filed for the hearing, which came before me  on
   that basis.

Upper Tribunal hearing

10. At the Upper Tribunal hearing, Ms Petterson accepted that  the  document
   produced evidencing the Urfi marriage by proxy in Egypt was genuine.  The
   question was whether it amounted to a valid marriage capable of  engaging
   the EEA provisions.  She also accepted that Ms  Sestakova  was  a  Slovak
   citizen exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom  at  the  date  of
   decision.

11. There is no evidence at all, other than the assertion by the  appellant,
   that he is no longer the spouse of his Afghan wife.  However, if  he  has
   entered into a valid marriage with Ms Sestakova and if in  Egypt  such  a
   marriage can be polygamous, then  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
   (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 may be  met  and  he  would  be
   entitled to the Residence Card for which he applied.

12. I gave Mr Mohammed time to  produce  evidence  to  assist  me  with  the
   legality and effect of an Urfi  marriage  entered  into  by  proxy.   The
   additional evidence was emailed to the Upper Tribunal on 15 March and  15
   April  2013.   It  consisted  of  further  submissions  by  Mr  Mohammed,
   accompanied by a bundle of documents, and an affidavit from  an  Egyptian
   solicitor.

Mr Mohammed's submissions

13. Mr Mohammed submitted that following A-M v A-M  (Divorce:  Jurisdiction;
   Validity of Marriage) [2001] 2 FLR 6, English law allowed for there to be
   a presumption of validity of marriage arising  out  of  cohabitation  and
   reputation which was strong evidence that a  marriage  had  been  entered
   into.  In El Gamal v El Maktoum [2011] EWHC 3763 (Fam), Bodey J was  said
   to have held that an Urfi marriage  entered  into  in  Egypt  without  an
   alleged marriage contract would be void.

14. The appellant relied on  Dicey  and  Morris'  'Conflict  of  Laws'  15th
   edition, and contended that foreign marriages would be  recognised  where
   the marriage was formally valid and the parties  had  capacity  to  enter
   into such a marriage.

15. Dealing with the recognition  of  an  Islamic  marriage,  the  appellant
   contends that Islamic law applies in  Egypt;  that  where  a  Muslim  man
   marries a Christian woman, as here, Shari'a law applies; and that a  wife
   may obtain a form of divorce  in  an  Urfi  marriage  under  Law  1/2000,
   Article 17 (albeit not a khula' divorce) as long as the marriage contract
   is evidenced in 'some form of writing'.

16. Mr Mohammed contends that the issues of residence and domicile  are  not
   relevant, as long as the religious ceremony is valid in the country where
   it is contracted.  A proxy marriage undertaken in Pakistan  is  valid  in
   Pakistan, so long as it is undertaken in accordance with Shari'a law, and
   therefore is recognised  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  same  principle
   applies in Egypt.   By  analogy,  he  relies  on  s.  5  of  the  Private
   International Law (Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Act  1995,  which  permits
   persons domiciled in England and Wales to marry abroad in accordance with
   the laws of the country where they do so, when actually present  in  that
   other country.  The same position on proxy  marriages  is  taken  in  the
   respondent's IDIs as the skeleton observes;  reference  to  the  case  of
   Akhtar (2166) that a telephone marriage was valid  are  irrelevant  here,
   since this Urfi contract was a proxy marriage.

17. Mr Mohammed referred me  to  'Personal  Status  Laws  in  Egypt  -  FAQ'
   produced by the Promotion of Women's Rights (Egypt) as to the  status  of
   Urfi marriages in Egyptian law, and to  a  document  entitled  'The  Urfi
   marriage:  Validity   and   Implications'   produced   by   the   Supreme
   Constitutional Court of Egypt.   Overall, his argument is  that  Egyptian
   law recognises Urfi marriages, as long as they are  documented  in  'some
   kind of writing', at least  for  the  limited  purpose  of  dealing  with
   divorces from such marriages.

18. No further submissions were received from the respondent.

Urfi contracts

19. 'Urfi' or customary marriage in Egypt is a contract taking  effect  only
   between the parties, which until 2000 had  no  external  effects.   Under
   Article 17 of the Egyptian Personal Status Law 1/2000, wives  under  Urfi
   marriages can apply to the family courts for a divorce, as  long  as  the
   Urfi contract is evidenced in 'some form of writing'.

20. The affidavit of Mr Aymari Mourad, an Egyptian solicitor, explains  that
   Egyptian law recognises five types of law:  Shari'a law,  Christian  law,
   Jewish law, non-faith or common law, and conflict laws which  are  almost
   always resolved in favour of Shari'a law.  The appellant is a Muslim; his
   marital arrangements would therefore be governed by Shari'a law and  that
   would override whatever religious adherence his wife had.

21. The formalities required for an Urfi marriage in Egypt, as  set  out  in
   his affidavit, are: that the parties are of the opposite sex  and  freely
   consent; the man is a Muslim; there must be two male Muslim witnesses (or
   one Muslim male and two Muslim females); the marriage must be  officially
   documented in 'any kind of writing'; and the parties must openly speak of
   the marriage and not conceal the fact that they are married.

22. Mr Mourad agrees with Ms Petterson that the document produced  in  these
   proceedings meets those  requirements.  Mr  Mourad  considers  it  of  no
   relevance that the marriage which took place in Egypt was between parties
   neither of whom was an Egyptian citizen:

      "14. ...In Egypt, there is no such thing as a 'foreign'  Muslim.   All
      Muslims are part of  the  wider  brotherhood  and  sisterhood  of  the
      Islamic faith.  Accordingly, if a Muslim of a foreign state  comes  to
      Egypt his actions will be subject to the laws of his Shari'a.

      15.   In relation to the  proxy  element  of  the  marriage,  this  is
      entirely permissible under Shari'a law.  Indeed,  under  Shari'a  law,
      there is no requirement that the parties have  even  met  before  they
      marry.  However, in this case I understand that the  parties  had  met
      prior the marriage and now live together as man  and  wife.   In  such
      circumstances, Shari'a law would recognise such a marriage.

      16.   In conclusion, I confirm that this  marriage  is  recognised  in
      accordance with Egyptian law."

23. Mr Mourad's evidence is tendered as expert evidence.  He states that  he
   is a solicitor, but gives no other indication of his  expertise  in  this
   matter, nor does he give any source for his evidence, other than Personal
   Status Law 1/2000.

24.  A  document  entitled  'Information  on  religious  freedom  in  Egypt,
   particular in relation to mixed marriage?' by the  Refugee  Documentation
   Centre (Ireland) confirms Mr Mourad's expert opinion  that  Muslim  women
   may not marry non-Muslim men without being guilty of apostasy.   That  is
   not an issue here.  A Muslim man's children are automatically Muslim.

25. A document entitled 'Personal Status Laws in  Egypt  FAQ',  prepared  by
   Promotion of Women's Rights (Egypt) notes that:

      "10. What are the main fields related to the family that  contemporary
      personal status laws did not solve?
      * Customary ('Urfi) non  registered  marriage  is  not  considered  as
      illegal; meaning a man and a woman can  still  get  married  secretly,
      without their marriage being registered. Since 2000, the wife  married
      'Urfi can petition for divorce but she will not receive any  financial
      support from her former husband. Besides,  it  is  very  difficult  to
      prove the paternity of the father  in  case  children  are  born  from
      customary marriages. DNA testing is not mandatory in paternity  cases,
      though a draft law was submitted to the People's Assembly in 2009  for
      that purpose. ...


      3. What is a customary ('Urfi) marriage?
      A customary ('Urfi) marriage is a marriage which is not celebrated  by
      a state representative and is not registered. If it  is  concluded  by
      the two future spouses in  front  of  2  witnesses  and  respects  the
      general conditions for a marriage (eg. minimum age, dower,  etc.),  it
      will produce certain legal effects.
      Egyptian law does not forbid customary marriages  but  grants  them  a
      status inferior to that of registered marriages: no claim concerning a
      marriage will be heard by the courts when it is denied, unless  it  is
      supported by an official marriage document. A  customary  marriage  is
      not considered illegal but in case the marriage is denied, the  courts
      will be prohibited from hearing any dispute regarding such a marriage.
      In other words it  deprives  the  wife  from  claiming  the  right  to
      alimony, maintenance or succession: if she goes to courts and pretends
      that her husband has to pay her alimonies, he will deny the  existence
      of a marriage contract between them  and  her  legal  action  will  be
      considered inadmissible.

      4. Are children born in a customary marriage legitimate?
      Parentage can be established if the father recognizes his child. If he
      does not, the mother can  bring  a  case  to  family  courts  to  have
      paternity established. Paternity dispute and filing  for  divorce  are
      the only grounds on which courts are allowed to rule (since  2000)  on
      customary marriages in case of denegation by one of the parties.
      The mother can prove, by any means of proof, the existence of intimate
      relations with the alleged father. A customary marriage contract  will
      be  considered  as  a  proof,  but  will  most  likely  need   to   be
      substantiated by other elements (ex. testimonies).

      5. Is it possible to terminate a 'Urfi marriage?
      If both spouses agree to  terminate  a  'Urfi  marriage,  the  husband
      repudiates his wife and the originals of the  marriage  contracts  are
      torn. To be in a safer position, the wife can ask her  former  husband
      to sign a paper in the presence of 2 witnesses, acknowledging that  he
      repudiated her.
      If the original of the marriage contract remains with the husband  who
      refuses to repudiate his wife and to destroy the contract, the wife is
      still considered married and cannot remarry. However, since 2000,  she
      can petition for a judicial dissolution of her marriage  on  the  same
      grounds as those recognised for registered marriages. She can use  any
      written document to prove the existence of the  marriage,  which  will
      then serve as the  basis  for  her  subsequent  request  for  divorce.
      Divorce by khul' however, is not allowed in that  case.  The  divorced
      wife will not be able to require  any  financial  right  for  herself.
      However, the father will have to provide alimony to  his  children  if
      paternity has been established."

26. Finally,  the  appellant  produces  "The  Urfi  Marriage:  Validity  and
   Implications", a paper presented at the International  Symposium  of  the
   Supreme Constitutional Court Egypt  in  collaboration  with  the  Konrad-
   Adenauer-Stiftung  Egypt  on  14-15  November   2009   at   the   Supreme
   Constitutional Court in Cairo. The papers from  the  conference  are  not
   included.  The introduction  sets  out  the  issue  which  the  Symposium
   discussed, as follows:

      "Urfi marriages, though valid under the religious point of  view,  are
      not officially registered in many Muslim states  and  can,  therefore,
      lead to complex, exceedingly problematical legal issues concerning the
      personal status of the persons  involved,  and  occasionally  severely
      affect women and children rights in particular.  In addition, a number
      of other unregistered marriages do exist in some Islamic countries, as
      for example the  Misyar  marriage  in  Saudi  Arabia,  or  the  Mut'ah
      marriage under the Shi'ite law, which is widely common in Iran. ...

      In Egypt today the number of marriages that are  concluded  informally
      is on the rise, and these marriages are considered a  growing  social,
      economic and legal  problem  both  in  Egypt  and  abroad.   Typically
      referred to as Urfi (customary) marriages, they are formed  in  a  way
      that makes them religiously valid yet at the  same  time  non-existent
      under national law, since they typically are not registered  with  the
      civil authorities.

      As an informal phenomenon, accurate statistics are not available,  but
      researchers have suggested that the number of Urfi marriages might  be
      even  higher  than  the  3  million  registered  marriages  in  Egypt.
      Concurrently, the number of conventional registered  marriages  is  on
      the decline, and the government has been forced to begin  to  confront
      the problems caused by the lack of official status of these marriages,
      creating for the first time in 2000, for example, a possible path  for
      a woman in an Urfi marriage to seek a divorce from it.

      The existence of a  type  of  marriage  outside  the  formal  national
      marriage and registration process is not limited to Egypt.   In  Saudi
      Arabia, the concept of a  Misyar  (travelling  or  visiting)  marriage
      often involves a woman staying in her own residence and being  visited
      by her husband in this type of marriage which, like the Urfi in Egypt,
      is typically not registered with the state.   In  Iran,  the  specific
      concept in Shi'ite law of a Mut'ah marriage (typically  translated  as
      temporary marriage)  is  practiced  in  fairly  large  numbers.   This
      marriage type shares some characteristics  in  common  with  Urfi  and
      Misyar, yet also carries some important differences.

      Urfi marriages can also create international challenges.  If the  wife
      obtains a visa for Europe, for example, how do or should the  European
      authorities treat the Urfi husband?  If  a  European  man  travels  to
      Egypt and concludes there an Urfi marriage with an Egyptian woman, can
      that woman later petition to join her husband in his home country?"

27. Those are the issues before the Tribunal in this appeal. In 2011  in  El
   Gamal v Al Maktoum [2011] EWHC B27 (Fam), Mr Justice  Bodey,  sitting  in
   the Family Division, was asked to  determine  whether  an  Urfi  marriage
   conducted in the United Kingdom should be regarded as a marriage,  albeit
   a void marriage, in English law.    The husband was  Egyptian,  the  wife
   American, and both were Muslims, although the wife  was  tending  towards
   Kabbalah by the end of the relationship.  The Urfi marriage ceremony  was
   conducted in London and no paper record was made.

28. He concluded that as the ceremony  had  made  no  attempt  to  meet  the
   requirements of the Marriage Act 1949, the law governing marriage in  the
   United Kingdom which was the lex loci celebrationis, it could not  be  so
   regarded.  He recorded expert evidence which he had  received  about  the
   Urfi marriage system in Egyptian law:

      83. I have had the benefit of expert evidence in Islamic law from  Mr.
      Ian Edge of Counsel on the requirements of a valid Islamic ceremony of
      marriage. Putting it very shortly, nowadays a written contract or some
      written evidence is  generally  required  by  the  courts  in  Islamic
      countries, although a  court  may  exceptionally  hear  oral  evidence
      instead. It would be rare to find a customary Islamic marriage  (known
      as an "Urfi") without writing, and it  would  be  unlikely,  says  Mr.
      Edge, that an Imam, certainly one from London, would even perform such
      a ceremony without a written contract. I pause to say that there is no
      evidence here of where the Imam came from; he may  have  practised  in
      London or he may not. The gist of Mr. Edge's evidence  was  that  this
      requirement for writing has become widely known, to  the  extent  that
      the traditional  Islamic  ceremony  has  actually  come  to  be  known
      generally  as  a  "Katib  al  Kitaab",  meaning  the  writing  of  the
      agreement. The evidence of Nadida  el  Dakak,  the  mother's  Egyptian
      solicitor, resonated with this expert evidence from Mr. Edge. When the
      mother told her of the intended secret marriage, Miss  el  Dakak  says
      she advised the mother against it; but the mother was  headstrong  and
      went through with it. Miss el Dakak advised the  mother  that  if  the
      father was insisting on this sort of marriage ceremony, then she  (the
      mother) must be confident that he would  declare  it  later,  and  she
      advised her 'to secure her future'. Miss el Dakak  said  in  her  oral
      evidence that "... in Egypt we don't like secret marriages".

29. A similar type of marriage (albeit not identical) was considered by  the
   AIT in NA (Customary marriage and divorce - evidence) Ghana [2009]  UKAIT
   00009.  The Tribunal concluded at paragraph 24 that:

      "24.  So far as the  position  relating  to  customary  marriages  and
      divorces in Ghana is concerned  there  is  no  substantial  difference
      between the evidence produced by the appellant and the respondent  and
      we can summarise our findings as follows:

           (a) A customary marriage is a lawful form of marriage  in  Ghana
           which  must  be  carried  out  under  the  relevant   particular
           tradition and customary practices. ...

           (d)  The  onus  of  proving  either  a  customary  marriage   or
           dissolution rests on the party making the assertion.  Under  the
           immigration rules it is  for  the  appellant  to  prove  that  a
           marriage is valid. Where this involves proving that  a  previous
           customary marriage has  been  dissolved,  it  is  reasonable  to
           expect the appellant to produce the best available  evidence  to
           support this assertion. As registration of the dissolution of  a
           customary marriage is not mandatory in Ghana, an appellant  does
           not necessarily have to produce a registration of dissolution to
           prove the divorce although it would be sensible to do so. In the
           alternative evidence in the form of a statutory  declaration  or
           affidavit produced by family members or  other  people  able  to
           confirm the dissolution of the customary tribal marriage  should
           be produced. The fact that such evidence is  not  produced  does
           not necessarily mean that the appellant cannot  succeed  on  the
           basis of oral evidence alone but in such cases an appellant  may
           need to explain the absence of documentary evidence which he can
           reasonably be expected to produce and may in consequence fail to
           discharge the onus of proof of showing that a previous  marriage
           has been dissolved."

Polygamous marriages

30. The Urfi marriage of these parties may be polygamous, since there is  no
   evidence other than the husband's assertion, that he is divorced from his
   Afghan wife.  A-M v A-M [2001]  2 FLR 6 also relied  on  expert  evidence
   from Mr Edge, this time in relation to divorce by  talaq,  a  matter  not
   germane to the present discussion.  The parties in A-M had  purported  to
   go through a marriage ceremony in London, which  they  both  knew  to  be
   actually as well  as  potentially  polygamous.   That  marriage  made  no
   attempt to meet the requirements of the Marriage Act  1949  and  was  not
   valid in  United  Kingdom  law.   Later,  apparently  in  an  attempt  to
   regularise the wife's position, the husband  had  divorced  the  wife  by
   talaq in Sharjah and then, she  thought,  remarried  her  there,  but  it
   turned out that instead what he had done was to revoke the talaq, so that
   no new legal marriage was created.  The parties had lived together for 20
   years and the court considered that the presumption of  marriage  applied
   to them.  The case gives helpful guidance on when a  polygamous  marriage
   may be lawful:

      "[36] In the present case,  if  lawful  marriage  is  to  be  presumed
      between these parties, it must have occurred in  an  Islamic  country,
      and it must have been a  lawful  polygamous  marriage.  It  is  common
      ground between the parties, and I so hold, that  the  presumption  [of
      marriage] must extend to presuming such a marriage, where the domicile
      of the parties permits it, since the whole rationale of the rule is to
      find a lawful occasion  for  the  kind  of  cohabitation  in  question
      whenever that can be done. It follows from the  evidence  of  Mr  Edge
      that a valid polygamous marriage could be contracted between these two
      parties in an Islamic country without any public ceremony, and  indeed
      without the presence of the wife, providing  she  had  at  some  stage
      signed a power of attorney, whether knowing exactly what  it  was,  or
      what it was for, or not. I have accepted her  evidence  that  she  did
      sign documents at the husband's request from time to time and  without
      applying her mind to what they were for. ...

      [40] If there was a valid marriage by Islamic law in this case, it can
      only have taken place whilst both were domiciled  in  countries  which
      permitted a valid polygamous marriage. ...


      [48] There are many other statements of the principle underlying  this
      rule in Hyde v Hyde and Woodmansee (above). Whilst it  stood,  it  was
      held to prevent any grant of a decree  of  nullity  in  respect  of  a
      polygamous marriage - see Risk (Otherwise Yerburgh) v  Risk  [1951]  P
      50. A decree of nullity is a form  of  matrimonial  relief.  The  rule
      never, however, meant that a polygamous union went wholly unrecognised
      by English courts. Such marriages were,  by  contrast,  recognised  as
      valid for many purposes when valid by the law of the place where  they
      were contracted, and providing that the lex domicilii  of  each  party
      permitted          entry          into          such          unions."
                          [Emphasis added]

The law

31. The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 apply to  this
   appeal.   The definition of  'spouse'  simply  excludes  a  spouse  in  a
   marriage of convenience.   The  respondent  has  not  asserted  that  the
   present relationship is a marriage of convenience and  she  accepts  that
   the Urfi marriage document is genuine.  No distinction  is  made  in  the
   Regulations between registered and customary marriages, subject always to
   the lex loci celebrationis rule, and the very helpful summary at rules 66
   and 67 in Dicey and Morris.

32. Mr Mohammed is right that the division is between  formal  validity  and
   capacity, but wrong as to the meaning of capacity,  which  in  Dicey  and
   Morris' rule 67(1) is qualified thus: "capacity to marry is  governed  by
   the law of each party's  ante  nuptial  domicile".   In  this  case,  the
   respective domiciles of the parties are Afghanistan for the  husband  and
   Slovakia for the  wife.    Afghanistan  is  a  Muslim  country  in  which
   polygamy is lawful; Egypt is also such a country and makes no distinction
   between foreigners and nationals as long as they are Muslims;  but  there
   is no evidence before me to suggest that Slovakia,  which  is  a  largely
   Christian country, is one in which polygamy is lawful.

33.  I  approach  this  appeal  on  the  basis  that  a  customary  marriage
   contracted in Egypt is capable of making of  the  non-EEA  party  an  EEA
   spouse, but that will be a question of fact on each occasion.   There  is
   no satisfactory evidence as to the present situation in relation  to  the
   appellant's Afghan spouse:   Afghanistan is a Muslim country and  he  has
   not returned there for many years.  If he had divorced  his  wife  'years
   ago' as he now says, there would be community or legal evidence  of  such
   divorce.

34. It follows  therefore  that  the  appellant  has  not  shown  that  this
   marriage was a monogamous marriage and that it is more likely than not to
   be a polygamous marriage.  That is not a difficulty  for  the  appellant,
   who is appellant is domiciled in Afghanistan, a country in which polygamy
   is lawful:  it is not suggested that he has acquired a domicile of choice
   in the United Kingdom which might restrict his ability  to  take  another
   wife.

35. However, the wife is  Slovak  and  Slovakia  is  not  a  Muslim,  but  a
   Christian country.  She is a Christian and there is no evidence before me
   which suggests that polygamy is lawful in Slovakia.  It has also not been
   suggested that she acquired a domicile of choice in the  United  Kingdom,
   nor in Egypt in the two weeks during which she was there  on  holiday  to
   contract the Urfi marriage.  If that analysis is right, the  parties  did
   not have capacity to enter into a polygamous marriage together in Egypt.





Conclusions

36. It follows that, even  treating  the  appellants'  evidence  as  to  the
   events in Egypt, the Urfi  marriage,  and  the  document  produced  which
   recorded it, as genuine, the contract into  which  they  entered  is  not
   recognised as a marriage under British law and accordingly, the appellant
   is not Ms Sestakova's spouse for the purposes of the EEA Regulations.  He
   is not, therefore, entitled to the Residence Card he seeks and  I  uphold
   the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   Mr Mohammed  has  not  pursued
   the allegations of bias in the grounds of appeal and I do not consider it
   necessary to rule separately thereon.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. Nothing  in  the
material before me suggests that such a direction is necessary and I do  not
make any anonymity order.
|                                      |                                     |
|Date:  23 October 2013                |Signed:                              |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |Judith Gleeson                       |
|                                      |Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |                                     |







