
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/07220/2015
     IA/07224/2015
     IA/07226/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2 September 2016                      |On 6 October 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                 SUNITA [K]
                                 PIYUSH [J]
                                    [S J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of India. The  first  named  appellant  was
    born on 1 May 1977.  The two other appellants are her sons born  on  24
    January  1999  and  19  February  2011   respectively.    A   reference
    hereinafter to  the  appellant  is  a  reference  to  the  first  named
    appellant.  The appellant arrived in this county with a six month visit
    visa from 28 June 2011 to 28 December 2011.   She  arrived  on  7  July
    2011.  Her sons were born in India.  They arrived on 12  February  2012
    with her estranged husband. The couple separated in mid-2013.

2.   The appellant is educated to degree level in India and used to work  as
    a hairdresser's assistant.

3.   The appellant made a human rights claim on 27 June 2013.  The  decision
    to remove the appellants was taken on 13 February 2015.  The appellants
    appealed and their appeals came before a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  on
    18 February 2016.  He set out his factual findings and  conclusions  as
    follows:

         "Facts found


         91.  The second and third appellant s have been in the UK since  12
             February 2012 and so 4.5 years. The first appellant  separated
             from her husband eighteen months ago about six months after he
             arrived in the UK and so about summer 2014.


         92.  As overstayers  they  were  ordered  to  return  to  India  in
             February 2015 but have not done so, and  a  further  year  has
             elapsed. They lived as a family unit in a house  of  a  friend
             who no longer lives there,  but  permits  them  to  occupy  it
             without charge. The first appellant depends upon the  goodwill
             of her community who provide her funds, and in return  she  is
             of help to them.  In short she works cash in had.


         93.  The first appellant has some medical problems,  but  they  are
             not of a severity to cause difficulty on  return.  The  second
             appellant had a stomach operation some time back.   There  are
             no long term issues.  He is short sighted, much so in one eye,
             but no treatment is needed. He has limited vision in  one  eye
             so has to be particularly careful of the other. There  are  no
             health problems for the third appellant.


         94.  The family have no relations in the UK.  The  first  appellant
             has three brothers and parents in the same village  in  India.
             One brother lives somewhere else. Her parents live with one or
             other of the brothers, and move between them.  One brother has
             two children, the other three.  The children of  the  brothers
             move in with their parents when the first appellant's  parents
             stay.


         95.  The first appellant has never worked in India. She has  worked
             in the UK. There are no health problems  precluding  her  from
             working.


         96.  The second and third appellants understand Punjabi  as  it  is
             their mother tongue. The first appellant speak little  English
             and she converses with her sons in Punjabi. She could  not  do
             so  to  any  significant  extent  in  English.  There  is   no
             significant language difficulty for the  third  appellant  and
             none at all for the first and second appellants. The  cultural
             milieu of the appellants has a significant Indian influence.


         97.  The first appellant's  in-laws  are  unlikely  to  be  of  any
             assistance to her.


         98.  The second and third appellants are in school in the UK.  They
             are neither star pupils nor have any special needs  (the  SATS
             grades so show).  They are educated  at  the  expense  of  the
             taxpayer.


         Conclusion


         99.  I have considered very carefully the persuasive arguments  put
             forward by counsel for the appellants.  I note that the family
             in India is not well off. I weigh carefully the fact that  the
             first appellant has not had paid employment in India, and that
             being a single parent in India, as a woman, is  likely  to  be
             more difficult than in the UK.  That is an important part of a
             proportionality exercise, and in considering whether there are
             very significant obstacles to integration.


         100. However, when considering carefully the reasons put forward by
             the appellants as to why they should not leave  the  UK,  they
             have, in truth, very little substance. They amount to the fact
             that they like being here and being educated here, and at  the
             expense of the taxpayer.


         101. There are  no  health  grounds  that  are  of  weight  to  the
             decision.  There was no medical evidence of the assertion that
             return would cause psychological  damage  to  the  second  and
             third appellants.


         102.  The first appellant is dependent on cash in hand for work she
             does for people or charitable support from the community.  She
             lives  at  the  gift  of  a  friend  and  that   is   insecure
             accommodation.


         103.     The level of integration for the first appellant  is  low,
             and even after studying English in India and being in  the  UK
             for some five years her spoken English  is  at  a  low  level.
             There are no real difficulties with language on integration to
             India.  I have found that all three speak Punjabi:  the  third
             appellant understands it for his mother can speak  to  him  in
             little else. The second appellant has an A* in GCSE  Urdu  and
             so  clearly  speaks  the  language.  The  second   and   third
             appellants must speak to their mother in Punjabi or Urdu  much
             of the time, and she to them.  There is no  language  barrier.
             It is clear from her evidence that all the  people  with  whom
             the first appellant interfaces are from the same community and
             so there is no cultural shock on return to India  for  any  of
             the appellants.


         104. I do not see how the  appellants  can  fall  within  paragraph
             276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules,  as  they  simply  do  not
             qualify. If they did qualify I do not find that there are very
             significant obstacles to integration in India. There  will  be
             obstacles,  of  course.   But  there  are  parents  and  three
             brothers  in  a  village  in  India  to  assist.   The   first
             appellant' parents occupy one house then the  other.   In  the
             short term there is a roof. The first appellant can work,  and
             as she does in the UK doubtless she can be of help  to  others
             and be rewarded economically. There is the third brother also.
             There is no family in the UK to assist  her.  The  second  and
             third appellants will be able to go to  school  on  return  to
             India as they are citizens.


         105.  I have considered carefully the length  of  time  the  family
             have been here. It is 4.5  years  for  the  second  and  third
             appellants. Whilst that is a long way short  of  seven  years,
             there is force in Counsel's submission that  four  years  from
             age 7 up is worth a lot more than 4 years from  birth.  It  is
             not so long that the second and third appellants can have lost
             their Indian roots. However the Immigration Rules use 7  years
             as a starting point. This is much shorter period and there  is
             nothing particularly usual about the facts of this case so  as
             to justify the use of a much shorter period for an  Article  8
             claim than for a claim under the Immigration Rules.


         106.  The first appellant as a single appeal would have no hope  of
             success, as she is simply an overstayer. I have taken  account
             of the submission that it is more difficult for three than for
             one, but there is substantial family and a village  that  they
             were brought up in, and left not so long ago. There are strong
             connections to India.  The first appellant is  in  touch  with
             her family as she gave evidence about them. I  do  not  accept
             that all the people the first appellant knew before  she  came
             to the UK were able to leave at  about  the  same  time.   The
             second and third appellants bear no responsibility  for  their
             being overstayers, but they are Indian citizens  whose  family
             is in India. They have had the benefit of over four  years  of
             English education, and have achieved fluency  in  the  English
             language which ought to be of use to them in India.


         107. There are assertions of integration but no  real  evidence  of
             it.


         108. Section 117A, B and D  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002, Razgar and Huang make it very  difficult  for
             the appellants to succeed. There is in their favour  the  fact
             that the first appellant is a  single  parent,  and  that  the
             family in India is not well off.  That is not  enough,  in  my
             view, to enable the appeals to succeed.


         109.  I have taken careful note of s.55  Borders,  Citizenship  and
             Immigration Act 2009.  Plainly the second and third appellants
             would be better off in the UK. That  is  the  reason  so  many
             people wish to come to the UK.  It is not enough of  a  reason
             to allow the appeal to succeed. There is every reason to think
             that the education of the  second  and  third  appellants  can
             continue in India, and that there will  be  sufficient  family
             support  from  three  brothers  to  make  the   transition   a
             proportionate response to their illegal presence in the UK.""

4.   In relation to the evidence of good character  the  judge  referred  to
    the following extract from, Nasim and others (Article  8)  [2014]  UKUT
    25(IAC) where the Tribunal held:

         'E The effect on human rights of paying one's way and not ocmmiitng
         criminal offences.


         25.  A further seam running through the appellant's submissions was
             that, during their time in the United Kingdom, they  had  been
             law-abiding,  had  not  relied  on  public   funds   and   had
             contributed to the United  Kingdom  economy  by  paying  their
             students' fees. Their  aim  was  now  to  contribute  to  that
             economy by working.


          26. We do not consider that this set  of  submissions  takes  the
             appellants' cases anywhere. It cannot rationally be  contended
             that their Article 8 rights have  been  made  stronger  merely
             because, during their time in  this  country,  they  have  not
             sought public funds, have refrained from  committing  criminal
             offences and have paid the fees required in order to undertake
             their  courses.  Similarly,  a  desire   to   undertake   paid
             employment in the United Kingdom is not,  as  such,  a  matter
             that can enhance a person's right to remain here  in  reliance
             on Article 8.


          27. The only significance of not having criminal convictions  and
             not  having  relied  on  public  funds  is  to  preclude   the
             respondent from pointing to any public interest in respect  of
             the appellants' removal, over and above the  basic  importance
             of maintaining a  firm  and  coherent  system  of  immigration
             control. However, for reasons we have already enunciated, as a
             general  matter  that  public  interest  factor  is,  in   the
             circumstances of these cases, more  than  adequate  to  render
             removal proportionate."

5.   The judge accordingly found that the good character  evidence  was  the
    absence of a negative factor, and not a positive factor  in  favour  of
    the appellant. He dismissed the appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  and
    under the Rules.

6.   There was an application for permission to  appeal  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted on 12 August 2016 on the basis that it was  arguable
    that the judge had set out an insufficient analysis of the  application
    of Section 55  with  particular  reference  to  paragraph  109  of  the
    decision.   It  was  arguable  that  the  judge  had  put  forward  "an
    insufficient analysis of the application of the  criteria  pursuant  to
    Section 117."  It was arguable that the judge "should have  set  out  a
    full analysis of the application of the criteria  in  Razgar  including
    carrying out a proportionality exercise  in  contradistinction  to  the
    findings set out in relation to the Immigration  Rules."  There  was  a
    response filed by the respondent on 19 September 2016. It was submitted
    that the First-tier Judge had directed himself  appropriately  and  had
    properly considered the best interests of the children and  whether  it
    was reasonable to expect them  to  return  to  India.   The  appellants
    clearly did not meet the Immigration  Rules  and  could  not  show  any
    exceptional features in their appeals.

7.   Mr Malik acknowledged that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  produced  a
    comprehensive and lengthy decision and he had only two short points  to
    make.  With reference to paragraph 108 of the decision - which  I  have
    reproduced above - the judge had failed to  consider  Article  8  in  a
    structured manner.  He had not explained how it was difficult  for  the
    appellants to succeed.

8.   In paragraph 109 he had noted that the children would be better off  in
    the UK and it was not clear that primary consideration had  been  given
    to the welfare of the children.  There  had  not  been  a  sufficiently
    structured analysis of the welfare of the children.  Mr Malik felt that
    these were the only two points  he  could  realistically  make  in  the
    circumstances of this case.

9.   Miss Isherwood submitted there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.  The appellant had arrived in  2011  as  a  visitor  and  had
    overstayed.  She was educated to  degree  level  in  India.   Both  the
    children were born in India.

10.  The determination was lengthy and included  copious  reference  to  the
    relevant authorities.  The judge had referred to the  medical  problems
    in paragraph 93, the family in India in paragraph 94 and the  education
    of the children at public expense - a  relevant  consideration  in  the
    light of EV (Philippines) v Secretary of State [2014] EWCA Civ  874  to
    which the judge had made extensive reference at  paragraph  16  of  his
    determination.   The  judge  had  plainly  considered  the   children's
    education, health grounds and the level of  integration  in  paragraphs
    100 to 103 of the decision.  All three appellants  spoke  Punjabi.   He
    had had regard to the length of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    paragraph 105.  The children might be better off in  the  UK  but  they
    were not entitled to residence.  She referred to  paragraph  6  of  the
    head note in AM (s.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC).  At paragraph 13
    it was noted that the judge in  that  a  case  had  not  made  specific
    reference to Section 117B(6) but it was plain that the circumstances of
    the  children  and  their  ability  to  relocate  to  Malawi  had  been
    considered.  The mere presence of the children  in  the  UK  and  their
    academic success was not a trump card.

11.  Mr Malik  accepted  that  Miss  Isherwood  had  made  fair  points  but
    maintained his submission that there had been no structured analysis of
    Article 8 and that the judge had erred in paragraph 109.

12.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the judge's determination  if  it
    was materially flawed in law.

13.  Mr  Malik  acknowledged  at  the  outset  that  the  determination  was
    lengthy.   It is indeed 26 pages long and I have only reproduced  above
    the judge's analysis of the facts and his conclusions.  Miss  Isherwood
    referred to the preceding part of the  determination  where  the  judge
    analyses the law and refers to all the main authorities. At the outset,
    in paragraph 5, he refers to the  issue  of  the  assimilation  of  the
    family into the UK and the residence of  the  children  for  some  five
    years.  He reminds himself that the best interests of the children were
    an integral part of the proportionality assessment under Article 8  and
    he made reference to Section 55 and  the  requirement  to  promote  the
    welfare of children in the UK.  He sets out  at  some  length  the  key
    paragraphs of ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State [2011] UKSC 4, Zoumbas
    v Secretary  of  State  [2013]  UKSC  74  and  many  other  authorities
    including EV  (Philippines)  and  a  lengthy  extract  from  Razgar  at
    paragraph 18 of the decision.  The judge then refers to Section 117 and
    sets out material parts in paragraphs 19 to 20  of  his  decision.   In
    paragraph 21 he reminds himself of the relevance of Section 117B(6)(b).
     He notes that the children have not resided in the UK for  over  seven
    years.  In paragraph 22 he refers to Huang v Secretary of State  [2007]
    UKHL 11 noting that while there was no need to apply a formal  test  to
    the exceptionality, it  would  only  rarely  in  practice  be  that  an
    otherwise lawful removal which disrupted family or private  life  could
    not be shown to be compliant with Article 8.

14.  The judge then refers to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) noting again that  the
    children had lived in the UK for fewer than seven years.

15.  He refers to Section 55 of the 2009 Act in paragraph 25 and  again  and
    importantly reminds himself that it is trite law "that sins of  parents
    are not to be visited upon their children"  but  that  the  immigration
    history is part of the factual matrix.  In paragraph 28  he  states  as
    follows:

         "Overall, and keeping in mind all this guidance,  what  I  have  to
         consider   is   whether   the   overall   circumstances   make   it
         disproportionate to remove the children and their mother (and their
         mother's circumstances are relevant to the children  since  she  is
         the only carer for them), or whether the public policy arguments  -
         that these three are all Indian citizens who arrived under  visitor
         visas 4 or 5 years ago, overstayed and never went  back  -  are  of
         more significance. Because it is a proportionality exercise I  look
         at how big the difference will be in India compared to life in  the
         UK, and weigh that against the public policy argument.  The 7  year
         period for a child is not a 'bright line', or a  firm  succeed/fail
         point. It is also a commonplace that the years  0-4  are  primarily
         spent  with  mother  (in  most  cases)  so  that  years  after  the
         toddler/infant stage are of more importance.  For  the  Immigration
         Rules, and as a starting point for Article 8  I  have  to  consider
         whether there are very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  in
         India."

16.  The judge then sets out paragraph 276ADE and found  that  none  of  the
    conditions were met by the appellants.  He refers to  Appendix  FM  and
    EX.1 which he considered did not assist the appellants  either  as  the
    period of residence was not long enough.

17.  It is quite clear that the judge directed himself at  great  length  on
    the applicable law in this case and the  relevant  authorities.   There
    has been no criticism of his approach which is set  out  on  the  first
    fifteen pages of his decision.

18.  The judge then turns to the documents produced,  the  evidence  at  the
    hearing and the submissions made by both sides, all of which are  fully
    covered.  At page 23 he makes  his  factual  findings  and  conclusions
    which I have reproduced above

19.  If ever this was a case which had to be read as a whole, this  was  it.
    The First-tier Judge in granting permission simply focused on  isolated
    parts of the decision without reading it in its context.

20.  Mr Malik's approach was as ever realistic  and  he  accorded  that  the
    judge's decision was a lengthy and comprehensive one.

21.  Paragraph 108 which was identified in the grant of permission needs  to
    be seen in the context of what the judge had set  out  earlier  in  his
    decision and the same applies to the references to  Razgar  and  Huang.
    In relation to Section 55 and the best interests of the children, apart
    from the case of Zoumbas the judge referred to Azimi-Moayed  (Decisions
    affecting  children;  onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT  00197  (IAC)   in
    paragraph 13 of his decision among other cases.  He refers  to  Section
    55 as I have mentioned at paragraphs 25 to 26 of the  decision  and  as
    was submitted by Miss Isherwood his approach was consistent  with  what
    was said in EV (Philippines).

22.  When paragraphs 108 and 109 are read properly in their context  and  in
    the context of the determination as a whole, I find no  evidence  of  a
    misdirection,  still  less  a  material  misdirection  in  the  judge's
    approach.

23.  The judge had all relevant matters in mind including Section 55 of  the
    2009 Act. His findings of fact were open to  him.   In  a  lengthy  and
    carefully reasoned decision no more structured analysis  was  required.
    I agree with what is said in the respondent's response as well  as  the
    arguments presented by Miss Isherwood.

Notice of Decision

24.  For the reasons I have given the decision of the judge was  not  flawed
    by a material error of law and this appeal is dismissed.

25.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.

26.  The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 5 October 2016

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

