


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/07156/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 30 July 2015                          |            On 19 August 2015        |
|                                         |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                             MILUTIN MASLOVARIC
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bircumshaw, Coventry Law Centre
For the Respondents:   Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated  on  8  September
       2015 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Morrison which refused the  appeal
       on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


    2. The background to this matter is that the appellant,  a  citizen  of
       Montenegro, entered the UK on 20 December 2012 to visit his  British
       wife for the birth of their first child. The appellant has been open
       that he obtained a visit visa as he knew  that  he  could  meet  the
       English language entry clearance requirements as a  partner,  having
       failed to obtain a sufficient score in an IELTS  test.  On  10  June
       2013 he applied for further leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  his
       family life with his wife and daughter. The respondent refused  that
       application in a decision dated 21 January 2014.


    3. It was common ground before Judge Morrison, and before us, that  the
       appellant could not meet  the  Immigration  Rules  for  partners  or
       parents as he was in the UK with leave as a visitor. The appellant's
       witness statement also  confirmed  that  he  had  not  obtained  the
       required English language  qualification  and  could  not  meet  the
       financial requirements.


    4. Judge Morrison therefore proceeded to conduct a second stage Article
       8 assessment. He considered the evidence concerning the  appellant's
       daughter who is a British national and on whom,  really,  this  case
       turns. Judge Morrison sets out the medical evidence relating to  the
       child at [16]. He  accepts  at  [17]  that  she  has  some  form  of
       arthritis without there being a detailed diagnosis and accepted that
       she will require ongoing medical treatment at Birmingham  Children's
       Hospital. The judge went on at [18] and [19] to assess  the  child's
       best interests, finding that they were  for  her  to  be  with  both
       parents but that  it  had  not  been  shown  that  separation  on  a
       temporary basis from her father would have an adverse effect on  her
       development.

    5. Notwithstanding the findings on the child's  best  interests,  Judge
       Morrison concluded that the decision to refuse leave did not  amount
       to a disproportionate interference with family life.

    6. The grounds of appeal argue, firstly, that Judge Morrison failed  to
       apply section 117B(6) in the second stage Article 8 assessment. This
       required him to take into account that "the public interest does not
       require" the appellant's removal if "it would not be  reasonable  to
       expect" his child to leave the UK.

    7. We accept that it was an error not  to  address  the  provisions  of
       paragraph 117B(6) as they are a mandatory  consideration;  see  Dube
       (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT  90  (IAC)  and   Forman   (ss   117A-C
       considerations) [2015] UKUT 412 (IAC).


    8. We did not find this to be an error such that the decision had to be
       set aside to be re-made, however.

    9. Firstly, we could not see how the  material  before  Judge  Morrison
       could have led to the conclusion that it was not reasonable for  the
       child to leave the UK with her parents. The medical evidence did not
       indicate that the child's arthritis was  serious  or  could  not  be
       treated in Montenegro.  Nothing supported the mother's assertion  in
       her witness statement about limited access to healthcare there.  She
       expressed concern if  there  is  a  medical  emergency  but  nothing
       suggested that anything of that kind has or will occur. The evidence
       was that the appellant was employed as a  veterinary  technician  in
       Montenegro, that his wife is qualified to degree level and that  her
       parents have funds which they are willing  to  use  to  support  the
       couple. The appellant's wife is  not  unfamiliar  with  the  country
       after a number of visits. We did not accept that the  evidence  came
       close to showing that the family would have to live in conditions in
       Montenegro that would make it unreasonable for this very young child
       to go there with her parents.

   10. We should also point out for completeness sake that no issue  arises
       from the principles in C-34/09  Ruiz  Zambrano  and  C-256/11  Murat
       Dereci. The couple here are clear that  the  appellant's  wife  will
       remain in the UK with their daughter whatever  the  outcome  of  the
       appeal so the child cannot be said to be deprived of her  rights  as
       an EEA citizen by the decision.  The  assessment  of  reasonableness
       under section 117B(6) is in the context of Article  8  and  not  EEA
       law.


   11. It was also our view that the failure to address section 117B(6) was
       not material where it is only one of a number  of   criteria  to  be
       applied in the second stage Article 8  assessment  and  the  section
       117B factors are specifically expressed as being non-exhaustive; see
       Forman (ss 117A-C  considerations)  [2015]  UKUT  412  (IAC)  again.
       Whatever the outcome of the assessment of the reasonableness of  the
       child leaving the UK, that still fell  to  be  weighed  against  the
       public interest in  maintaining  effective  immigration  control  as
       expressed in the Immigration Rules. Those Rules  still  fell  to  be
       weighed as a central or  primary  factor;  see  Haleemudeen  v  SSHD
       [2014] EWCA Civ 558 at [42]. The appellant accepts that the  English
       language and financial requirements  were  not  met,  those  matters
       further weighing against him.


   12. In our judgement, other than the child's circumstances, the evidence
       not showing it to be unreasonable for her to leave the  UK,  all  of
       the factors to be taken into account went against the appellant.  It
       appeared to us that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  summarised  the
       appeal very accurately at [26], stating:


           "In effect what I am being asked  to  do  in  this  case  is  to
           dispense with the requirement  of  the  appellant  to  meet  the
           Immigration Rules."


   13. It was not our view that the appellant could expect  to  benefit  in
       that way even after an assessment of the reasonableness of the child
       leaving the UK which we have found, in any  event,  could  not  have
       been a material factor here.


   14. The remainder of the grounds and oral argument before us concerned a
       comparison  between  the  appellant's  circumstances  and  those  of
       someone in the UK  unlawfully  or  on  temporary  admission.   Quite
       correctly, given the limits of our statutory jurisdiction, this  was
       not put in terms of a vires challenge.  As  we  understood  it,  the
       submission was that the appellant should in some way benefit in  the
       Article 8 second stage proportionality assessment given that someone
       who did not have leave or had temporary admission might be  able  to
       benefit from paragraph EX.1 when this appellant who had entered  and
       remained lawfully could not do so.


   15. We can deal with that aspect of the challenge relatively  simply  as
       we did not accept that what was a different set of facts  for  which
       Parliament via the Immigration Rules has  made  different  provision
       was relevant to the assessment that Judge Morrison had to make.


   16. For these reasons, we did not find that the decision of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal disclosed an error on a point  of  law  such  that  it
       should be set aside.

Decision:

       The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on
      a point of law such that it should be set aside and it shall stand.


Signed: [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt                          10 August 2015
