

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/07405/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |               Decision and Reasons   |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|On 26 January 2016                       |               On 3 February 2016     |
|                                         |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  R S HAFIZ

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs J Moore, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 17 December  2013.   He
    has not asked for an anonymity order, and none has been made.

 3. The appellant's leave to remain in the UK was  based  in  part  on  his
    claim to have passed an English test in Birmingham in May 2013.   Based
    on information from Education Testing  Services  (ETS)  that  the  test
    certificate had been falsely obtained and  had  been  invalidated,  the
    respondent cancelled the appellant's leave.  He appealed to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 4. Designated Judge J  G  Macdonald  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
    decision promulgated on 7 August 2015.  He found  that  the  respondent
    had not discharged the burden of showing that deception had been  used.
    He thought that statements provided by two civil servants were "generic
    in nature" and did not relate to the "individual appellant  who  denies
    that he engaged in deception" (paragraph 25).  He found nothing in  the
    evidence  to  link  the  appellant  to  the  widespread  abuse  of  ETS
    certificates (paragraphs 26 and 27).

 5. The SSHD sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on  grounds
    headed, "Failing to give adequate reasons for findings  on  a  material
    matter".  The grounds rehearse the evidence  on  which  the  respondent
    relied, and say that it included a "spreadsheet" which  identified  the
    appellant by name and recorded the test taken on 1 May 2013 as invalid.



 6. On 4 December 2015 Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge McClure granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal:

      ... In light of the decision  in  Gazi  IJR  [2015]  UKUT  327  it  is
      arguable that the failure to act upon the evidence presented from  the
      witnesses giving reasons why the English language test certificate was
      invalid is an arguable error of law.

 7. Mr Matthews submitted thus.   At  paragraph  26  the  judge  failed  to
    understand the evidence before him.  The judge said that  the  document
    "ETS SELT source data" was not self-explanatory, but  it  is  precisely
    that:  a  clear  statement  that  the  appellant's  test   certificate,
    identified by his name and the certificate number, has been found to be
    invalid.  The judge says there must be a process  and  an  explanation,
    but that is what the witness statements provided.  The judge says  that
    who completed the document is not stated, but  the  source  is  plainly
    ETS, even if an individual name is not given.  There is no  requirement
    for an individual to give evidence.   The  judge  continues,  "On  what
    basis the evidence was obtained is also not made clear"; that does  not
    seem to mean anything.  The judge says that this is the  only  document
    linking the appellant to the alleged deception and that it cannot stand
    on its own without elaboration, but the witness statements supply that.
     The judge says that there is a lack of direct and clear evidence, when
    such evidence was obviously before him.

 8. Mr Matthews accepted that it was open to the judge to  conclude  either
    way, and that he was not bound to find for the respondent, but he  said
    that a decision which arose from failure  of  understanding  could  not
    stand.  The case required to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    hearing of new.

 9. Mrs Moore submitted along these lines.  The judge was entitled to  find
    that the Secretary of State failed to discharge the  burden  of  proof,
    did understand  the  nature  of  the  evidence  before  him,  and  gave
    sufficient reasoning for disregarding it.  Although the judge  granting
    permission relied heavily on Gazi (a decision not published at the time
    the Secretary of State framed  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal) that case is not  authority  that  evidence  of  this  nature
    automatically establishes deception.  To the contrary, the President of
    the Upper Tribunal in Gazi took a highly adverse view of  the  evidence
    presented by the respondent.  For example, at paragraph 14, he mentions
    "a discernible element of bombast" in the statements relied upon by the
    respondent, and at paragraph 15 he describes some of the  averments  as
    containing "an unmistakable self-serving element".  The Upper  Tribunal
    in Gazi thought as little of the evidence as  the  judge  did  in  this
    case, and for similar reasons.

10. Mr Matthews in reply pointed out  that  Gazi  is  a  case  on  judicial
    review, raising different considerations, and not the last word in ETS-
    related litigation.  He  said  that  "test  cases"  arising  from  such
    statutory appeals, rather than judicial reviews, are due  to  be  heard
    soon, both in the Upper Tribunal  and  in  the  Court  of  Appeal.   He
    repeated his submission that the  judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  for
    finding for the appellant in this particular case.

11. I reserved my determination.

12. Gazi does not go as far in  favour  of  the  respondent  as  the  judge
    granting permission appears to have thought; but nor does it go  nearly
    as far in favour of the appellant as Mrs Moore contended.  Although the
    case arose in a different context, the President was satisfied that the
    respondent's evidence (in all respects similar to the evidence in  this
    case) "was sufficient to warrant the assessment  that  the  [test]  had
    been procured by deception" (paragraph 35).  Although not infallible or
    beyond challenge, the Upper Tribunal was "satisfied that  the  evidence
    upon which the impugned decision was made has the  hallmarks  of  care,
    thoroughness, underlying expertise and sufficient reliability."

13. The decision in the present case does come close to a finding that  the
    evidence relied upon by the Secretary of State is simply  insufficient,
    which would not be consistent with Gazi, and would not be justified  on
    reference to the evidence.  Mr Matthews' rebuttal had much to  be  said
    for it.  If there had been  nothing  more  in  the  determination,  the
    respondent's grounds might have been sufficient to set it aside.

14. Reading the determination in full,  I  note  that  the  judge  had  the
    benefit of oral evidence from the appellant, including his  explanation
    that he sat the test and his denial that he cheated.  At  paragraph  27
    the judge reminds himself that the appellant "has demonstrated  a  good
    command of English both before and since the test  complained  of"  and
    goes on that the appellant therefore "does not readily  fall  into  the
    category of someone who might be likely to cheat."  He then  says  that
    given that the burden of proof is on the Secretary of State, it has not
    been discharged.  This was obviously a "touch and go" case.  It  is  of
    course true that someone who has no real need to cheat may nevertheless
    do so, for whatever  reason  (perhaps  for  certainty  of  outcome,  or
    convenience).  On the other hand, proven ability to pass  such  a  test
    (as the appellant had done previously) and a good  command  of  English
    are indications in his favour.  The judge had the advantage of  hearing
    and observing the witness.  There is no explicit favourable credibility
    finding but such must be implied.  These appear to be the factors which
    the judge found, just, to tip the balance.  The matter is again  "touch
    and go" but in my view the final conclusion is one which  was  open  to
    the judge, a legally adequate explanation for it has been given, and no
    error has been shown sufficiently material to require the determination
    to be set aside.

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


            [pic]


            29 January 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




