
IAC-AH-SC-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07548/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 September 2014                            |On 20 January 2015         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                              Andrzej AUGUSCIAK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Gilbert, instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
Partners, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Andrzej Augusciak was born on 31 January 1983 and  is  a
    male citizen of Poland.  He had appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge R A Jones; Mr B Bompas) against a  decision  of  the  respondent
    dated 21 March 2012 to make a deportation  order  against  him  on  the
    ground that his removal from the United Kingdom was  conducive  to  the
    public good.  The First-tier Tribunal, in a  determination  promulgated
    on 20 June 2014, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Designated Judge Zucker gave permission to appeal on 9 July 2014 in the
    following terms:

         The grounds submit that the appellant has spent time  in  a  United
         Kingdom prison during extradition proceedings which were  found  by
         the High Court to be  flawed.   The  appellant  contends  that  his
         deportation would violate his human rights  because,  if  deported,
         rather than being  extradited,  he  would  not  receive  credit  in
         Poland, to where he would be returned, in respect of the time spent
         in prison in the United Kingdom against the sentence imposed by the
         Polish courts.

 3. In its  response  under  Rule  24  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, the respondent submitted:

         The respondent will submit the grounds raise no  material  arguable
         errors of law and were merely an attempt to re-argue the  claim  in
         mere disagreement with the negative outcome  of  the  appeal.   The
         question of double punishment has been raised before the Panel  and
         was addressed in findings which were properly open to the Panel and
         supported by sound and sustainable reasons at paragraph 23  of  the
         determination.

 4. The appellant has been living in the United  Kingdom  since  2004.   In
    that year, he had been sentenced in absentia in Poland to a total of 25
    months' imprisonment for burglary offences  which  had  been  committed
    before he left that country to enter the United  Kingdom.   A  European
    Arrest Warrant (EAW) was issued against him in 2007.  The appellant was
    arrested and spent 22 months in prison under the terms of the  warrant.
    On 10 September 2012, the judge discharged the EAW on the  basis  there
    were substantial grounds to show that if, expelled, the appellant would
    face a real risk of being subject to treatment contrary to Article 3 of
    the ECHR on his return to Poland.  That decision was, in turn, appealed
    under Section 28 of the Extradition Act and the appeal was allowed  and
    remitted for hearing (see the decision of the Administrative  Court  in
    Poland v Augusciak [2012] EWHC 4043 (Admin)).  District Judge  Coleman,
    sitting at Westminster  Magistrates'  Court,  ordered  the  appellant's
    extradition on 16 September 2013 and  the  appellant  appealed  to  the
    Administrative Court (Collins J) who allowed his appeal on  the  ground
    that the  proceedings  had  not  been  formerly  commenced  within  the
    required time period.  The appellant had been arrested  under  the  EAW
    whilst still serving his term of imprisonment for offences committed in
    the United Kingdom in 2009; the appellant  had  pleaded  guilty  to  an
    offence  of  possessing  prohibited  ammunition  and  possession  of  a
    prohibited weapon and for which he had been sentenced  to  five  years'
    imprisonment  in  February  2010  at  a  Crown  Court.   He  had   been
    recommended for deportation by the Crown Court  Judge,  notwithstanding
    his status as an EEA national.  The  extradition  hearing  should  have
    commenced within 21 days of the appellant's England and Wales  criminal
    sentence coming to an end (23 March 2012) whereas it had not  commenced
    until 24 July 2012.  Collins  J  found  that  this  area  vitiated  the
    legality of  the  entire  proceedings;  because  proceedings  had  been
    commenced out of time, everything that had happened in the  extradition
    following that error had been a nullity.

 5. The grounds of appeal note that no attempt had been made  to  re-arrest
    the appellant or to re-commence extradition proceedings.  Before us, Ms
    Isherwood, for the respondent, made enquiries whilst at court but there
    was nothing to suggest that these proceedings would be  forthcoming  in
    the near future.

 6. The difficulty in the appellant's case is whether he will or  will  not
    be given credit for the time that he has spent in  the  United  Kingdom
    when he  returns  to  face  re-arrest  in  Poland  in  respect  of  his
    conviction in absentia.  The appellant submits that, if he is  returned
    to Poland by way of extradition, then all the  time  he  had  spent  in
    prison under the EAW (22 months) will be deducted from his  outstanding
    sentence in Poland.  Whereas, if he is deported rather than extradited,
    he will not receive any  credit.   This,  in  turn,  raises  issues  of
    "double punishment" (see WC (no risk of double punishment) China [2004]
    UKIAT 00253).   The  appellant  challenges  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination on a number of bases.  First, the Tribunal found that the
    appellant could have agreed to his own extradition to Poland  whereupon
    he would be given credit for time spent in the United Kingdom  and  the
    EAW.  Secondly, the Tribunal suggested that the appellant  himself,  by
    challenging extradition, had led to his is remaining  in  detention  in
    the United Kingdom  for  a  period  that  was  longer  than  necessary.
    Thirdly,  the  Tribunal  took  into  account   that   the   extradition
    proceedings "may" be restarted.

 7. In its determination, the Tribunal at [23] noted that the appellant  is
    "a young man in good health who was found by Dr  Blackwood  not  to  be
    suffering from mental illness."  The Tribunal  in  the  same  paragraph
    addressed the relevant circumstances and concluded that the appellant's
    removal, under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 would  be  proportionate.   An  Article  3  ECHR  claim  that  the
    appellant might be at risk of ill-treatment in Poland from  his  family
    and members of the Roma community was dismissed by the  Tribunal  which
    noted that the appellant's Counsel  before  it  had  acknowledged  that
    "this claim was difficult to maintain though he had not  abandoned  it"
    [24].  This latter matter is not referred to at all in the  grounds  of
    seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 8. We raised with Mr Gilbert a matter which we found to  give  rise  to  a
    significant difficulty in his client's case.  The  grounds  of  appeal,
    which we have summarised above, are predicated on the  assumption  (and
    it is no more than that) that, if the appellant is deported (as opposed
    to extradited) to Poland the  Polish  authorities  will  not  give  him
    credit for any time spent in detention  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    difficulty is that there has been no evidence at all put before  either
    the First-tier Tribunal or ourselves which  would  establish  that  the
    Polish authorities were likely to respond to the appellant's return  in
    that way.  Mr Gilbert submitted that it  was  likely  that  they  would
    respond by depriving the appellant of any credit but he could  give  us
    no persuasive reason  why  they  would  do  so.   He  argued  that  the
    appellant should not need to rely upon the  discretion  of  the  Polish
    authorities to give him credit but the fact remains that he should  not
    be in the position of giving the appellant the benefit of the doubt  on
    an issue which is amenable to being  settled  by  reference  to  expert
    country evidence.  Put simply, it is the appellant's case that he is at
    jeopardy of double punishment; consequently, he was required before the
    First-tier Tribunal to prove to the appropriate  standard  that  he  is
    likely to be punished twice.  He has failed to do so.   Indeed,  whilst
    the Polish authorities may wish to punish the  appellant  for  offences
    committed in Poland  and  for  which  he  has  not  served  a  term  of
    imprisonment there, but they might,,  faced  with  problems  of  prison
    overcrowding  common  throughout  Western  Europe,  consider  that  the
    appellant has served his time.  The fact is, we simply do not know.  We
    are not prepared to assume that the authorities in a  modern  EU  state
    would behave unjustly,  particularly  concerning  a  person's  personal
    liberty, without clear credible evidence on the point.

 9. We acknowledge that there are possibly  problems  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's view that  the  appellant  (if  he  wished  to  be  sure  of
    receiving credit for his detention spent in the United Kingdom)  should
    have acquiesced in the expedition proceedings.  As it  turned  out,  he
    had been right to fight those proceedings as the  Administrative  Court
    ultimately concluded they had been a nullity.  However,  any  error  of
    law which the First-tier  Tribunal  may  have  perpetrated  is  not  so
    serious as to require us to  set  aside  its  determination  given  the
    failure of the appellant to establish, by reference to  evidence,  that
    he is likely to receive no credit in Poland for periods of imprisonment
    served in the United Kingdom.  In  the  circumstances,  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Decision

10. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed        Date 19 January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

