
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/07305/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd September  2013                          |On 9th September 2013      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                          Mr sheikh mohamed jameel
                         (Anonymity Order not Made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Kirk (Instructed by Shah Law Chambers)
For the Respondent:  Mr T Wilding (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant against a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Jhirad) promulgated on  3rd  July  2013  by  which  she  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    him leave to remain on the basis of his long residence in the UK.   The
    application was made on 7th July 2012 and thus was made under  the  old
    14 year Rule that was deleted on 9th July 2012.

 2. The grounds seeking permission to appeal argue firstly that  the  Judge
    ought to have granted the Appellant's application  for  an  adjournment
    when the Secretary of State's representative adduced at the  hearing  a
    covering letter purporting to serve  the  IS151A  Notice  so  that  the
    representatives could make a subject access request in relation to  the
    Home Office file to investigate further whether and to what extent  the
    Respondent had made efforts to serve the Notice.

 3. Secondly it is asserted that the Judge  erred  in  giving  insufficient
    consideration to the Appellant's evidence of  not  having  been  served
    with the IS151A Notice which "stopped the clock" for  the  purposes  of
    the Rule.

 4. Thirdly the Judge is said to have erred in her consideration of Article
    8.  She did not follow the guidance of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  and  made
    no finding of whether there was any  interference  in  the  Appellant's
    private life or as to whether any interference was  sufficiently  grave
    as to engage Article 8.  Further  the  Judge  is  said  to  have  given
    inadequate reasons for dismissing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 5. I confess to being puzzled by grounds 1 and 2 as drafted  by  Mr  Kirk.
    He represented the Appellant also before the First-tier  Tribunal.   It
    is clear from the Home Office bundle for that hearing that  the  IS151A
    about which so much is made must have  been  served  on  the  Appellant
    because he appealed against that  decision.  Mr  Wilding  was  able  to
    produce the Adjudicator's determination  in  regard  to  that  hearing.
    While that may have taken Mr Kirk  by  surprise  (although  the  bundle
    should have warned him) it certainly cannot have taken the Appellant by
    surprise as it was he who appealed and indeed sought an  onward  appeal
    to the IAT when he lost in 2000.  The Appellant was quite simply  lying
    when he claimed ignorance of  the  IS151A  in  September  2000.  It  is
    unclear how this evidence was not brought to the attention of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  However it does  mean  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    possibly succeed under the Immigration Rules whether or not the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's reasoning was flawed.

 6. So far as Article 8 is concerned I disagree with Mr Kirk that the Judge
    erred in not following Razgar.  There is  nothing  to  be  gained,  nor
    indeed any requirement to mechanistically go through the five steps set
    out in Razgar if the case is clearly about  proportionality.   In  this
    case it was.  There was no credible family life but clearly  a  private
    life; the Appellant having been in the UK since 2000. The Judge,  while
    not expressly saying that the Appellant had a private life  that  would
    be interfered with if he were removed, clearly proceeded on that  basis
    as she gives reasons why removal would be proportionate.

 7. It was  argued  on  the  Appellant's  behalf  that  if  the  Judge  had
    approached Article 8 properly she would have found in  the  Appellant's
    favour as he has been in the UK for 14 years and the Secretary of State
    has a policy of allowing such  people  to  stay  as  evidenced  by  the
    Immigration Rules and furthermore no attempt had been  made  to  remove
    him which is a clear indication of the Secretary of State's view as  to
    the interests of  immigration  policy  in  his  removal.   That  is  an
    unattractive argument.  The Secretary  of  State  has  no  policy  that
    benefits this Appellant.  The Immigration  Rule,  now  deleted  allowed
    those who had not come to the attention of the authorities for 14 years
    to remain.  That does not apply to this Appellant and the fact that  he
    has not been removed is not a factor in his favour.   The  fact  is  he
    made an unwarranted asylum claim in 2000 which he lost.  He  knew  that
    he was required to leave the UK and yet he did not do  so.  We  do  not
    know if any efforts were made by the Secretary of State to seek him out
    and remove him but that does not exonerate him from blame -  he  should
    have left. Furthermore as has  now  made  clear  he  has  lied  to  the
    Tribunal about what took place in 2000.

 8. The Judge noted that he had no girlfriend in the UK, that he has family
    in Pakistan, that he left aged 35 and thus has spent most of  his  life
    there.  He has acquired skills in the UK that will stand  him  in  good
    stead in Pakistan and Pakistan  is  the  country  of  his  nationality,
    heritage and culture.  The Judge noted that there was no evidence  that
    he would be homeless or destitute in Pakistan.  Without spelling it out
    the Judge clearly found that returning him was not  a  disproportionate
    breach of his private life.

 9. Given that the Appellant came to the UK, lodged an unmeritorious asylum
    claim, remained knowing he should leave and then lied to the  Tribunal,
    even had the Judge erred in her approach to Article 8 I would  not  set
    aside the determination as there is no prospect of  any  Judge  finding
    any differently.

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains no error of
    law that would warrant it being set aside.

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.








Signed                              Date 5th September 2013





Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



