
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07775/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2015                          |On 26 March 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         mr george barrington bonner
                         (anonymity ORDER not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Alabi, Solicitor.

                                  DECISION

 1. No anonymity order has previously been made in these proceedings and no
    such application was made before me today.  There is no need  for  such
    an order.

 2. This is a respondent appeal but I shall henceforth refer to the parties
    in the original terms detailed in the decision of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Abebrese following  a  hearing  at  Taylor  House  on  12
    September 2014.

 3. The appellant, born 4 October 1957 is a citizen of Jamaica.

 4. He made an application for  further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  His application was refused on 21 January 2014.  The  refusal
    was made under paragraph 322(1) of the Immigration Rules in respect  of
    a refusal of leave to remain or a variation of  leave.   The  appellant
    requested that his application be considered  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules on the basis that he is a dependant and that the  application  is
    based on his long residency in the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant's
    partner also made an application which was joined  with  his,  however,
    the  respondent  considered   their   applications   separately.    The
    respondent in refusing the appellant's application concluded  that  she
    was  not  satisfied  that  there  are   compelling   or   compassionate
    circumstances surrounding the  appellant's  case  and  accordingly  the
    respondent was not prepared to exercise any discretion.

 5. The appellant appealed and in a decision promulgated  on  22  September
    2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese allowed the  appellant's
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 6. The respondent sought permission to appeal.  This was granted by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Colyer.  His reasons for so doing are:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, against a  decision
             of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Abebrese)  who,  in   a
             determination promulgated on 22nd September 2014, allowed  the
             Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse
             his application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on
             the basis of family and private  life  here  under  Article  8
             ECHR.

         2.   The Grounds for applying to the upper tribunal submit that the
             judge has made a material error of law,  misdirecting  himself
             with reference to article 8  ECHR.   The  appellant  seeks  to
             remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the   grounds   of   his
             relationship with his wife and his private life, and these are
             rights  that  are  clearly  sufficiently  recognised  in   the
             immigration rules.  the appellant is able to return to Jamaica
             and apply for entry clearance, or his wife is able  to  travel
             with him to Jamaica and continue their family life together in
             that country.  It is submitted that the judge failed  to  have
             regard to the substantive  requirements  of  appendix  FM  and
             appendix FM-SE  in  considering  the  appellant's  case.   The
             respondent refers to the case of Nagre; and  the  requirements
             of the immigration rules.

         3.   The grounds disclose an arguable error of law."

    Thus the appeal came before me today.

 7. Ms. Petterson submitted that having found that the  appellant  did  not
    qualify for leave to remain under the  Immigration  Rules  it  is  only
    where there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave  to  remain
    outside of the Immigration Rules would it be necessary for the judge to
    have proceeded to consider whether there are  compelling  circumstances
    not sufficiently recognised under them.  She relied on the authority of
    R (on the application of) Nagre v SSHD [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin).   She
    went on to submit that the judge had materially misdirected himself  in
    law in finding that there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently
    recognised under the Immigration Rules.  The appellant seeks to  remain
    in the United Kingdom on grounds of his relationship with his wife  and
    his private life and these are rights  that  are  clearly  sufficiently
    recognised within the Immigration Rules  themselves.   He  is  able  to
    return to Jamaica and apply for entry clearance, or his wife is able to
    travel with him to that country and continue their family life together
    there.  Grants of leave outside of the Immigration Rules  are  reserved
    for the most exceptional cases and should not be used  as  a  means  to
    circumvent requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Accordingly  the
    judge has erred in allowing the appeal under Article 8.

 8. Mr. Alabi submitted that the judge had focused on all relevant  matters
    before coming to a conclusion that was open to him to be  made  on  the
    evidence.  This was not  about  the  judge  being  sympathetic  to  the
    appellant's plight and therefore he  has  not  erred  in  allowing  the
    appeal in the way that he did.  Article 8 was engaged  and  there  were
    arguably good grounds for the judge to go outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules themselves.  He has not materially erred.

 9. In addition to the above matters the respondent  has  submitted  within
    her grounds that the  Immigration  Rules  themselves  are  a  "complete
    code".  I do not find that to be the position.  It is though  necessary
    for a judge to decide  whether  there  are  good  reasons  to  consider
    Article 8 directly.  See for example MM (Lebanon)  &  Ors,  R  (On  the
    Application Of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 985 and R (on the application of) Esther Aben Oludoidoyi & Ors
    v Secretary of State (Article 8) (Lebanon) and Nagre  IJR  [2014]  UKUT
    5398 (IAC).

10. I appreciate that a good reason is one that is  compelling  or  because
    there are exceptional circumstances.   However  there  is  no  test  of
    exceptionality; there does not have to be anything extreme to  move  to
    Article 8 directly.  Good reason may  be  present  if  the  Immigration
    Rules themselves do not  provide  discretion  to  examine  whether  the
    immigration decision is proportionate in light of all  the  appellant's
    circumstances but only if the consequences of the immigration  decision
    are likely to have significant impact on the  private  or  family  life
    continuing.  It will  be  necessary  to  carry  out  a  proportionality
    exercise if a judge is satisfied that Article 8(1) is engaged but  that
    proportionality exercise should be conducted within the  terms  of  the
    Immigration Rules where possible.

11. This is  an  appeal  where  Judge  Abebrese  has  materially  erred  as
    submitted by Ms. Petterson.  It is an appeal where the issues raised by
    the appellant have been adequately addressed by  the  consideration  of
    the Immigration Rules and accordingly it was unnecessary for the  judge
    to proceed to a further full and separate consideration of  Article  8.
    On the individual facts of this appeal there is no reason for the judge
    to have gone on to give consideration to the Article 8 claim in the way
    that he did.  As I say, in so doing he has materially erred.   This  is
    an appeal where the proportionality exercise was  in  effect  conducted
    within the terms of the Immigration Rules themselves resulting  in  the
    appellant's application being refused by the respondent.  For the  same
    reasons the judge should not have allowed the appellant's appeal  under
    Article 8.



Notice of Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

13. I set aside the decision.

14. I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.






Signed                              Date  25 March 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date  25 March 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

