
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/07626/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 April 2016                          |On 28 April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               shahzad fakhar
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Counsel, instructed through Direct
                    Access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M Davies (the judge), promulgated on 22  July  2015,  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal was against  the
    Respondent's  decision  of  9  February  2015,  refusing  to  vary  the
    Appellant's leave to remain as a Tier 1 General Migrant and  to  remove
    him from the United Kingdom under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan. He originally arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2010 as a student. On 18 October 2011 he was  granted
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 General Migrant until 18 October  2013.  He
    sought an in-time  extension  of  leave  in  the  same  category.  This
    application   was   refused   and   a   subsequent   appeal   dismissed
    (IA/02991/2014). The Appellant then made  a  fresh  application  within
    twenty-eight days. It is  this  application  which  gave  rise  to  the
    decision under appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Respondent's refusal of the latest application  was  based  on  the
    conclusion that certain earnings from  claimed  self-employment  relied
    upon were not genuine, with reference to paragraph  19(i)  and  (j)  of
    Appendix A to the Immigration Rules (the Rules).



The judge's decision

 4. The judge identifies the core issue in the appeal  before  him,  namely
    whether earnings from self-employment were genuine  or  not  (paragraph
    18). Having listed the various factors set out in  paragraph  19(j)  of
    Appendix A, the judge concludes that he was not satisfied the  earnings
    were genuine (paragraph 19). Thereafter, ten reasons are  provided  for
    this central conclusion (paragraphs 20-30). I do  not  propose  to  set
    these out here, as I will deal with them in due course.

 5. As a direct result of  the  conclusion  on  earnings,  the  appeal  was
    dismissed in respect of the Points-Based System claim.  Article  8  was
    not pursued at the hearing, but the  judge  considers  it  briefly  and
    finds  against  the  Appellant  (paragraph  33).  There  is   a   final
    observation about jurisdiction, but this is not in fact a live issue.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The well-drafted grounds accept that some of the  reasons  provided  by
    the judge were open to him on the evidence. The general thrust  of  the
    challenge is based upon the evidential restrictions imposed by  section
    85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).
    It is said that the judge erred in finding  against  the  Appellant  on
    matters in relation to which he  (the  Appellant)  was  precluded  from
    adducing new evidence because of section 85A.

 7. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but granted
    on renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 15 February 2016.





The hearing before me

 8. Mr Richardson  submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  supplied  all  the
    documents specified under the Rules. Thus, he had been  complaint  with
    this essential step of the  application  process.  In  respect  of  the
    genuineness issue, the interview in 2015 had not expressly put concerns
    or objections to  the  Appellant.  The  Respondent's  decision  on  the
    application was made only a couple of weeks later and the Appellant was
    not given the  chance  to  provide  any  additional  evidence  or  make
    representations prior to that decision. There was  no  opportunity  for
    the Appellant to set out matters relating to genuineness of earnings in
    the application form. The judge described his reasons as  "cumulative",
    and so even if two or three of these were sustainable,  the  errors  on
    others undermined the entirely of the  decision.  The  point  taken  in
    paragraph 27 of the decision was unforeseeable to  the  Appellant.  The
    Appellant was not permitted to adduce further witness statements and so
    the judge was wrong to have held this failure against him. There was no
    detailed reasoning in paragraph 30.

 9. Mr Kotas submitted that the decision of the Vice-President in Ahmed and
    Another (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 00365 (IAC) is  correct.
    It was open to the Appellant to adduce any evidence in addition to that
    specified under the Rules in support of his application. The  Appellant
    has had experience of the Points-Based System and should have  provided
    more evidence. It was accepted that the judge erred in paragraph 27 but
    this was said to be immaterial. In reality,  submitted  Mr  Kotas,  the
    Appellant was asserting a fairness challenge.  However,  this  had  not
    been argued before the judge or on appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

10. In reply, Mr Richardson referred to the application form. There was  no
    space in which to address genuineness issues.  The  Appellant  was  not
    given a fair opportunity to address the Respondent's concerns prior  to
    the decision on the application.



Section 85A of the 2002 Act

11. Sub-sections 85A(3) and (4) provide:

           "(3) Exception 2 applies to an appeal under section 82(1) if -

           (a) the appeal is against an  immigration  decision  of  a  kind
           specified in section   82(2)(a) or (d),

           (b) the immigration decision concerned an application of a  kind
           identified in immigration rules as requiring  to  be  considered
           under a 'Points Based System', and

           (c) the appeal relies wholly or partly on grounds  specified  in
           section 84(1)(a), (e)  or (f).




           (4) Where Exception 2 applies the Tribunal may consider evidence
           adduced by the appellant only if it -

      (a)  was submitted in support of, and at  the  time  of  making,  the
                  application to which the immigration decision related,

                  (b) relates to the appeal in  so  far  as  it  relies  on
                  grounds other than those        specified  in  subsection
                  (3)(c),

                  (c) is adduced to prove that a  document  is  genuine  or
                  valid, or

                  (d) is  adduced  in  connection  with  the  Secretary  of
                  State's reliance on a discretion under immigration rules,
                  or compliance with a requirement of immigration rules, to
                  refuse an application  on  grounds  not  related  to  the
                  acquisition of 'points' under the 'Points Based System'."



Decision on error of law

12. I have concluded that there are  no  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision.

13. The first thing to say is that in my view Ahmed is  correctly  decided,
    and the prohibition of post-decision (if post-application) evidence  is
    accurately stated in paragraph 5:


           "The purpose of that provision is quite clear.  It is that where
           a Points Based application is made and refused,  the  assessment
           by the Judge is to be  of  the  material  that  was  before  the
           decision-maker rather than a new consideration of new  material.
           In other words the appeal if it is successful is  on  the  basis
           that the decision-maker with the material before him should have
           made a different decision, not on the basis that a different way
           of presenting the application would have  produced  a  different
           decision."

14. The application of section  85A  may  entail  harsh  results  for  some
    applicants, but that is the reality of the legislative and  Rules-based
    framework for the Point-Based System.

15. Second, it is not contended by the Appellant that the judge  failed  to
    apply section 85A at all. Rather, it is said  that  when  applying  its
    restrictions  the  judge  effectively  took  irrelevant  matters   into
    account.

16. Third, it is  common  ground  that  none  of  the  'exceptions  to  the
    exception' under section 85A(4)(b)-(d) apply in this case.

17. Fourth, as Mr Richardson quite properly acknowledged, four of  the  ten
    reasons provided by the judge have not been challenged on appeal (these
    being reasons one, two, three, and nine). It is clear that the findings
    within these paragraphs and the reasons in support were fully  open  to
    the judge. It is also clear that the points  made  are  all  materially
    damaging to the Appellant's overall credibility. The failure to mention
    previously the highly significant issue of his claimed  self-employment
    when presented  with  an  opportunity  to  do  so  was  obviously  very
    problematic. The inference drawn by the judge  in  paragraph  22  casts
    further doubt about the essence of the Appellant's genuineness. For the
    avoidance of any doubt, the reasoning in paragraph 23 is not  expressly
    challenged in the grounds and in any event I find  that  it  is  sound.
    Finally, referring back to the previous Tribunal  decision  from  2013,
    the judge was bound to take cognisance of the fact that  the  Appellant
    had been deemed untruthful then.

18. I must of course view the judge's decision  holistically,  and  he  did
    refer to his reasoning being cumulative. However,  these  four  adverse
    matters immediately place  a  significant  (although  not  insuperable)
    barrier to the success of this appeal  because  their  effect  is  that
    there  are  several  unchallenged  (and  in  my  view  unchallengeable)
    credibility problems which would undoubtedly have coloured the rest  of
    the Appellant's evidence.

19. Fifth, I turn to reasons four, five and six (paragraphs  24-26).  These
    points are directly challenged in the grounds of appeal.

20. The reasoning in paragraph 24 relies on the finding that the  Appellant
    had failed to adduce "sufficient evidence" that  he  had  entered  into
    agreements for the provision of services. Mr  Richardson  submits  that
    the Appellant could not have adduced any post-decision evidence because
    of section 85A, and so the judge erred in holding this fact against the
    Appellant. With respect, I disagree with this  analysis.  On  a  proper
    reading of the passage, the judge was not expecting  the  Appellant  to
    provide further evidence that he was unable to. The  judge  was  simply
    stating his conclusion that the  admissible  evidence  adduced  by  the
    Appellant with his application was insufficient to prove the particular
    issue in question. That was a conclusion to which he  was  entitled  to
    arrive at. It has not been alleged that the conclusion  was  irrational
    in light of the pre-decision evidence.

21. A response to this from Mr Richardson runs  along  the  line  that  the
    Appellant could not have known what matters raised  concerns  with  the
    Respondent until the decision on his application was made: the  judge's
    conclusion was therefore unfair.

22. However, putting aside for the moment the issue of the fairness of  the
    Respondent's processes (to which I will return), Mr Richardson's  point
    is met by a series of rather fundamental facts:

   i. The requirements of the various  categories  within  the  Points-Based
      System are set out in the Rules;

  ii. Although the Rules are complex  in  certain  respects,  the  essential
      criteria for an application's success are accessible to applicants;

 iii. Paragraph 19(i) of Appendix A to the Rules is stated in  clear  terms:
      "the Secretary of State must be satisfied that the earnings  are  from
      genuine employment...";

  iv. A list of relevant  factors  to  be  considered  are  then  listed  in
      paragraph 19(j). This is not only a statement of  how  the  Respondent
      will consider an application, but clearly provides a guide as to  what
      sort of information a prospective applicant could or should provide;

   v. It is down to an applicant to provide relevant and sufficient evidence
      in support of an application;

  vi. The prohibition on adducing post-decision evidence is clear  from  the
      terms of section 85A;

 vii. The Appellant has had legal representation throughout the  application
      and appellate process;

viii. The Appellant has gone through the Points-Based System before.

23. Taking these basic facts together, the Appellant in this case had every
    opportunity and precautionary indicator available to him to submit  the
    evidence on the essential elements  of  his  application.  In  all  the
    circumstances of his case,  in  particular  the  outcome  of  his  2013
    appeal, one might have thought that every effort would have been  taken
    to provide a wealth of evidence on the earnings issue. A failure to put
    in sufficient evidence at the right time is not a matter to be laid  at
    the door of the judge. The fact that the  Appellant  did  not  know  in
    advance the specific points eventually relied on by the Respondent does
    not assist him in this case. In my view, the points made by  the  judge
    in paragraph 24 (and indeed in paragraphs  25  and  26)  all  concerned
    basic aspects of the Appellant's application, as  it  was  put  to  the
    Respondent.

24. It might be said that on a strict application of section 85A appeals to
    the First-tier Tribunal no longer  have  any  utility  in  Points-Based
    System  cases.  That  is  incorrect.  The  Tribunal  can  look  at  the
    admissible evidence and decide for itself whether  the  Respondent  was
    right or wrong in refusing the application.

25. The judge's reasons at paragraphs 25 and 26 are similar  in  nature  to
    those discussed already. He relies on  a  lack  of  evidence  from  the
    Appellant on material issues (contracts of service and the  ability  to
    undertake all of the work claimed). I would refer back to what  I  have
    said in my  paragraphs  20-23,  above.  In  essence,  it  was  for  the
    Appellant to  have  adduced  evidence  on  matters  that  were  clearly
    relevant to his application when he made that application,  or  at  the
    latest soon thereafter and prior to the decision being made. As a  Tier
    1 applicant, it  seems  really  rather  obvious  that  he  should  have
    provided contracts for services and evidential explanations of  how  he
    was able to work as much as  he  claimed  to.  Again,  the  failure  to
    provide this type of evidence was something to which  the  judge  could
    quite properly have regard.

26. Sixth, Mr Kotas accepts that the  judge  erred  in  paragraph  27  when
    referring to the Appellant's failure to adduce  "further  evidence"  on
    the issue in question. The Appellant was of course precluded from doing
    this by virtue of section 85A. Thus, the failure to adduce inadmissible
    evidence was not a relevant consideration.

27. In my view the error is not material. By itself, it cannot properly  be
    said to be a particularly significant aspect  of  the  judge's  overall
    reasoning. Even in combination with what I say about  paragraph  28  of
    the decision, below, the error simply does not raise the possibility of
    a different outcome to the appeal being anything other  than  a  remote
    one.

28. Seventh, there is an error in paragraph 28 similar in  nature  to  that
    contained in the previous paragraph. The Appellant was  precluded  from
    obtaining additional witness statements from claimed clients and so the
    judge should not have held that against him. However, once again, in my
    view this is not a material error, having regard to the decision  as  a
    whole. Alone or together with the error in paragraph  27,  this  matter
    does not provide a tipping point, beyond which the judge's reasoning as
    whole is rendered unsustainable.

29. Eighth, in paragraph 30 the judge refers  to  oral  evidence  from  the
    Appellant. On a strict view of section 85A  and  Ahmed,  such  evidence
    should not have been admitted. Yet, as with the  previous  two  errors,
    this reason (alone or in  combination)  can  be  stripped  out  of  the
    decision and what remains is in my view fully sustainable.

30. Ninth, in paragraph 31 the judge makes  it  clear  that  he  had  taken
    account of the fact that the Appellant provided specified evidence.  He
    was correct as a matter of law to conclude that  notwithstanding  this,
    the Appellant's appeal failed for the reasons stated previously in  the
    decision.

31. Tenth, Mr Richardson arguments had a clear thread running through them:
    there is unfairness in the decision-making process for  those  applying
    under the Points-Based System because of the operation of section  85A.
    I have some sympathy for that view. It appears as though the Respondent
    does not contact Tier 1 applicants prior to a decision  being  made  in
    order to raise concerns and allow for these  to  be  addressed.  It  is
    arguable that the application form could be better presented  in  order
    to assist applicants with the presentation of their cases in the  first
    instance.

32. Having said that, there was no discreet fairness point taken before the
    judge and none is raised  on  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  It  is
    therefore not a live issue before me. It seems to me as though it could
    be a potentially fertile line of argument in appropriate cases  (albeit
    probably only in the context of  judicial  review,  given  the  limited
    scope of appeals under the new statutory regime).

33. For all the reasons set out above, the judge was entitled  to  conclude
    as he did and the Appellant's appeal must fail.

Anonymity

34. No direction was sought and none is appropriate.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed                                       Date: 27 April 2016

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date: 27 April 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

