
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/07173/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 May 2016                           |   On 31 May 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MR CHIBUIKE ANELE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, a home office presenting officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Pang Chung


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of  the
     First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of Mr Anele  ('the  claimant')
     who appealed against a decision taken on 3 February 2015 to refuse  to
     grant him leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

  Background Facts

   2. The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 17 January 1988.
       He applied for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules HC395 (as
      amended)  on  the  basis  of  his  private  and  family  life.   That
      application was refused because the  Secretary  of  State  considered
      that the appellant failed to meet the Immigration Rules as he had not
      been in a relationship with his partner for two years or more and she
      did not consider that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
      the claimant's integration into Nigeria. The Secretary of  State  did
      not consider that there were any exceptional circumstances warranting
      a grant of leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

  The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

   3. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      promulgated on 22 October 2015, Judge Majid  allowed  the  claimant's
      appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal found that  the  claimant  satisfied
      the relevant Immigration Rules.

  The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   4. The Secretary of State sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal. The grounds in essence  were;  i)  the  judge  committed  a
      procedural  irregularity  by  restricting   cross   examination   and
      preventing the home office presenting officer from making submissions
      on certain points, ii) that the judge failed to give adequate reasons
      and iii)  that  he  misdirected  himself  by  failing  to  apply  the
      Immigration Rules or to consider section 117 of the 2002 Act.   On  6
      April 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler granted the Secretary  of
      State permission to appeal in respect of grounds ii) and  iii)  only.
      Thus, the appeal came before me.

  Summary of the Submissions

   5. Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds of  appeal.  He  submitted  that  the
      determination has a lacuna. We do not know what Immigration Rules the
      judge considered. We  do  not  know  what  factors  judge  took  into
      account. There is just no reasoning. The judge took into  account  ZH
      Tanzania v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ
      691 ('ZH Tanzania') and considered the best interests of  child  were
      paramount and a trump card because she is British which  is  contrary
      to case-law. The judge allowed  the  appeal  but  as  is  clear  from
      paragraph 27 we do not understand why. There  is  much  reference  to
      case law but how it is relevant to the determination is unclear.  The
      reasoning is absent. Mr Tarlow submitted that it is clear from  case-
      law that a determination must contain reasons why the party  has  won
      or lost the appeal. The parties must know what the  reasons  are.  He
      submitted that if were to find a material  error  of  law  there  was
      sufficient information to remake the decision myself.

   6. I indicated to Mr Chung that I was struggling to find  the  reasoning
      in the decision and asked him to point me to any paragraph where  the
      judge has given reasons or has undertaken an analysis and applied the
      Immigration Rules or case law to the facts of the case.

   7. Mr Chung relied on the Rule 24 response and his skeleton argument. He
      submitted that the judge took into account the written statements. He
      found that the  claimant  and  his  partner  are  in  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship. I asked where the judge has  considered  the
      insurmountable obstacles test. Mr Chung submitted that at the  First-
      tier Tribunal hearing  the  parties  gave  evidence.  The  claimant's
      partner witnessed her parents being killed  in  the  Congo.  I  again
      asked  where  there  is  any  finding  that  this   amounts   to   an
      insurmountable obstacle to the  partner  relocating  to  Nigeria.  Mr
      Chung  conceded  that  the  judge  did  not  conclude  this  in   his
      determination. I asked Mr Chung to point me to  any  paragraph  where
      the judge has considered whether or not it would  be  reasonable  for
      the child to  leave  the  UK.  Mr  Chung  responded  that  the  judge
      considered that the child was a British  Citizen.  I  indicated  that
      this was insufficient to fall within the Immigration Rules. The first
      hurdle is that the child must be a qualifying child, in this case she
      is a British Citizen, but that to satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules the First-tier Tribunal had to consider whether  it
      would be reasonable for the child to leave the UK.

   8. Mr Chung referred  me  to  paragraphs  19  and  20  where  the  judge
      considered ZH Tanzania, however, he accepted that the judge  had  not
      considered the reasonableness of the child leaving the UK.

   9. I invited Mr Chung to make submissions on the assertion in  the  rule
      24 response that it was incorrect that  the  appellant's  immigration
      status was precarious when he met his  partner.  Mr  Chung  submitted
      that he had leave to remain as a student when he  first  met  her.  I
      indicated that  the  appellant's  leave  was  and  still  is  limited
      therefore the appellant had and still has  a  precarious  immigration
      status. Mr Chung accepted that his immigration status is precarious.

  10. Mr Chung submitted that the children's welfare has been ignored.  The
      Secretary of State did not take this into account. When  pressed,  Mr
      Chung accepted that the child was not born when  Secretary  of  State
      made her decision.

  Discussion

  11. As set out above I indicated  to  Mr  Chung  at  the  outset  that  I
      considered that the First-tier Tribunal decision did  not  engage  at
      all with the relevant  Immigration  Rules  in  order  to  provide  an
      opportunity for him to address me  on  that  point.  The  Immigration
      Rules are not set out (which would not be an  error  of  itself)  and
      there is no reference to what the requirements of the Rules are.  The
      judge at paragraph 3 sets out:

         "I put on record that in considering this appeal I  shall  bear  in
         mind the  legal  provisions  of  the  relevant  paragraphs  of  the
         immigration rules (as amended).  There  are  detailed  but  I  have
         bought every provision of these  paragraphs  in  mind  meticulously
         during the assessment of the appellant's case.  I  am  also  taking
         into account the new changes in the rules brought into force  on  9
         July 2012 which materially changed the application of article 8  of
         the ECHR. The provisions of the Immigration Act 2014 are also taken
         into account.

  12. The judge's recital of the oral evidence during  the  proceedings  is
      contained in a single paragraph. At paragraph 7 of the  decision  the
      judge set out:

         "In response to Ms Tabbassam's, Mr Pang-Chung's and  my  questions,
         the Appellant made statements consistent with his assertions in the
         application. Further his wife gave evidence and confirmed the  fact
         that she was the mother of the child, L and  was  living  with  the
         appellant at the address from which  they  had  travelled  together
         this morning to court. She also drew my attention to the letter  of
         the health visitor who had said that whenever  she  visited  L  she
         found the appellant giving her his fatherly love."

  13. The judge makes one  further  reference  to  the  oral  testimony  at
      paragraph 13:

         "The Appellant told me in his oral  evidence  that  he  is  totally
         bereft of his Nigerian parents' care  and  attention  because  they
         regard him as an outcast because he has married out of his tribe."

  14. The judge correctly notes that he is not required  to  isolate  every
      piece of evidence and indicate whether he has found it  relevant  and
      that he is obliged only to give sufficient and adequate reasons.  The
      judge at paragraph 6 records that  he  has  carefully  read  all  the
      statements and other documents and the oral evidence. At paragraph  8
      the judge sets out that:

         "I have outlined the evidential elements of the evidence adduced on
         behalf of the Appellant which are relevant  to  the  fair  disposal
         this appeal. I have taken into account all the documentary and oral
         evidence  in  making  up  my  mind  on  factual  issues.  To  avoid
         repetition, I shall refer to  some  evidence  in  my  deliberations
         below."

  15. At paragraph 10 the  judge  again  refers  to  the  evidence  he  has
      considered.

  16. What then follows is a lengthy exposition and commentary on  the  law
      some of which I struggle to understand how  it  is  relevant  to  the
      issues before the First-tier Tribunal judge.

  17. The judge then correctly sets out the  relevant  statutory  provision
      (section 55 of the Borders. Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009) and
      relevant case-law on the best interests of the child. This runs to  8
      paragraphs. Although  the  judge  has  identified  all  the  relevant
      considerations that should be taken into account there is  a  failure
      to identify what he considers the best interests of the child to  be.
      What the judge says is:

         "One must be cautious been working out the "the best  interests  of
         the child" because the Secretary of State holds all the cards.  The
         Secretary of State draft the Immigration Rules;  the  Secretary  of
         State issues IDI's and guidance statements; the Secretary of  State
         authorises the  public  statements  made  by  his/her  officials  -
         Pokhriyal v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1568, per Jackson LJ."

  18.  This  is  insufficient.  There  is  no  analysis  of   the   child's
      circumstances and how the factors identified in the case-law apply to
      her. There is no finding on what the best interests of the child are.

  19. The only other reference to any identification of  the  child's  best
      interests is at paragraph 12 where the judge sets out:

         "Mr Pang-Chung said  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  because  the
         Appellant was in a  genuine  marital  relationship  and  should  be
         supported by the judicial system in  this  country.  I  accept  his
         submission because the Appellant's wife now has a baby  whose  best
         interest has to be taken into account particularly since  the  baby
         is British."

  20. The conclusions of the judge are set out at paragraphs 26 and 27:

         "I am fully conscious of the  "legal  requirements"  stipulated  by
         immigration law. It is incumbent upon me to advert to the new Rules
         giving respect to the animus legis dictated  by  the  supremacy  of
         Parliament. The rule of law demands that this Appellant  should  be
         helped by the system because he is in a  genuine  relationship  and
         his wife has been granted asylum in the UK. The  best  interest  of
         the child  has  to  be  taken  into  account.  It  should  also  be
         remembered that this Appellant is a good student. He  has  spent  4
         years  in  Essex  University  and  with  high  marks,  obtained  an
         undergraduate degree and an LLM.

         Accordingly,  in  view  of  my  deliberations  in   the   preceding
         paragraphs and having taken  into  account  all  of  the  oral  and
         documentary evidence as well as the  submissions  at  my  disposal,
         cognisant of the fact that the burden of proof is on the  Appellant
         and the standard of proof is the balance  of  probabilities,  I  am
         persuaded that the Appellant comes within the relevant  immigration
         law, as amended."

  21. There is no analysis of the Immigration Rules  and  the  requirements
      that the claimant must meet. It is not clear to me which  Immigration
      Rules the judge has considered. Presumably appendix FM and paragraphs
      EX.1(a) and (b). However, there is no consideration as to whether  or
      not there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with  his
      partner continuing outside the UK. In fact, the words  insurmountable
      obstacles do not appear anywhere within  the  judgement.  Neither  is
      there any analysis as to whether or not it would  be  reasonable  for
      the child to leave the UK.

  22. The decision is woefully inadequate. There  is  no  analysis  of  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules, no application of the case-law
      to the facts, insufficient findings of fact and virtually no  reasons
      given for the conclusion reached. I am not even sure what  aspect  of
      the 'relevant immigration law' the judge was persuaded the  appellant
      came within.

  23.  It  is  not  clear  that  had  a  judge   directed   himself/herself
      appropriately the outcome would have been the same.

  24. I find that there is a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal decision. I set that  decision  aside  pursuant  to  section
      12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

  25. I considered whether or not I could re-make the  decision  myself.  I
      considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings.
      I am satisfied that the nature and extent of  judicial  fact  finding
      that is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-
      made is such, having regard to the overriding objective, that  it  is
      appropriate to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

  26. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be  heard
      before a First-tier Tribunal   other than  Judge  Majid  pursuant  to
      section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of the TCEA.  A  new  hearing  will  be
      fixed at the next available date.

  27. I have considered whether any parties require the  protection  of  an
      anonymity direction. No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously.
      Having considered  all  the  circumstances  and  evidence  I  do  not
      consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a  material
error of law.  I set aside that decision pursuant  to  section  12(2)(a)  of
the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a de-novo hearing  before  a
different judge pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of the TCEA to  be
listed on the next available opportunity.



Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 29 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
