
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/07608/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 January 2016                    |On 1 February 2016                   |
|Prepared on 11 January 2016          |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD LATIF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Hashmi, Solicitor, Mamoon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant, born 1 January 1955, is a citizen of Pakistan.

    2. The Appellant entered the UK as a visitor on 26 March 2007. His leave
       expired on 13 September  2007  without  any  attempt  being  made  to
       extend, or to vary it.

    3. On 29 October 2014, as an overstayer, the Appellant  applied  to  the
       Respondent for the issue of a residence card to confirm  a  right  of
       residence asserting by reference to Regulation 8 of  the  Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ["EEA Regulations"] that he
       was an extended family member of the sponsor ["EFM"].

    4. That  application  was  refused  on  10  February  2015  because  the
       Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant had been a member  of
       the sponsor's household, or dependent upon  him,  when  he  lived  in
       Pakistan, prior to travelling to the UK.

    5. The Appellant appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  against  that
       refusal, and his appeal was heard and dismissed by Judge Kempton in a
       decision promulgated on 29 May 2015.

    6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision to the  Upper
       Tribunal. Permission was refused by the First Tier Tribunal by way of
       decision of Judge Ford of 27  August  2015  on  the  basis  that  the
       grounds amounted to no more than a disagreement with the decision.

    7. The application for permission to appeal was renewed by the Appellant
       to the Upper Tribunal on further grounds. Permission was  granted  by
       Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein on 22 September 2015 on the  basis  it
       was arguable that Judge Kempton had not taken into  account  relevant
       evidence, which might have led to a different outcome.

    8. The Respondent served a Rule 24 response to  the  grounds  of  appeal
       dated 6 October 2015 in which she asserted that there was no material
       error of law.

    9. Neither party  has  applied  for  permission  to  rely  upon  further
       evidence pursuant to Rule 15(2A)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
       Rules 2008.

   10. Thus the matter comes before me.

  Regulation 8 - evidence overlooked?

  11. The Appellant and sponsor are brothers. The Appellant  is  the  elder
       brother by some 17 years. They grew up  together  in  their  parents'
       household, and then in due course as adults left  that  household  to
       make their own careers. The sponsor travelled  to  Holland  in  about
       1995/6, and acquired citizenship of the Netherlands in about  2000/1.
       He then moved to the UK in about 2000/1, and he has lived  here  ever
       since.

  12. The Appellant travelled to Abu Dhabi and built a business  there.  He
       says, and it was not disputed before the Judge,  that  he  lost  that
       business through the fraud of his  partner,  and  in  addition  found
       himself imprisoned in 2006. The sponsor's claim to have travelled  to
       Abu Dhabi, arranged for the Appellant's release from  prison  in  Abu
       Dhabi, and then to have taken him back to Pakistan to their  parents'
       home, because the Appellant's health had deteriorated  was  also  not
       disputed, although the Appellant had accepted on 9 March 2007 that he
       had in fact been deported from Abu Dhabi [F1]. The  sponsor  accepted
       in oral  evidence  [RoP]  that  between  2006  and  March  2007,  the
       Appellant was  living  in  Pakistan  as  a  member  of  his  parents'
       household along with his own wife and children, and another  brother,
       and his family.

  13. In 2005 however the Judge found that the Appellant had  travelled  to
       the UK as a visitor from Pakistan, and had then returned to  Pakistan
       [8].

  14. The Appellant offered no evidence to the First Tier Tribunal, whether
       written or oral, and it was asserted on his behalf that he was  unfit
       to do so as a result of his mental condition.

  15. A medical report from a consultant psychologist, Dr Irfan,  dated  15
       March 2015  was  produced  in  evidence  [ApB  p15],  and  the  Judge
       considered it [18].  Whilst  she  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
       genuinely been diagnosed with a serious mental health condition,  she
       noted that there was no evidence that he was receiving  the  majority
       of the treatment recommended in that report. Although  the  Appellant
       had presented himself upon attendance at  the  hearing  in  the  same
       manner that had  been  observed  by  the  consultant,  i.e.  entirely
       unresponsive and uncommunicative, she expressed  concern  that  there
       was no evidence to suggest that this was the manner in which  he  had
       behaved between  2007-2015.  (Although  the  Judge  appears  to  have
       overlooked it, the report noted  that  the  Appellant  had  no  prior
       history of  psychiatric  diagnosis  and  had  never  previously  been
       prescribed with anti-depressant medication or  tranquillisers.)  What
       the Judge did not remark upon directly, but was presumably the  basis
       for her comment, was the record of the Appellant's interview  by  the
       ECO in Islamabad on 9 March 2007 [F1]. He was clearly responsive  and
       communicative at that date, so however unwell he may have been  then,
       his  current  condition  represented  a  serious  subsequent   mental
       collapse, which on the face of the report had  not  resulted  in  the
       Appellant seeking any medical help prior to March 2015.

  16. Although there was a large volume of evidence about the health of the
       Appellant's son who was living in Pakistan and  who  had  suffered  a
       stroke the Judge considered this  to  be  irrelevant,  save  that  it
       demonstrated the family  were  able  to  access  "very  good  medical
       facilities in Pakistan".

  17. Thus the Judge rejected the proposition that the Appellant  satisfied
       the requirements of Regulation 8(3) on the  grounds  of  his  health.
       There is no challenge to that decision before me.

  18. Given the date of the sponsor's acquisition  of  citizenship  of  the
       Netherlands the Appellant could not hope to  establish  that  he  was
       ever a member of the sponsor's household outside the UK,  at  a  time
       when he was an EEA national.  Ms  Hashmi  accepted  this  before  me,
       although it was a point that was argued by her before the First  Tier
       Tribunal, and is also a claim that was made in the renewed grounds of
       appeal submitted to the Upper Tribunal.

  19.       Thus under Regulation 8 (2) the appeal turned  upon  the  short
       point of whether the Appellant could establish  that  in  the  period
       immediately before he travelled to  the  UK  in  March  2007  he  was
       dependent  upon  the  sponsor,  before  there  needed   to   be   any
       consideration of the Appellant's position since he had arrived in the
       UK; Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - Reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79.

  20.       Ms Hasmi accepted that no bank statements had been produced  in
       evidence for any bank account held by any member  of  the  family  in
       either UK or Pakistan for the relevant period, and that none  of  the
       volume of money transfer receipts produced [ApB p104-125] related  to
       that period, since the earliest is dated March 2011. Nor  were  there
       produced for any relevant period any tax returns for any adult member
       of the family then living in Pakistan.  Thus,  as  she  accepted,  no
       documentary evidence was produced at all to the First  Tier  Tribunal
       in order to demonstrate the financial positions of the adult  members
       of the household in Pakistan of which the Appellant was said to be  a
       member at the relevant time.

  21.       Thus there was no basis for the claim  that  was  made  in  the
       renewed grounds of appeal submitted to the Upper Tribunal,  that  the
       Judge had  overlooked  documentary  evidence  that  corroborated  the
       assertion that the  Appellant  was  financially  dependent  upon  the
       sponsor in the relevant period.

  22.       Accordingly, the Judge was confronted with a situation in which
       there  was  only  a  bald  assertion  by  the  sponsor  that  he  had
       financially supported the Appellant in the period 2006 - March  2007,
       for which he was unable to provide any details. The sponsor  gave  no
       details of the financial support that he claimed to have provided  to
       the Appellant in either his witness statement, or in  the  course  of
       his oral evidence. To the extent that the renewed grounds  of  appeal
       submitted to the Upper Tribunal suggest the  contrary,  there  is  no
       evidential foundation for them.

  23.       On the other hand, whilst replacement copy bank statements  for
       the bank accounts maintained by both the sponsor, and the  Appellant,
       and their brother, and their father, at  the  time  would  have  been
       available to the sponsor from the issuing banks, if the originals had
       been lost in  the  interim,  none  had  been  produced  in  evidence.
       Moreover, copy records would no doubt have been  available  from  any
       money transfer agency used by the sponsor to remit funds to  Pakistan
       in the relevant period if they too had been  lost  subsequently,  and
       again none for the relevant period had been produced in evidence.

  24. The sponsor did not seek to address in either his witness  statement,
       or in his oral evidence the record of the Appellant's interview on  9
       March 2007, when the Appellant had not claimed to be  dependent  upon
       the sponsor, and had claimed to  be  financially  independent.  Asked
       what  his  occupation  and  income  were,  he  had  replied  "I'm  in
       agriculture. I have lands. 1 lakh per month."

  Regulation 8 - Error of Law?

   25. As set out  above,  the  Judge  rejected  the  proposition  that  the
       Appellant satisfied  the  requirements  of  Regulation  8(3)  on  the
       grounds of his health. There is no challenge to that decision  before
       me.

   26. Although the Judge did refer herself to the guidance to be  found  in
       Dauhoo she made reference to no other jurisprudence. The key sentence
       in  paragraphs  20  and  24  of  the  decision  either  both  contain
       typographical errors,  or,  they  indicate  that  the  Judge  wrongly
       considered that a successful applicant needed to establish both  that
       he was a member of the sponsor's household and  dependent  upon  him,
       when in fact one or the other is sufficient.  Moreover  there  is  no
       obligation upon an applicant to establish that the  household  relied
       upon was located in the EEA; Bigia [2009] EWCA Civ 79.

   27. Accepting those errors Mr Kingham argued that there was in this  case
       no material error of law requiring the decision to be set  aside  and
       remade. He argued that it was plain when the decision was read  as  a
       whole that the Judge had not been satisfied that  the  Appellant  had
       made out his claim to have been dependent upon  the  sponsor  in  the
       relevant period, because no positive finding had been  made  to  that
       effect. In any event, if the  decision  were  to  be  set  aside  and
       remade, that claim was bound to be rejected  on  the  evidence  given
       that the relevant standard of proof was the balance of probabilities.

   28. I agree. The decision contains no clear finding of  fact  either  way
       upon the simple issue of whether the Appellant was dependent upon the
       sponsor in the relevant period,  because  the  Judge  has  throughout
       conflated that  issue  with  the  question  of  whether  or  not  the
       Appellant was a member of the sponsor's  household  in  the  relevant
       period. Nevertheless I am satisfied that it is tolerably  clear  from
       her decision that she did not accept that proposition. In any  event,
       it is clear to me from my review of the evidence set out above,  that
       if I were to set aside and remake the decision I would  be  bound  to
       reach the conclusion that the Appellant had not discharged the burden
       of proof that rested upon him in  relation  to  that  issue.  In  the
       circumstances the decision to dismiss the appeal is confirmed.

  DECISION

       The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on
       29 May 2015 did not involve the making of an  error  of  law  in  the
       decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to be  set
       aside and remade. The decision to dismiss the appeal  is  accordingly
       confirmed.

  Direction  regarding  anonymity  -  Rule  14  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
  Tribunal) Rules 2008

       The Appellant did not seek anonymity before the First Tier  Tribunal,
       and no request for anonymity is made to me. There appears  to  be  no
       proper basis for the Upper Tribunal to make such a direction  of  its
       own motion.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 11 January 2016
