

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ia 07325-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   25.04.2014|
|on    10.03.2014 & 22.04.2014                 |sent out:                28th|
|                                              |April 2014                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                             Bibi Medina RAMPUTH
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Mr S Rungasamy (working under the supervision of
                    Lawrence & Associates)
For the respondent: Mr Ian Jarvis (on 10 March); Mr Nigel Bramble (on 22
April)

                           DETERMINATION & REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Andrew Devlin), sitting at Hatton Cross on  15  October
    2013, to  a long residence appeal by a citizen of  Mauritius,  born  28
    June 1984. Permission was given on the  basis  that  the  judge  hadn't
    followed the guidance set out in Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  rules  -
    correct approach) [2013] UKUT (IAC) 640. Before me,  on  10  March,  Mr
    Jarvis applied, without opposition from Mr Rungasamy,  to  add  further
    grounds challenging the reasoning, or lack  of  it,  for  some  of  the
    judge's findings of fact.

 2. This appellant had been here with leave as a student  from  12  October
    2003 till 2010: following a successful appeal, her leave to remain  was
    extended in 2011 till 30 January 2013,  but  'curtailed'  in  2012,  to
    expire on 13 May, as her college had had its  licence  revoked.  It  is
    necessary,  particularly  in  view  of  Gulshan    and   other   recent
    authorities,  to  consider  the  basis  for  the  judge's  findings  on
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

ERROR OF LAW

 3. On 9 May 2012 the appellant applied for  indefinite  leave  to  remain,
    which was refused on 22 February 2013: she relied  in  her  grounds  of
    appeal on a point about the removal directions  which  came  with  that
    decision, and on article 8. By the date of the decision, the  appellant
    had been here for ten years, with leave;  a  point  to  which  I  shall
    return. At paragraphs 157 - 8 the  judge  alluded  to  the  appellant's
    failure to do anything to complete her  studies,  and  at  159  to  the
    general rule (paragraph 276B (i), though he didn't cite  it),  allowing
    indefinite leave to remain for someone here that long  on  that  basis;
    but he went on:

          160. Other than these considerations, I am unable to identify  any
               other reason(s), having regard to the  public  interest  that
               would make it undesirable to grant the  Appellant  indefinite
               leave.

          161. In the absence of any such reason, I find  that,  although  I
               cannot be not satisfied that the Appellant's  ties  with  the
               United Kingdom are as strong as she claims or that there  are
               any significant compassionate circumstances in  her  case,  I
               am satisfied that the fact that the Appellant can only  avail
               herself of the rule by reason of her intransigence,  and  the
               delay in hearing her appeal, of itself, makes it  undesirable
               to grant the Appellant indefinite leave.

          162. I therefore find that the Appellant  meets  the  requirements
               of paragraph 276B (ii) of the Immigration Rules.

 4. I will turn to what those requirements are shortly; but it seems to  me
    that  the  judge's   conclusions   in   this   passage   are   somewhat
    contradictory. If it had only been a question of the superfluous double
    negative in the first sentence of 161, then that might have  been  read
    down without  difficulty;  but  the  passage  as  a  whole  contains  a
    contradiction between the appellant's having indefinite leave to remain
    being undesirable (at 161) and in accordance with the  rule  (at  162),
    which would not be easy to resolve in this way.

 5. Paragraph 276B as it now stands reads as follows:

       The requirements to be met by an applicant for  indefinite  leave  to
       remain on the ground of long residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
       that:
       (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful  residence  in
       the United Kingdom.
       (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons why it
       would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave  to  remain
       on the ground of long residence, taking into account his:
       (a) age; and
       (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and
       (c) personal history, including character, conduct, associations  and
       employment record; and
       (d) domestic circumstances; and
       (e) compassionate circumstances; and
       (f) any representations received on the person's behalf; and

    The Home Office take no point against the appellant on  the  conditions
    set out in sub-paragraphs (iii) ['general grounds' for refusal], or  on
    (iv) [knowledge of English language and life], or (v)  [gaps  in  legal
    basis of stay]; so there is no need to say  more  about  those,  except
    that it may be assumed that this appellant meets them.

 6. Mr Rungasamy referred me to a decision of the Tribunal, MU  ('statement
    of additional grounds' - long residence - discretion) Bangladesh [2010]
    UKUT (IAC) 442. While the decision does suggest that someone  may  rely
    on such a statement, claiming ten years' lawful  residence  which  they
    have only accumulated on the basis of s. 3C leave, running while  their
    appeal  is  pending,  it  also  notes,  at  paragraph  12,   that   the
    circumstances in which this has happened are "... not irrelevant to the
    exercise of the discretion under paragraph 276B". Nor is it  irrelevant
    that the Home Office's own  policy  guidance  on  'Long  Residence  and
    Private Life'  expressly  recognizes  that  the  necessary  ten  years'
    residence  may  be  acquired  while  an  appeal  is  pending  in  those
    circumstances, so long as the necessary  s.  120  'additional  grounds'
    statement has been served.

 7. This appellant would not have  had  the  necessary  ten  years'  lawful
    residence on the basis of her student  leave  as  originally  extended,
    since that was only till January, and not to October 2013; and she must
    have known that she did not have it at the date of her application, and
    could only get it by pursuing an appeal which could, and did take  some
    time to resolve.

 8. However, it is now agreed that the judge's first reason  for  regarding
    the appellant as not qualifying for consideration under paragraph  276B
    (no s. 120 'additional grounds' statement served: see his paragraphs 62
    - 64) was wrong, because the appellant's representatives had faxed  one
    to the Home Office on 14 October, which did raise  the  paragraph  276B
    point. By that  time,  the  day  before  the  first-tier  hearing,  the
    appellant had built up the necessary ten  years'  lawful  residence  to
    qualify for indefinite leave to remain under paragraph 276B (i).

 9. That state of affairs raised questions on the  judge's  application  of
    paragraph 276B (ii) which were not answered in his decision;  but,  for
    the reasons set out at 3 - 4, left conspicuously hanging  in  the  air.
    This in my view was an error of law on his  part,  which  required  the
    decision to be re-made, which  was  to  be  done  following  a  further
    hearing before me on 22 April.

SCOPE OF FURTHER HEARING

10. The appellant had not challenged any of the judge's findings of fact on
    paragraph 276B (ii) by means of a r. 24 response; so they  only  needed
    to be revisited if either Mr Bramble chose  to  pursue  the  additional
    handwritten grounds of appeal put forward by Mr Jarvis on 10 March;  of
    if the findings left the factual position on  the  application  of  the
    rule so unclear that they needed to be supplemented. Mr Bramble did not
    pursue the additional grounds; and both sides agreed that I  could  re-
    make the decision on 276B (ii) on the basis of the judge's findings  of
    fact on conditions (a) - (f), together with the facts relating  to  how
    the appellant had built up her ten years' residence, in the context  of
    'reasons why it would be undesirable' for her to  be  given  indefinite
    leave to remain.

11. If, on re-making the decision on that basis, I were satisfied  that  it
    would not  be undesirable for the  appellant  to  be  given  indefinite
    leave to remain, then of course there would be no  need  to  go  on  to
    consider the case under article 8, nor any need to re-visit the judge's
    reasons on that point. However paragraph 276B (ii) specifically  allows
    a wide range of considerations to be taken into account, and I  put  it
    to the parties that, if I found there were  reasons  why  it  would  be
    undesirable for the appellant to be given indefinite leave to remain on
    the ground of long residence, then that would leave no  room  for  such
    'exceptional'  or  'compelling'  features  in  the  case  (see  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC), and Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate  aim)  Pakistan  [2014]  UKUT  85
    (IAC)) as to require any free-standing consideration of article 8.

12. Both sides agreed with this suggestion; so my sole task is  to  re-make
    the decision under paragraph 276B (ii), in the light  of  the  parties'
    agreement that the appellant does  satisfy  the  requirements  of  (i),
    (iii), (iv), and (v). Despite the reference to 'reasons why'  in  (ii),
    it is clear that I need to reach my own decision on the merits  of  the
    case, on the basis of the judge's  findings  of  fact.  That  makes  it
    unnecessary to say any more about the burden  and  standard  of  proof,
    though in general it rests on the appellant in a case of this  kind  to
    show that any fact she relies on is more likely than not  to  be  true.
    The appellant has, on the face of paragraph 276B (ii),  to  satisfy  me
    that "... having regard to the public interest there are no reasons why
    it would be undesirable for [her]  to  be  given  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the ground of long residence"; but it is  clearly  preferable
    in such a case for the Home Office to put forward reasons why it  would
    be undesirable, so she can answer them.

DECISION RE-MADE

13. The judge was obviously  directing  his  attention  to  the  individual
    considerations under paragraph 276B (ii), though he did not always make
    it quite clear where one  started  and  another  stopped.  I  shall  go
    through them one by one:

     a) age
        The appellant is now nearly 30, as good an age  as  any  other  for
        changing country, other things being equal.

     b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom
        I shall deal with this together with (d) and (e), as the judge did.

     c) personal history, including character,  conduct,  associations  and
        employment record
        Here the judge's findings were almost entirely  positive:  see  his
        paragraphs 143 -  146.  He  found  no  reason  to  think  that  her
        character,  conduct  and  associations  were  anything  other  than
        impeccable: as for her employment record, letters she produced from
        the hospital where she worked as a  care  assistant  made  it  "...
        relatively clear that she is hardworking and dedicated to her  work
        and the patients under her care". The  appellant  had  remained  in
        that employment (see paragraph 131) despite her claims  to  require
        significant physical support. The judge accepted what  the  letters
        said as showing that the appellant was economically active in  this
        country, and able to remain so.

     d) domestic circumstances
     e) compassionate circumstances
        Please see the following paragraphs for  the  judge's  findings  of
        fact, and my conclusions on these, and on (b).


     f) any representations received on the person's behalf
        The judge dealt with this at paragraph 152: while the appellant had
        expressed a wish to complete her studies and qualify as a  midwife,
        he noted that she had not given any reasonable explanation for  her
        failure to try to find and enrol  at  another  college,  after  her
        previous one lost its licence (see the judge's paragraph  17  (iv))
        in March 2013. Mr Rungasamy stressed the fact  that  the  appellant
        had been lawfully in this  country  for  over  ten  years,  without
        breaking the immigration laws or using deception to evade them:  he
        suggested that there was nothing to justify her  removal.  I  shall
        return to this topic later.

14. The judge dealt with considerations (b), (d) and (e) at paragraphs  107
    - 142 [(b) and (e)], and 148 - 151 [(e)]. To  summarize  his  findings,
    the appellant was "relatively fluent" in English (107) and had  studied
    here from 2003 to 2011-12 (135); but the  judge  was  not  prepared  to
    accept that she had lived  throughout  her  ten  years  here  with  her
    brother and his  family,  especially  because  of  her  cousin  Nadia's
    evidence that she had in fact been living with her since November  2011
    (111 - 112). Nor was the judge prepared to accept that the  appellant's
    brother had paid her course fees, after she fell out with her father in
    Mauritius, following her marriage to a Pakistani  in  2006  (which  had
    ended in divorce in 2007); or (as her brother put  it:)  "met  all  her
    needs".

15. The appellant had been back to Mauritius in 2006, 2008  and  2009,  the
    last time for her mother's funeral rites. Each time she had  stayed  in
    her father's house, despite her claim to  have  fallen  out  with  him,
    though the judge did note (at 14 (viii)) her evidence that  her  father
    had stayed elsewhere himself on her 2008 and 2009 visits.

16. Besides the course fees, the appellant  had  claimed  to  receive  more
    general financial support from her  brother;  but  the  judge  did  not
    accept (127) either that she needed it, or that he was in a position to
    give it. While he accepted her evidence (130) that she suffered to some
    degree from arthritis of the spine and knee, high  blood  pressure  and
    depression, and reduced mobility, he noted the almost complete lack  of
    any  medical  evidence  of  this,  in  particular  to  show  that   the
    appellant's condition required significant or any physical support.  As
    already noted, she had stayed at work.

17. While the appellant had produced letters from friends or  acquaintances
    of her own or her families, her brother had  been unable  to  name  any
    friends of hers, and there was no oral evidence from any of  them:  the
    judge was not prepared [140] to accept that  she  had  any  significant
    relationships outside her family, though at the same time he noted that
    this might increase whatever reliance she  might  have  on  her  family
    members. It followed that the judge was not satisfied  (142)  that  the
    appellant's ties with this country were anything like as strong as  she
    had claimed.

18. Turning to the possible compassionate circumstances,  the  judge  noted
    his previous findings about the appellant's  physical  condition  (also
    mentioning - see  149  -  that  she  suffered  from  obesity)  and  her
    relationship with her father, which led the judge not to  be  satisfied
    (150) that she would be unable to turn to him or his family members  if
    she had to go back there. Finally the judge concluded at 151:

       Other than being parted from her  family,  and  some  dislocation  in
       place and medical treatment ... I cannot be satisfied that there  are
       any significant compassionate circumstances in this case.

19. Conclusions     The appellant has been in this country  for  10�  years
    now, either  studying  or  working,  without  having  anything  to  her
    discredit, either in terms of immigration or the general law, and  with
    good references from her work. As the judge  accepted  (141)  she  must
    have built up some ties with  people  here,  besides  her  own  family,
    though none of these were  particularly  significant.  So  far  as  her
    family were concerned, it seems she had lived for some  time  with  her
    brother, and now lived with a cousin; but the judge did not accept, for
    reasons I have reviewed, that she got or needed any significant support
    from them.

20. Apart from the appellant's manifest obesity, which may nor may  not  be
    associated with some of the other problems  she  described,  the  judge
    rightly saw no clear evidence of her  suffering  from  any  significant
    condition which  could  not  be  treated  in  Mauritius,  a  relatively
    advanced Commonwealth country. The judge did not accept, for reasons he
    gave, that she would be without family support there, if she needed it.



21. If this appellant had built up ten years' lawful stay on the  basis  of
    leave granted by the Home Office, then all she  would  have  needed  to
    show is that considerations under paragraph 276B (ii) (a) - (f) led  on
    balance to there being no serious reasons why it would  be  undesirable
    for her to be given indefinite leave to remain on the  ground  of  long
    residence. As already noted at 12, there is no issue on  the  remaining
    sub-paragraphs of paragraph 276B [(i),  (iii),  (iv)  and  (v)].  I  am
    prepared to accept that, in view of the appellant's good record in this
    country, she might have managed to succeed, on (ii) (a) - (f) taken  by
    themselves.

22. However, that is not the case here: as already noted at 7, at the  date
    of the decision, and of her appeal against it, it must have been  clear
    to her and her then advisers (Lambeth  Solicitors),  that  she  had  no
    claim to remain under paragraph 276B (ii),  or  any  other  Immigration
    Rule. Her present solicitors (Lawrence &  Associates)  certainly  moved
    fast, following the tenth anniversary of her arrival here on 12 October
    2013, serving the s. 120 statement on the 14th, to get it in before the
    first-tier hearing on the 15th. I should not want to criticize them for
    that: they were simply doing the best for their client, in a way  which
    the law allows and the Home Office recognize as allowed: see 6.

23. While this appellant has not been guilty of  the  "blatant  deception",
    practised by the appellant in MU, she and her solicitors  between  them
    have managed to put her in a position where she is, with  one  possible
    exception, eligible for the indefinite leave to be  granted  those  who
    have been lawfully here for ten years, not by getting or keeping  leave
    granted by the Home Office; but  by  their  own  unilateral  action  in
    appealing when she was not eligible for ten-year leave, and  serving  a
    s. 120 notice as soon as she was. Though I do not blame them for  that,
    there is still a strong  public  interest  in  making  sure  that  such
    stratagems do not  succeed  in  defeating  the  clear  purpose  of  the
    Immigration Rules, unless  that  is  outweighed  by  an  even  stronger
    legitimate interest on the appellant's side.



24. For my part, I should regard that as requiring the  appellant  to  show
    that, on the considerations at paragraph 276B (ii) (a) - (f), there are
    exceptional reasons why it would be wrong for her  to  be  required  to
    leave. Whether that is right or wrong, it must be quite clear from  the
    judge's findings of fact, as I have summarized them at 19  -  20,  that
    this appellant's case raises no reasons outweighing the public interest
    referred to at 23. It follows that there are  serious  reasons  why  it
    would be undesirable for her to be given indefinite leave to remain  on
    the ground of long residence, and on that point her  appeal  must  fail
    under the Immigration Rules. There is no scope  for  her  to  be  given
    limited leave, for the same reasons as set out in MU (at paragraph 2 of
    the judicial head-note and paragraph 9  of  the  text);  nor  was  this
    argued before me.

25. It may be objected that this result leaves very  little  room  for  any
    application of MU  or the Home Office policy guidance at all.  However,
    I do not think that  is  right:  so  long  as  it  is  recognized  that
    exceptional family or personal reasons under 276B (ii) (a)  -  (f)  may
    outweigh the public interest in not granting indefinite leave to remain
    to someone who has only achieved ten years' lawful  residence  in  this
    way, then the principle in MU  will have the effect it was intended  to
    have.

26. Since both sides agreed (see 10) that the  breadth  of  paragraph  276B
    (ii) left no room for consideration of article 8, if the appellant were
    not to succeed under the Rules, it follows that the judge's decision is
    set aside, and re-made, dismissing the appeal as a whole. I will simply
    add that I regarded the agreement  on  this  point  as  clearly  right:
    unlike so many of the current Rules, 276B (ii) allows enough  room  for
    discretion in considering the appellant's private and family  life,  as
    against the public interest, for article  8  not  to  come  into  play,
    unless some consideration is put forward which  could  not  come  under
    those set out at (a) - (f); and I cannot think  at  present  what  that
    could possibly be.

Appeal dismissed


                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



