

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/07383/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 October 2013                            |On 9 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     Mr Justice McCloskey, the President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                       CHRISTELLE SAURELLE IYASSA ZOCK
                          (No Anonymity Order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Awan, instructed by Mayfair Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction


[1]  On 15 February 2013, Christelle Saurelle Iyassa Zock (hereinafter  "The
    Respondent"), a national  of  Cameroon,  was  granted  entry  clearance
    enabling her to enter the United Kingdom as a student [see Article 4 of
    the Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order 200] She duly arrived
    in the United Kingdom,  on  3  March  2013.   At  the  port  of  entry,
    enquiries were  conducted.   These  established  that  the  educational
    institution where she was proposing to study a  HND  in  Business,  the
    International School of Business, had been the  subject  of  a  licence
    revocation and associated removal from the Register of Sponsors, on  20
    February 2013.  It appears that she was granted temporary admission  to
    the United Kingdom.  Next, on 11 March 2013, a UKBA  Official  notified
    the following decision in writing to her:

        "I therefore  refuse  you  leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom/I
        therefore  cancel  your  continuing  leave.   If  your  leave   was
        conferred by an entry clearance, this will also have the effect  of
        cancelling your entry clearance.  The cancellation  of  your  leave
        will be treated for the purposes of the [1971 Act]  and  the  [2002
        Act] as a refusal of leave to enter at a  time  when  you  were  in
        possession of a current entry clearance...
        I have given ... directions for your removal to Cameroon...  on  17
        March 2013".

    This decision and these directions were contained in Form IS.82.C.

[2]  In a related formal UKBA notification, Form IS.125,  issued  some  four
    months later [on 26 July 2013], the juridical basis of the  Appellant's
    decision-making finds expression.  Firstly, it was stated:

        "...  I  am  satisfied  that  there  has  been  such  a  change  of
        circumstances in your case since the leave was given that it should
        be cancelled.  The change of circumstances... is that you  obtained
        leave to enter as a student to study  at  International  School  of
        Business Studies, but subsequent  to  that  the  college's  sponsor
        licence has been revoked and it has been removed from the  Register
        of sponsors on 20/02/13."

    Secondly, the following formal decision was notified:

        "I therefore cancel your leave under paragraph 2A(8) of Schedule  2
        of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  and  paragraph  321A(1)   of   the
        Immigration Rules...
        I therefore refuse you leave to enter the United Kingdom".

    Although the formal notifications are far from felicitously worded,  it
    would appear that the following sequence of decisions was made:

        a)   Initially, the Respondent was granted an entry visa permitting
           her to enter and remain in the  United  Kingdom  (presumably  on
           certain conditions) for the relevant study purpose.
        b)   Next, the licence of the sponsor college was  revoked  and  it
           was removed from the Register of Sponsors.
        c)   Upon the Respondent's arrival in the United Kingdom,  she  was
           granted temporary admission.
        d)   Subsequently, her entry clearance was formally cancelled.
        e)   Removal directions were made, but were not implemented.
        f)   Later, the Respondent's  temporary  admission  to  the  United
           Kingdom was cancelled.

 [3] Against this background, the Respondent exercised her right of  appeal.
     In a determination dated  11  August  2013,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowed her appeal.  The following is the key passage in the judgement:



        "... I find that the decision is materially  unfair  in  accordance
        with the guidance in Patel... the Appellant has lost the  fees  she
        paid the college, the fees she paid the UKBA for her visit and  the
        cost of travelling to and living in  the  UK  to  date.   The  UKBA
        licences colleges  and  has  a  responsibility  for  the  effective
        operation of the sponsorship system.  While there is not  a  policy
        that covers this situation I consider  that  granting  60  days  of
        leave to find another sponsor would be appropriate but I  leave  it
        to the Respondent to decide the appropriate fair response".

    This  gave  rise  to  a  conclusion  that  the  decision  whereby   the
    Appellant's entry visa had been cancelled was not  in  accordance  with
    the law.  The appeal was allowed accordingly.

The Issue in this Appeal

[4]  Permission to appeal was sought by the Appellant  on  the  ground  that
    the Tribunal's reliance on the decision in Patel [2011] UKUT 0211 (IAC)
    was misconceived, as it applies to in-country appeals only.   This  was
    considered  to  constitute  an  arguable  material  error  of  law  and
    permission to appeal was granted accordingly.

[5]  What did Patel decide? Its ratio decidendi  is  quite  clear.   It  was
    concerned with the processing of  applications  for  further  leave  to
    remain by lawfully  present  students  who  wished  to  continue  their
    studies in the United Kingdom, the UKBA withdrawal of approval for  the
    educational institution in question and the  consequential  refusal  of
    the extended leave to remain application.   The decision of  the  Upper
    Tribunal is encapsulated in paragraph 18 of its determination:

        "For reasons which we will briefly explain we  conclude  that  this
        decision was not made  in  accordance  with  the  la,  because  the
        Appellant's application was not treated fairly".

    The ratio of the decision is  that  where  the  licence  of  a  sponsor
    college has been revoked by the Secretary of State in the course of the
    processing of an application for a student's variation of leave and the
    student is neither aware of the revocation nor in any  way  responsible
    therefore,  the  Secretary  of  State  should  afford  the  student   a
    reasonable  opportunity  to  amend  the  application,  prior   to   its
    determination, by identifying a new sponsor: see paragraph  [22].   The
    Upper Tribunal considered that this opportunity  was  required  by  the
    operation of two common law principles, namely that of fairness and the
    equal treatment of all applicants.  In thus  concluding,  the  Tribunal
    observed, in paragraph [20]:

        "A refusal of leave to remain  is  a  very  serious  step  for  the
        Appellants.  Subject to a successful appeal their leave  to  remain
        expires and their continued  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  is
        unlawful and susceptible to summary removal.   Further,  there  are
        now statutory restrictions on what material can be submitted  post-
        decision in certain classes of case...."

    In thus deciding, the Upper Tribunal drew on the decision of the  Court
    of Appeal in R (Q) v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 364 and its own  decision  in
    Thakur [2011] UKUT 151.

[6]  At this juncture, we draw attention to the operative provision  of  the
    Immigration Rules, paragraph 321A(1), which provides:

        "The following grounds for the cancellation of a person's leave  to
        enter or remain which is in force on his arrival in, or  whilst  he
        is outside, the United Kingdom apply:


        (1.)  there has been such a change in  the  circumstances  of  that
             person's case since the leave  was  given  that  it  should  be
             cancelled".

    The relevant provision of  primary  legislation  engaged  is  paragraph
    2A(8) of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act  1971.   This  provides,  in
    material part:

        "(1.)     This paragraph applies to a person who has arrived in the
             United Kingdom with leave to enter which is in force but  which
             was given to him before his arrival.
        (2.) He may be examined by an Immigration Officer for  the  purpose
             of establishing -
             (a)   whether there has been such a change in the circumstances
               of his case, since that leave was given, that it  should  be
               cancelled...
        (8.)  An  Immigration  Officer  may,  on  the  completion  of   any
             examination of a person under this paragraph, cancel his  leave
             to enter.
        (9.) Cancellation of a person's leave under sub-paragraph (8) is to
             be treated for the purposes for the purposes of  this  Act  and
             Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as
             if he had been refused leave to enter at a time when he  had  a
             current entry clearance".

[7]  In addition to the relevant provisions of primary legislations and  the
    Immigration Rules, there is a  third  layer,  constituted  by  an  UKBA
    policy, which, in summary, states the following:

        (a)  If the Tier 4 sponsor's licence  expires,  is  revoked  or  is
           surrendered and the person concerned has been  given  a  student
           entry visa but has not yet travelled to the United Kingdom,  the
           visa "is cancelled".
        (b)  If, in such circumstances, the person travels  to  the  United
           Kingdom, "you will not be allowed to enter".
        (c)   If the person concerned is already  studying  in  the  United
           Kingdom and was not "involved in the  reasons  why  the  Tier  4
           sponsor had their licence revoked or why  it  was  surrendered",
           such person's existing permission to stay  will  be  limited  to
           sixty days or a lesser period if the balance is less than  sixty
           days.






    The policy continues:

        "You may want to apply for permission to stay with another  Tier  4
        sponsor during this time."

[8]  In the course of argument, it was conceded by Ms Everett  (representing
    the Secretary of State) that if the Respondent had been admitted to the
    United Kingdom and had been notified of the  proposed  cancellation  of
    her entry visa on any subsequent date - whether the  next  day  or  the
    following week or whenever - she would have been afforded the sixty day
    "period of grace"  enshrined  in  the  UKBA  policy.   The  purpose  of
    granting her this facility would have been to enable her to address the
    mischief viz  the  expiry,  revocation  or  surrender  of  the  Tier  4
    sponsor's licence and the associated de-registration by finding another
    sponsor.

[9]  We consider that there is no material distinction between  the  student
    (the Respondent) in this case and the student (the Appellant) in Patel.
     Their situations and circumstances are  materially  indistinguishable.
    The contention that the decision in Patel  is  confined  to  in-country
    appeals is, in our view, unsustainable, as this is nowhere to be  found
    in the ratio decidendi of the decision. The in-country appeal in  Patel
    was simply an element of the factual  matrix  therein.  In  determining
    this appeal, we consider it appropriate to focus on  the  precipitating
    event in both situations.  This  consists  of  the  revocation  of  the
    sponsor  college's  licence  and  consequential  de-registration.   The
    precipitating event in both cases is the same. The Secretary of State's
    argument was that this student should be treated differently  from  the
    Patel student for the simple reason that the  precipitating  event   in
    the present case occurred while she was  outside  the  United  Kingdom,
    rather than present therein. We reject this contention. It involves  an
    artificial distinction between the two cases. Furthermore,  it  entails
    objectively unjustifiable differential treatment as between  a  student
    such as this Respondent and her in-country  equivalent  or  comparator.
    This  would create arbitrary distinctions and  unjustifiable inequality
    of treatment within the body of visiting students as a whole.   All  of
    this would be inimical to the common law principles in play, which  are
    fairness and equal treatment. In summary, the unfairness and  disparate
    treatment to be avoided in the two cases are  in  substance  the  same.
    There was no suggestion that Patel was wrongly decided. For the reasons
    explained, we consider that its ratio should be applied to  the  matrix
    of the present case.

Decision


   [10]   For the reasons elaborated we dismiss this appeal and  affirm  the
          decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
                                                                       [pic]

                                                The Hon Mr Justice McCloskey

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 05 December 2013
