
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07808/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 February 2016                  |On 3 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr arsalan khattak
                         (anonymity ORDER not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and  Mr  Khattak
    as "the appellant".

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who appealed against a  decision
    to refuse to vary his leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    and to remove him  by  way  of  directions  under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.   He  appealed  that
    decision and following a hearing at Birmingham, at which the respondent
    was not represented, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lodge allowed his
    appeal.  The respondent sought permission to appeal which  was  granted
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Heynes on  14  January  2016.   His
    reasons for so doing were:-
         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
             decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge promulgated  on  5
             August 2015 allowing the appeal  against  the  refusal  of  an
             application for leave to remain.
         2.   The grounds of appeal  complain  that  the  Judge  misdirected
             himself and gave inadequate reasons for the decision.
         3.   It is arguable that the Judge erred in  his  approach  because
             the appeal before him related to an  application  for  further
             leave on the basis of private leave."

 3. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 4. There was no appearance from the appellant or  his  representative.   I
    considered a  letter  dated  24  February  2016  from  Imperium  Group,
    Immigration Law Specialist who represents the appellant.  It  confirmed
    that they were not instructed  to  attend  the  hearing  and  that  the
    appellant, with the help of the respondent (Voluntary Departures  Team)
    had left the United Kingdom and returned  to  his  country  of  origin.
    This was corroborated  by  the  HOPO's  own  information.   The  letter
    suggested that  as  a  consequence  the  appeal  could  be  treated  as
    "abandoned in line with Section 104 of NIAA 2002".

 5. Mr Norton relied on the respondent's grounds of appeal and reminded  me
    that the original refusal of the  appellant's  application  related  to
    issues of private and family life and that these were reflected in  the
    grounds of appeal that fell to be considered by the Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The judge had purported to allow the appeal  though  on
    the basis that the appellant's  leave  should  have  been  extended  to
    enable him to attend a course and for it to be completed.  That it  was
    said amounted to a material error of law.  In light of the issues  that
    fell to be considered the appeal should have been dismissed  consequent
    upon the findings of the judge within his decision.

 6. On my own analysis I accept the submissions of Mr Norton to the  effect
    that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal has materially erred and that
    the appeal should be re-made by dismissing it.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


Signed   Date: 29 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
