
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/07329/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision Promulgated     |
|On 3rd November 2014                   |On 9th December 2014     |
|                                       |                         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                               Mr Andrew Nicol
                        (Anonymity Direction Not Made)


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Nicol in person.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of South Africa and was born on 5th February
    1989.  He applied  for  leave  to  remain  which  was  refused  by  the
    respondent on 21st January 2014.  A  further  decision  to  remove  the
    respondent was made further to Section 47 of the Immigration Asylum and
    Nationality Act 2006.  His appeal was considered further to Appendix FM
    (family life) and Paragraph  276  ADE  (private  life)  by  First  Tier
    Tribunal Judge Boyd on 29th May 2014 and dismissed on 13th June 2014.

 2. The judge recorded [5] that the appellant failed to attend the  hearing
    and that

    'He [the appellant], later in the morning,  did  on  contact  state  he
    would not be attending, stating that both  he  and  his  representative
    were suffering from flu.   He  did  not  ask  for  an  adjournment.   I
    considered Rules 19 of the Procedure Rules.  I was not satisfied that a
    good reason for his  non-attendance  had  been  given.   The  appellant
    failed to contact the Tribunal until the  Tribunal  contacted  him  and
    there was no evidence to support  his  claim  that  he  was  unable  to
    attend'.

 3. An application for permission to appeal by the respondent  was  granted
    by First Tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on  the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that no medical certificate could have been  obtained  in  the
    time available.

 4. At the hearing before me the appellant  did  attend  and  he  explained
    first that he was not aware that the hearing had proceeded on  the  day
    until he received the judge's determination and secondly his sister had
    in fact contacted the Tribunal in the morning to advise that he was ill
    and had requested an adjournment.  He advised that  there  had  been  a
    change of address for him in March but this had not been adopted by the
    Tribunal.

 5. I find that there is reference to this change of address  in  an  email
    sent by the appellant to the Tribunal albeit after the  event  in  June
    2014.  Nonetheless he must have been aware of the date of  the  hearing
    because his sister, according to the appellant telephoned the Tribunal.
     However, at the hearing before me, the  appellant  produced  an  email
    from his sister, Melissa Nicol, confirming that she called the Tribunal
    in the early hours of the morning on the day of the hearing  to  inform
    the judge of 'our illness and to ask for a rehearing'.  I accept  this.
    It does not appear that this was relayed to the judge.

 6. No alternative address had been recorded by the  Tribunal  and  I  note
    that the appellant also confirmed that a bundle had been  sent  to  the
    First Tier Tribunal for the hearing  but  no  bundle  relating  to  the
    appellant was on file.  This advised of a change of  address  but  none
    was made.  I accept therefore, as both  the  file  and  the  change  of
    address were absent, that there may have been  further  evidence  which
    was relevant to the appeal not before the First Tier Tribunal Judge.

 7. As Mr Kandola pointed out at the hearing the appellant has now been  in
    the United Kingdom lawfully for ten years (he entered the  UK  on  29th
    October 2004) and it would be important for  the  appellant  to  obtain
    professional legal advice.

 8. I find that there is an error of law in the determination of the  First
    Tier Tribunal judge for the reasons explained above  and  I  set  aside
    that determination.

 9. The matter, however, in view of the nature and extent of  the  findings
    to be made, should be returned to the First Tier Tribunal for a hearing
    de novo with a direction that ALL evidence  to  be  relied  on  by  the
    appellant is to be provided to both the Tribunal and the respondent  in
    a paginated and indexed bundle at least 14 days prior to the  rehearing
    listed for 22nd April 2015.



Signed                                  Date 3rd November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington






