
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/07200/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


| Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8th May 2015                        |On 15th May 2015                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Richard Ofosu
                        (no anoNYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Attended in person
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Mr Richard Ofosu date of birth 10th November 1992, is a
    citizen of Ghana.  Having considered all the  circumstances  I  do  not
    make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [SSHD]  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Davey
    promulgated on 31st December 2014, whereby the judge allowed Mr Ofosu's
    appeal against the decision of the SSHD dated 20th January 2014.

 3. The decision by the SSHD was to refuse Mr Ofosu a  residence  card.  Mr
    Ofosu had applied for a residence card as a family  member  of  an  EEA
    qualified person. It was Mr Ofosu's case that  he  was  married  to  Ms
    Natalia Korneluk, a Latvian citizen, who was exercising  treaty  rights
    in the UK.

 4.  The appeal was allowed on the basis that,  whilst  Mr  Ofosu  did  not
    qualify as a family member under Regulation 7 of the  2006  Immigration
    (EEA) regulations, he did qualify as an extended  family  member  under
    Regulation 8, as a person that was in  a  durable  relationship.  Judge
    Davey in deciding the case noted that it was not  being  asserted  that
    the marriage was valid, as there  was  a  lack  of  evidence  that  the
    customary marriage had been registered or  was  lawful  in  Ghana,  and
    there appeared to be a lack of evidence as to how Latvian law or  other
    criteria necessary for the marriage to be  recognised  were  satisfied.
    The case was being advanced on the basis that Mr Ofosu and Ms  Korneluk
    were in a durable relationship.

 5. During the course of the hearing before me Ms  Korneluk  and  Mr  Ofosu
    spoke as to their relationship and  whether  their  Ghanaian  customary
    marriage was recognised in English law. Ms Korneluk stated that if  her
    marriage was not recognised in English law, it may be that there was no
    ongoing relationship between herself and Mr Ofosu. That may be a matter
    that has yet to be investigated.

 6. I am concerned with the decision made by Judge Davey.  Judge  Davey  in
    allowing the appeal outright  had  identified  the  relationship  as  a
    durable relationship akin to marriage that had  lasted  for  two  years
    qualifying Mr Ofosu under Regulation 8. Judge  Davey  had  allowed  the
    appeal outright. The issue of extended family members is dealt with  in
    the case of Ihemedu (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT 00340.

 7. In Ihemedu it was noted that an extended family member's entitlement to
    a residence card fell for consideration under Regulation 17(4)  of  the
    2006 Regulations. The grant of a residence card under Regulation  17(4)
    is subject to a discretion in the SSHD as to whether to grant such. The
    SSHD had not exercised or considered exercising the discretion.

 8. In line with Ihemedu the Judge in allowing the appeal should have found
    that the decision was not in accordance with  the  law  and  there  was
    therefore an application before the SSHD which  required  the  SSHD  to
    consider all the facts and in making a lawful decision to exercise  the
    discretion set out in Regulation 17(4).

 9. For the reasons set out there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    original decision. I substitute the following decision:-

        The appeal is allowed to  the  limited  extent  that  there  is  an
        application before the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
        requiring her to exercise the discretion under Regulation 17(4)  of
        the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  and  to  make  a  lawful
        decision.


Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
