
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/07209/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 4 August 2015                     |On 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                           ROBSON MARTINS PEREIRA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Aitken, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Brazil, born on 18 January 1964.   On  10
    February 2015 the respondent  refused  his  application  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of private  and  family  life  under  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE and Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR ("no exceptional circumstances").

 2. First-Tier Tribunal Judge JC Grant-Hutchison dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal by determination promulgated on 11 May 2015.

 3. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is on the following grounds:-

          1. Reference is made to paragraphs 16 and 17 of the determination
             where the Judge accepted that the appellant has a relationship
             with his partner Ms  Priddy  and  their  child  ...  there  is
             evidence of family and private life ... the Judge has erred in
             dismissing the appeal under Article 8 ...

          2. ... the appellant's child is a "qualifying child" in terms  of
             Part 5A of the 2002 Act as he  is  British  and  in  terms  of
             Section 117B (6) ... "in the case  of  a  person  who  is  not
             liable for deportation, he public interest  does  not  require
             the person's removal where:-

               a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

               b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

 4. On 2 June 2015  a  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  permission  to
    appeal, observing:-

         "It is arguable ... that the Judge failed to apply  the  provisions
         of Section 117B ... this appears to be because the Judge  took  the
         view that because there was no removal decision there would  be  no
         interference with family life (the appellant is currently in prison
         serving an 11 year sentence for  sexual  offences  and  as  yet  no
         deportation decision has been made).  However, JM (Liberia)  [2006]
         EWCA Civ 1402 requires the Judge to deal with the Article  8  claim
         and in so doing she is required to apply the provisions of  Section
         117A to D of the 2002 Act."

 5. At paragraph 17 of her determination the Judge said that as no  removal
    directions had been set there was  no  interference  with  family  life
    interests of the appellant, his partner or their child.  The Presenting
    Officer conceded at the outset that this  was  an  error  of  law,  but
    indicated that she would argue that it was not material.

 6. Mr McGinley said that notwithstanding any error of legal approach,  the
    Judge made all the factual findings required to resolve Article  8  and
    they were as favourable to the appellant as he might  have  hoped.   It
    was found that the appellant lived with his  son  for  the  first  five
    months of the child's life until the appellant was imprisoned,  was  in
    touch with his partner every day by telephone and  that  she  regularly
    visited with the child.  Although that was only twice monthly, that was
    "due only to distance and finances and not for the want of  wishing  to
    see each other" (paragraph 16).  The appellant's partner and child live
    in Dumfries whereas he  is  currently  imprisoned  at  Glenochil.   His
    partner is driven there by her mother and the journey is  considerable.
    Mr McGinley said that the issue  remaining  in  the  case  was  one  of
    balancing those positive family life findings against  the  appellant's
    admittedly serious offending.  He submitted that the appellant is not a
    person liable for deportation because no such proceedings have yet been
    commenced by the Secretary of State.  Liability to  deportation  arises
    from action taken by the Secretary of State not simply from the fact of
    conviction.  In terms of section 117B (6), the child  being  a  British
    citizen and having a mother  who  is  also  a  citizen  and  has  lived
    throughout her life in the UK  it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
    departure of the child from the UK and removal to  Brazil  to  maintain
    the paternal link.  The determination should therefore be reversed.

 7. Ms Aitken submitted  that  the  error  in  the  determination  was  not
    material, because no Tribunal properly directing itself  in  this  case
    could find that the appellant's removal  would  be  a  disproportionate
    breach of the Article 8 rights involved.  Although the  Judge  accepted
    that the appellant had a genuine  relationship  with  his  partner  and
    child, she also correctly considered Appendix FM of the Rules  and  set
    out the suitability requirements at paragraph 14 of her  determination.
    The appellant was bound to be refused leave to  remain  on  grounds  of
    paragraph S-LTR.1.3, his presence in the UK not being conducive to  the
    public good because he had been convicted for an offence and  sentenced
    to imprisonment for at least four years, and on grounds of paragraph S-
    LTR.1.5, his presence not being conducive to the public good because in
    the view of the Secretary of State such offending caused serious  harm.
    There was nothing to justify looking at Article 8 any more broadly than
    prescribed by the Rules.  There could be only one outcome and therefore
    there was no need  to  remake  the  determination.   Alternatively,  it
    should be remade by again dismissing the appeal.

 8. I reserved my determination.

 9. There is plainly no error of law  in  the  Judge's  decision  that  the
    appellant's case could not succeed under the  Rules  on  the  basis  of
    family and private life by reason of failure to  meet  the  suitability
    requirements due to his serious offending.

10. The question, as Mr McGinley put it, is one  of  balancing  the  family
    life features against the serious offending.  In my opinion, the  Rules
    provide the answer.  There are in this particular  case  no  facts  and
    circumstances which are not foreseen by the  Rules  but  yet  might  on
    application of Article 8 require a  grant  of  leave  to  remain.   All
    relevant matters are addressed in the consideration under the Rules.

11. I do not think that the appellant benefits from section 117B (6) of the
    2002 Act as "a  person  who  is  not  liable  for  deportation".   Such
    liability does not require a deportation order to have been made or any
    steps to have been taken towards the making of such an order.  Contrary
    to the submission on the appellant's behalf, I consider that  all  that
    is required is that the appellant is susceptible to the making of  such
    an order, which is plainly the case.  To hold otherwise  would  nullify
    significant parts of the general refusal provisions in paragraph 322(5)
    and (5A)  (relied  upon  in  the  respondent's  decision)  and  of  the
    suitability requirements in Appendix FM which clearly are  intended  to
    arise from the fact  of  conviction,  not  from  deportation  procedure
    having been invoked.

12. The Judge said at the end  of  her  determination  that  she  was  "not
    weighing up the appellant's crimes and future risk to  the  public  and
    children in particular against his private and family life".  In  light
    of that specific observation, I consider that although the outcome will
    be same the determination should not simply  be  left  to  stand.   The
    question which the judge left hanging should have an answer.

13. As stated above, I doubt if this  case  justifies  looking  beyond  the
    Rules.  If it might,  then  taking  account  of  the  judge's  positive
    findings on family life and of the  submissions  on  both  sides  I  am
    satisfied that the seriousness of the offending and the strength of the
    public interest is such that the proportionality balance falls  clearly
    against refusal of leave to remain.

14. If there were any shred of doubt about where to strike the  balance,  I
    note that in the FtT both the appellant and his  partner  continued  to
    maintain that he was  the  victim  of  a  conspiracy  and  despite  his
    convictions was not in fact guilty of any crimes.  A tribunal is  bound
    to proceed by accepting those convictions, and  such  denial  of  guilt
    bodes ill for the future.

15. The determination of the First-Tier Tribunal  is  set  aside,  but  the
    appeal is again dismissed on human rights and on  all  other  available
    grounds.

16. No anonymity order has been requested or made.






           [pic]


           6 August 2015
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
