
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07006/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 January 2018                     |On 07 February 2018                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                              ABHISEK BHOWMICK
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. H. Kannangara, Counsel instructed by Law Direct
                  Immigration Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Grimmett, promulgated on 22  June  2015,  in  which  she
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
     refuse to vary his leave as a Tier 4 Student.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted following a decision from Mrs. Justice
    Cheema-Grubb following the Appellant's application for judicial review.
     The Order states:


    "It is clearly arguable that the First Tier Judge Grimmett  erred  when
    she refused the Claimant's appeal on the limited basis that the  SSHD's
    policy of allowing 60 days for a student to find an alternative  course
    and obtain a CAS need not have been  applied  to  this  Claimant.   The
    Claimant's lawyers' letter of 21st January 2015 and the  recitation  of
    evidence from the hearing demonstrate that it was the Claimant  himself
    who had informed the SSHD that he believed the  college's  licence  had
    been withdrawn/ revoked."


 3. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions

 4. At the outset of the submissions I referred to the case  of  EK  (Ivory
    Coast) [2014] EWCA Civ 1517.  It was agreed by both representatives, in
    line with this case that, in order to  obtain  a  60  day  letter,  the
    reason for the withdrawal of the CAS must be due  to  the  Respondent's
    actions.

 5. Mr. Kannangara submitted that the Appellant knew in January  2015  that
    the college had lost its licence.  He submitted that  the  licence  had
    been  revoked  by  21  January  2015.   The  decision  to  refuse   the
    Appellant's application was taken on 30 January 2015.  This was due  to
    the fact that the Sponsor's licence  had  been  revoked.   However,  he
    accepted that it was not clear from the CAS itself whether it had  been
    withdrawn as a result of the Sponsor losing its licence or  whether  it
    was already withdrawn or invalid when  the  licence  was  revoked.   He
    submitted that the Respondent was the only one who would know this and,
    following her guidance, she should have issued a  60  day  letter.   He
    submitted that the CAS indicated that the Appellant's  sponsorship  had
    not been withdrawn, only that the CAS had been withdrawn.


 6. Mr. Avery submitted that, when a sponsor's licence was  revoked  and  a
    CAS was withdrawn as a result, an applicant would get a 60 day  letter.
    He submitted that there was no error in Judge Grimmett's decision.  The
    Appellant had been inconsistent in his evidence about the circumstances
    around the revocation and withdrawal.  He submitted  that  the  college
    may have had its licence revoked, but that it did  not  mean  that  the
    college had not withdrawn the CAS beforehand.  The application had been
    refused because the CAS had been withdrawn by the  college.   This  was
    not an action carried out by the Respondent.


  7. In response Mr. Kannangara  submitted  that  the  CAS  was  clear  that
     sponsorship had not been  withdrawn,  and  that  this  meant  that  the
     Sponsor had not withdrawn the CAS.  The college did not have a licence,
     so the CAS could not be valid.  He submitted  that  the  CAS  had  been
     withdrawn as a result of the college losing its licence.


Error of law


 8. I have carefully considered the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    At [6] to [8] the Judge states:


         "The Appellant appeals on the grounds that "the  Appellant  informs
         us the Sponsor he obtained the CAS was revoked end of  2014"  which
         was explained at the hearing as the Sponsor's licence  having  been
         revoked at that time as a result of which the Appellant says he  is
         entitled to 60 days in order to regularise his  stay  by  making  a
         further application as the revocation of the licence  was  not  his
         fault.


         The difficulty with that assertion on the part of the Appellant  is
         that he was unable to say when the licence was revoked  and  indeed
         his oral evidence as to in what circumstances he found out about it
         was somewhat confused.  He said to begin with  that  he  heard  the
         licence was revoked when the Home Office sent him the letter saying
         that his application had been refused although that  letter  refers
         to the withdrawal of the CAS not revocation of the licence.  It was
         pointed out to him that his  solicitor's  letter  of  21st  January
         2015, indicates that he was aware that the college licence had been
         revoked at that time and he then said that the college had told him
         that the licence had been revoked but then he heard nothing further
         and so he thought it was revoked and then he  received  the  letter
         from the Home Office to say that it had been revoked but  the  Home
         Office letter does not say that.


         The Appellant's application was refused because when the  Secretary
         of State checked the Confirmation of Acceptance  for  Studies  they
         found that it had been withdrawn.  The Respondent's policy to allow
         60 days for a student to find an alternative  course  applies  only
         when a college's licence is withdrawn and not when  a  Confirmation
         of Acceptance  for  Studies  had  been  withdrawn.   The  Appellant
         therefore cannot succeed in this appeal."


 9. Although not set out in terms as in EK,  I  find  that  the  Judge  has
    correctly set out that a 60 day letter is only issued  when  a  licence
    has been withdrawn, or "revoked", by the Respondent, as opposed to when
    a CAS has been withdrawn by a college.


10. The Judge finds that the Appellant's evidence regarding  how  he  found
    out that the Sponsor's licence had been revoked, and when he found out,
    was not consistent or clear.  The Order refers to the fact that it  was
    the  Appellant  who  informed  the  Respondent  that  he  believed  the
    college's licence had been revoked.  I have considered the letter dated
    21  January  2015.   This  states  that  the  Appellant  informed   his
    representatives that the "college he submitted his CAS  from  with  his
    original application has been revoked".  There is no reference to  when
    the college's licence was revoked, nor how the Appellant  is  aware  of
    this.  I accept that this letter predates  the  Respondent's  decision,
    but it does not confirm that, up until any revocation, the  Appellant's
    CAS was valid.  It is not proof that the CAS was withdrawn due  to  the
    revocation of college's licence by the Respondent.  There has  been  no
    challenge to the record of the evidence as set out by the Judge.  There
    is no material error of law in her consideration of this letter.


11. I have considered the CAS.  This states:


         "The CAS has been marked as WITHDRAWN.  The details  are  displayed
         below.


         WARNING - the Sponsor's licence is revoked."


    Later it states "Current CAS status - WITHDRAWN".


 12. The CAS indicates that sponsorship has not been withdrawn.   Therefore,
     it was submitted, the withdrawal of the CAS had nothing to do with  the
     college but was due to the licence being  revoked  by  the  Respondent.
     However the Appellant has not provided any evidence to show  that  this
     is the case, neither before the First-tier  Tribunal,  nor  before  me.
     Nor is it clear from the decision that this argument  was  put  to  the
     Judge in the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr. Kannangara appeared in the First-
     tier Tribunal, and he has not submitted that the Judge failed  to  take
     into  account  this  argument.   If  it  were  the  case  that,   where
     sponsorship is not withdrawn but a CAS is withdrawn,  this  means  that
     the withdrawal of the  CAS  is  due  to  the  Respondent  revoking  the
     college's licence, rather than the college withdrawing the CAS  of  its
     own accord, it is  surprising  that  even  now  no  evidence  has  been
     provided by the Appellant to substantiate this claim.


 13. Further the Appellant  did  provide  any  evidence  to  the  First-tier
     Tribunal from the college confirming that they had  not  withdrawn  his
     CAS.  In the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal it states that  he
     could not get any information as the college was no longer functioning,
     but it is not clear that this was the case in June 2015 when his appeal
     was heard in the First-tier Tribunal.


 14. There are various other dates on the CAS, for example the "Current  CAS
     status date", and the "expiry date" but it has not  been  submitted  by
     the Appellant, either before the First-tier Tribunal or before me, that
     these dates are  of  any  significance  in  showing  why  the  CAS  was
     withdrawn.


 15. It was agreed at the hearing that a 60 day letter was only  appropriate
     where the Respondent was responsible for the  revocation  of  the  CAS.
     The Judge correctly cited this.  The Appellant did  not  discharge  the
     burden of proof to show to the First-tier  Tribunal  that  it  was  the
     Respondent who was responsible for the withdrawal of the CAS.   I  have
     given  careful  consideration  to  the  letter  from  the   Appellant's
     representatives, which the Judge took into account at [7].   This  does
     not show that the CAS was  withdrawn  due  to  the  revocation  of  the
     Sponsor's licence.  It indicates that the Appellant was aware that  the
     licence had been revoked, but it does not say when,  and  it  does  not
     confirm that, prior to any revocation, his CAS was still valid.  I find
     that there is no error of law  in  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the
     evidence,  and  she  was  entitled  to  come  to  a  finding  that  the
     Appellant's appeal could not succeed.  Even now, the Appellant has  not
     shown that  the  college  had  not  withdrawn  his  CAS  prior  to  the
     revocation of their licence.


 16. I find there is no error of law in the decision.  Cogent  reasons  were
     given by the Judge for rejecting the Appellant's argument that the  CAS
     was withdrawn due to the revocation  of  the  licence.   There  was  no
     evidence before me to support the Appellant's argument  that  the  fact
     that the CAS indicated that sponsorship had not  been  withdrawn  meant
     that it was not the college who had withdrawn the CAS.  It is not clear
     that this argument was put to the Judge in the First-tier  Tribunal  in
     any case.


17. There is no material error of law in the decision.


Decision


 18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making  of
     a material error of law, and I do not set it aside.


 19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


 20. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 5 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
