

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07566/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Sent           |
|On : 1st November 2013                        |On : 8th November 2013       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MEGHNA AGARWAL

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lawrence Tarlow of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    unrepresented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is one of three linked appeals in which the appellants before  the
    First-tier Tribunal (a married couple and their child, the  wife  being
    the principal appellant) successfully challenged  the  refusal  on  1st
    March 2013 of further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1
    (General) Migrant and her dependants.   The  appeals  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 18th  July  2013,  and  were  allowed  by  Judge
    Cheales.

2.   On behalf of the Secretary of State, permission was  sought  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, the grounds being drafted  by  Mr  Tarlow.   The
    point was a narrow one, namely that, although the Tier 1  Migrant,  Mrs
    Agarwal, had started up her own company and was doing well, she had not
    complied with the requirement at paragraph 25(b) of Appendix A  to  the
    Immigration Rules, that she "must be registered as self-employed in the
    UK, and must provide the specified evidence."  This she had not done.

3.   Permission was duly granted, and Mrs  Agarwal,  who  is  unrepresented,
    was intending to rely on an argument derived from Alvi, namely that the
    failure to meet requirements which are in Policy Guidance  but  not  in
    the Immigration Rules should not lead to rejection of  an  application.
    Fortunately for her, she did not need to advance this argument when the
    matter came before me, because Mr Tarlow, with his customary  fairness,
    drew to my attention to the following definition at paragraph 6 of  the
    Immigration Rules, under the heading 'Interpretation':
             "Under part  6A  of  these  Rules,  'self-employed'  means  an
         applicant is registered as self-employed with HM Revenue & Customs,
         or is employed by a company of which the applicant is a controlling
         shareholder."

4.   This definition  was  inserted  into  the  Immigration  Rules  on  29th
    February 2008, when the Points Based System was first rolled  out,  and
    Mrs Agarwal meets the latter of the two alternative requirements.   The
    requirement at paragraph 25(b) of Appendix A was inserted on 6th  April
    2011, but no change was made to the definition  of  'self-employed'  at
    paragraph 6 in the main body of the Immigration Rules, which  sets  out
    the meaning of 'self-employed' for the whole of Part 6A of those Rules.
     Appendix A is subordinate to Part 6A, filling out  the  detail  needed
    for the application of the general requirements laid down by  Part  6A.
    Where there is a clash between the definition of such a general term as
    'self-employed' between Part 6A itself and Appendix A, the former is to
    be preferred.

5.   In the instant case, the wider definition accords  with  both  fairness
    and common sense.  Mrs Agarwal has achieved the purpose for  which  the
    Tier 1 (General) route was  set  up  in  the  first  place,  to  enable
    talented individuals from overseas to make a useful contribution to the
    British economy.  Her business is a going  concern,  and  she  and  her
    dependants do meet the requirements for further leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom.




     DECISION

     The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  upheld,  and  the
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           1st November 2013
