
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/07624/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 October 2016                 |On 18 October 2016                 |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                               RACHID KARROUZI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Dr Mynott for Broudie Jackson and Cantor
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant, a national of Algeria was  born  on  31  March  1981.  The
   Appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 6
   February 2015 to refuse to grant an application for a permanent residence
   card as confirmation of his right to reside in the UK.
3. The Appellants application was considered under Regulation 10(5)  of  the
   Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 and refused  on  the  basis  that  the
   Appellant had failed to demonstrate that the  EEA  national  wife  was  a
   qualified person at the time of the divorce on 14 December 2009.
4. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Myers  heard  the  appeal  against  the
   decision and dismissed the appeal on all grounds. In a decision dated  21
   April 2016 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird found errors of law  in  the
   decision and set it aside with no preserved findings and the matter  came
   before me for rehearing.
The Law
5. The burden of proof in this case is upon the Appellant and  the  standard
   of proof is upon the balance of probability. As the Appellant is  in  the
   United Kingdom I can take into account evidence which concerns  a  matter
   arising after the date of the decision in accordance with  Section  85(4)
   of the 2002 Act. In relation to  the  relevant  date  I  have  considered
   Boodhoo and another (EEA Regs:  relevant  evidence)  [2013]  UKUT   00346
   (IAC) where it was held that in an EEA appeal, a tribunal  has  power  to
   consider any evidence which it thinks relevant to the  substance  of  the
   decision, including evidence which concerns a matter  arising  after  the
   date of the decision.
Evidence
6. I had the bundle of documents that were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   together with a supplementary bundle containing a supplementary statement
   from  the  Appellant  and  a  certified  copy  of  the  application   for
   dissolution of the marriage.
7. I heard evidence from the Appellant, He was  asked  what  evidence  there
   was that his ex-wife  had  been  in  the  UK  at  the  time  the  divorce
   proceedings commenced on 5 November 2009 as the refusal letter  suggested
   that the evidence  only  covered  the  period  up  to  August  2009.  The
   Appellant pointed to the evidence of his ex wife's bank statements  which
   were in the bundle at page 72 onwards which showed a number  of  deposits
   including job seekers allowance up to and including payments made  on  25
   November 2009.
Final Submissions
8. Mr Bates conceded  that  on  the  basis  of  caselaw  and  the  documents
   produced the Appellant did meet the requirements of Regulation  10(5)  of
   the 2006 Regulations and the appeal should be allowed.
Findings
9. On balance and taking the  evidence  as  a  whole,  I  have  reached  the
   following findings
10. The Appellant  is  citizen  of  Algeria  who  applied  for  a  permanent
   residence card following his divorce on the basis that  he  had  retained
   the right of residence.
11. Mr Bates quite properly conceded that the only matter put  in  issue  by
   the refusal letter have been addressed by the Appellant  and  the  appeal
   should succeed.
12. The Appellant has produced documentary  evidence  that  is  accepted  as
   reliable to show that divorce proceedings were initiated  on  5  November
   2009 and a decree absolute was granted on 14 December 2009. It  is  clear
   from the bank statements that were produced that at the time the  divorce
   proceedings  were  initiated  the  Appellants  ex  wife  was  in  the  UK
   exercising treaty rights as  there  are  deposits  of  JSA  covering  the
   relevant period and that she remained a qualified person at the  date  of
   the decree absolute shortly thereafter. This interpretation was confirmed
   by the decision in NA [2016]  EUECJ  C-115/15(30  June  2016)  which  was
   relied on by Dr Mynott.
Conclusion
13. I find that the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof on  him  to
   show that the terms regulation 10 (5) of the Regulations are met.
Decision
14. The appeal in respect of the EEA Regulations is allowed.
15.  No order for anonymity is made.

Signed                                                              Date
18.10.2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell



To the Respondent
Fee Award

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered making a fee award. I make
no award of any fee as I note that documentary evidence confirming the
divorce was not before the decision maker.


Debra Birrell

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

