
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07471/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 25 November 2015                  |On 16 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                     ALC
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr. C. Howells, of counsel, instructed by N. C.
                    Brothers & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

History of Appeal

 1. The Appellant, who was born on 6 March 1986, is a national  of  Poland.
    She entered the United Kingdom in August 2005 and her son was born here
    on 7 September 2005.

 2. On 5 September 2013 she drove to her son's school, whilst she was  five
    times over the alcohol limit permitting her to drive. She  reversed  at
    full speed into other cars and a woman  ended  up  pinned  against  her
    front door by the Appellant's car. This woman suffered what  were  said
    to be life changing injuries resulting  in  the  need  for  around  ten
    operations. The Appellant was charged with causing  serious  injury  by
    dangerous driving and pleaded guilty to this charge.

 3. She was convicted on 2  April  2014  and  on  24  April  2014  she  was
    sentenced to three years imprisonment and disqualified from driving for
    three years.  On 23 July 2014 the Respondent informed her that she  was
    minded to deport her from the United Kingdom and on  13  February  2015
    she made a substantive decision to deport her.

 4. The Appellant appealed on 26  February  2015  and  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Perry dismissed her appeal in a decision, promulgated on 7 August
    2015.  The Appellant appealed against this decision on 24  August  2015
    and First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox granted her permission to appeal on 4
    September 2015.  The Respondent subsequently filed and served a Rule 24
    response, dated 14 September 2015.

Error of Law Hearing

 5. In the first ground of appeal it was  argued  that  there  had  been  a
    prejudicial delay  between  the  hearing  on  10  April  2015  and  the
    promulgation of the decision on 7 August 2015. I have noted  that  rule
    29(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 states that the Tribunal must  provide  each
    party with a notice of decision as soon as reasonably  practicable.   I
    also note that  in  Sanbasivam  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2000] Imm AR 85 Potter LJ  found  that  "substantial  delay
    between hearing  and  preparation  of  the  determination  renders  the
    assessment of credibility issues unsafe and that such  delay  tends  to
    undermine the loser's confidence in the  correctness  of  the  decision
    once delivered".

 6. However, the record of proceedings contained  a  typed  record  of  the
    evidence given at the appeal hearing and the Appellant did  not  assert
    that this record had not been compiled at the time of  the  hearing  or
    that it included any  inaccuracies.  Neither  did  she  point  out  any
    findings of adverse credibility which had been caused  by  this  delay.
    Therefore, I do not find that any error of law arose from this delay.

 7. In her third ground of appeal the Appellant submitted that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  had  failed  to  apply  regulation  21(3)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) 2006 ("the EEA Regulations") in so
    far as she had failed to consider whether there were serious grounds of
    public policy which justified the Appellant's removal from  the  United
    Kingdom under regulation 19(3)(b) of the EEA Regulations.  It  was  not
    disputed that the Appellant  had  been  continuously  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom and exercising a Treaty right between 2005 and 2012.  As
    a consequence, she had acquired a permanent right of residence for  the
    purposes of regulation 15 of the EEA Regulations.

 8. Regulation 21(3) of the EEA Regulations clearly states that a  decision
    to remove a person from the United Kingdom "may not be taken in respect
    of a person with a permanent right of  residence  under  regulation  15
    except on serious grounds of public policy or public security".  In  LG
    and CC (EEA Regs: residence, imprisonment; removal) Italy [2009]  UKAIT
    00024 the Upper Tribunal found that "a clear distinction is required to
    be drawn  between  the  three  levels  of  protection  against  removal
    introduced in the 2006 Regulations, each level  being  intended  to  be
    more stringent and  narrower  than  the  immediately  lower  test".  At
    paragraph 4 of the judgment the  Tribunal  relied  on  the  finding  by
    Carnwath LJ in LG (Italy) v Secretary of  State  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  190
    where he referred  to  their  being  "a  new  hierarchy  of  levels  of
    protection, based on criteria  of  increasing  stringency".  The  first
    level was a general one which meant that the test was whether  "removal
    may be justified 'on the grounds of public policy, public  security  or
    public health".

 9. However, where a person had a right of permanent residence there was  a
    "more specific criterion" which was that a person "may not  be  removed
    'except on serious grounds of public policy or  public  security".  The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge referred to this test in paragraph 58 of  his
    decision but he did not then apply this enhanced test to the  facts  of
    the Appellant's case in relation to whether there were serious  grounds
    of public policy or public security. At most he asserted  in  paragraph
    70 of his decision that "the appellant does pose a  significant  threat
    to the safety and security of the public".  He  provided  no  reasoning
    for this particular finding.

10. In ground 2 the Appellant also submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision that the  Appellant  posed  a  significant  threat  to
    public policy and public security was also unreasonable.  I  find  that
    the correct test was whether she posed a  "serious"  as  opposed  to  a
    "significant" threat.  It is  accepted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did base his findings on  the  Appellant's  personal  conduct  as
    required by regulation 21(5)(b). However, he did fail to properly apply
    regulation 21(5)( c)  as  he  was  required  to  consider  whether  she
    represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently   serious   threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society".

11. The factors relied upon by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in  paragraphs
    60 66 and 67 related to the offence of which she had been convicted  in
    2013, her alcoholism prior to the offence  and  her  assertion  shortly
    after the incident that she felt normal before driving her car  on  the
    day of the incident. He did not sufficiently address  the  question  of
    whether the Appellant now posed a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat.

12. The Judge did refer to the NOMS report in paragraphs 66 and 67  of  his
    decision but only mentioned  in  passing  that  her  offending  manager
    concluded that there was a low risk of her re-offending. He also failed
    to take into account that the OASys assessment, dated 3 December  2014,
    said that the Appellant fully accepted responsibility for  the  offence
    and that she was very motivated to address her history of offending and
    was very capable of changing and reducing her offending and that  there
    was a letter from Solent NHS Trust, dated 9 May 2014,  which  confirmed
    that she was no longer drinking.

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  asserted  that  there  were  significant
    unresolved issues relating to her relationship with her  father,  which
    undermined the conclusion in the report that she was committed  to  and
    is evidencing an ability to develop a strong alcohol relapse prevention
    strategy.  However, there was no evidence from  the  NHS  or  probation
    service to support  this  assertion.   I  accept  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  was  not  bound  to  adopt  the  opinions  of  relevant
    professionals but it was necessary for him to  provide  reasons  if  he
    chose not to.

14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge also placed  very  great  weight  on  the
    Appellant's past conviction; as did the Respondent at the hearing,  and
    did not appear to remind himself that  regulation 21(5)(e) states  that
    "a person's previous criminal convictions do not in themselves justify"
    removal.

15. For all these reasons I find that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred
    in his approach to regulations 19 and 21 of the EEA Regulations. I also
    find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings on Article 8 of  the
    ECHR were fatally flawed by his approach to the Appellant's  conviction
    and that this also amounted to an error of law.

16. I also find that for this reason, there was no basis upon which I could
    retain any  factual  findings  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    assessment of the Appellant's Article 8 rights.

17. For all these reasons I am satisfied that there were material errors of
    law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and reasons and that it
    should be set aside in its entirety. I am also satisfied that, as there
    will need to be a complete  re-hearing,  this  is  a  proper  case  for
    remission to the First-tier Tribunal.

    Directions

    1.   The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo
         hearing.

    2.   The appeal should listed before a First-tier Tribunal Judge  other
         than First-tier Tribunal Judge Perry.




    Nadine Finch
         Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


         Date: 2 December 2015
