
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07470/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 April 2016                          |On 28 April 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mustafa altinisik
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr A Moksud, Legal Representative from First Global
     Immigration

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State (hereafter the  Respondent,
    as she was at  first  instance)  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge D A Pears (the judge), promulgated on 29 September 2015,
    in which he allowed the appeal of Mr  Altinisik  (now  once  again  the
    Appellant).  The appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 10 February 2015, refusing to grant him  leave
    to remain on Article 8 grounds  and  to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom by way of directions under section 10 of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999.

 2. The basis of the Appellant's case before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    that he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  son  H,  a
    British citizen.  The Appellant had been married to H's mother, also  a
    British citizen.  Unfortunately the relationship had  broken  down  and
    the couple had divorced.  The Appellant asserted that he had an ongoing
    relationship with H, was seeking to have further contact with him,  and
    that this was sufficient to found a case under Article 8.




The judge's decision

 3. At paragraph 3 of his decision the judge makes it  clear  that  in  his
    view the only issue in dispute  in  the  context  of  the  Respondent's
    refusal letter was the requirement under  Appendix  FM  E-LTRPT.2.4(b).
    This particular provision stipulates that: "the applicant must  provide
    evidence that they are taking and intend to continue to take an  active
    role in a child's upbringing".  Having set out the evidence provided by
    the Appellant at paragraphs 7 to 12, the judge goes on to find that the
    Appellant's evidence was credible.  On the basis of that  evidence,  in
    particular Orders from the Wakefield County  Court  by  District  Judge
    Lynch, the judge concluded that  the  Appellant  was  entirely  genuine
    about pursuing contact with his son  H,  and  that  ultimately  he  was
    taking and intended to take in the future an active role in  his  son's
    upbringing. Therefore E-LTRPT.2.4(b) was  satisfied.   Given  this  the
    judge goes on to allow the appeal under, as he put it, "Appendix FM  of
    the Immigration Rules".



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The concise grounds of appeal assert that the judge erred by failing to
    consider  the  particular  requirements  of  EX.1   of   Appendix   FM.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on
    17 March 2016.




The hearing before me

 5. Ms Fijiwala relied on the grounds of appeal. She submitted that it  was
    incumbent upon him to  have  done  so  notwithstanding  his  favourable
    finding  on  the  eligibility  requirement  of  Appendix  FM  mentioned
    previously.  There had been no concession on  the  EX.1  point  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

 6. For the Appellant Mr Moksud submitted that as  the  Presenting  Officer
    had not raised any particular issues about the application of  EX.1  at
    the hearing, the judge had been entitled to  simply  allow  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules without making express reference to EX.1.

Decision on error of law

 7. I find that the judge made a material error of law in this case.

 8. Whilst I have some sympathy with his approach to the appeal before him,
    given that the Presenting Officer does not seem to have  made  any,  or
    any substantial, submissions on the requirements of  EX.1,  nonetheless
    these requirements fell to be decided by the judge on  appeal.   Having
    regard to the Respondent's refusal letter it is apparent that  she  had
    taken  the  view  that  because  the  Appellant  did  not  satisfy   E-
    LTRPT.2.4(b), EX.1 could not apply.  Therefore the  substance  of  EX.1
    had not been considered at all by the  Respondent.   In  light  of  the
    decision in Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not freestanding) [2014] UKUT  63
    (IAC) the Respondent had adopted a correct approach in this regard.

 9. Once the judge found in  the  Appellant's  favour  on  the  eligibility
    requirement,  he  should,  indeed  was  bound  to,  have  gone  on  and
    considered all the requirements under EX.1.  His failure to do  so  was
    clearly material given that those requirements must be met in order for
    an Appellant to succeed under the Rules.

10. In light of this  material  error  of  law  I  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision.




Re-making the decision

11. Both representatives were agreed that I could and  should  re-make  the
    decision on the evidence before me.

12. For her part Ms Fijiwala stated that she had no submissions to make  on
    the application of EX.1 in the circumstances of this case.

13. Having considered the evidence as a whole, the findings of  the  judge,
    and Ms  Fijiwala's  position  before  me  I  find  that  the  Appellant
    satisfies all of the relevant requirements under the  parent  route  of
    Appendix FM.

14.  There  has  never  been  any  issue  in  respect  of  the  suitability
    requirements. In terms of the eligibility requirements, the  only  live
    issue had been that referred to previously in my decision.   The  judge
    found in the Appellant's favour on this issue.  That  finding  has  not
    been challenged and is therefore preserved.

15. In respect of EX.1(a), on the unchallenged  evidence  as  a  whole  (in
    particular pages 9-64 of  the  Appellant's  bundle)  I  find  that  the
    Appellant has had and  continues  to  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his son H.  He has sought, been granted, and
    maintained contact with H, albeit limited by  the  constraints  of  the
    Contact Orders which appear in the Appellant's bundle (pages 9-11).  He
    is exercising parental contact rights and his relationship with H in my
    view clearly falls within the ambit of a "parental relationship".

16. Moving on to the second requirement, H is a British citizen.

17. Finally, I address the question of whether it would be reasonable for H
    to leave the United Kingdom.  H normally resides with his  mother,  the
    Appellant's now ex-wife.  There has never been any suggestion that  she
    would, or could reasonably be expected to move to Turkey. H is  clearly
    not going to be separated from his mother. Given this state of  affairs
    it would clearly be unreasonable (indeed, as matters stand  in  respect
    of residency, it would be unlawful) for H to leave the  United  Kingdom
    and go and live with the Appellant in Turkey.  It seems to me as though
    there could be no other answer to this final question.

18. In light of the foregoing, all the requirements of Appendix  FM  having
    been satisfied, the Appellant succeeds under the Rules and  the  appeal
    is allowed on this basis.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date: 27 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                                  Date: 27 April 2016





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

