
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/07236/2015
                                                               IA/07246/2015
                                                               IA/07252/2015
                                                               IA/07254/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th November 2016                |On 22nd November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Y P
                                     N P
                                      V
                                      K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr E Wilford, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Respondents


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The Secretary of State, with permission appeals  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Manyarara)  who,   in   a   determination
    promulgated on 22nd  June  2016,  allowed  their  appeals  against  the
    decisions made by the Secretary of State to  refuse  further  leave  to
    remain on Article 8 grounds.

 2. Whilst this is the appeal by the Secretary of State, for  the  sake  of
    convenience I intend to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Appellants  are  all  citizens  of  India;  the  first  and  second
    Appellants are the parents of the third  and  fourth  Appellants.   The
    family had made conjoined applications for leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds under Article 8 and that application was refused by  the
    Secretary of State in a decision reached on 9th February 2015.

 4. The decision letter set  out  in  the  papers  made  reference  to  the
    family's immigration history.  The first Appellant entered the UK on  a
    student visa in February 2007 and  his  wife  and  eldest  minor  child
    entered shortly thereafter in November  2007  as  dependants  upon  his
    student visa.  Further leave was  granted  until  30th  November  2011.
    Shortly before that leave was to  end,  the  first  Appellant  and  his
    dependants submitted applications for leave to remain on  human  rights
    grounds under Article 8 of the ECHR which was  refused  on  16th  June,
    2012.  An appeal was heard before the First-tier Tribunal in  September
    2012 but was dismissed.  In that month the fourth Appellant and  second
    child was born.  By October  2012  the  first  and  second  Appellants'
    appeal rights were exhausted and it was on  26th  August  2014  that  a
    reconsideration was requested of the previous application for leave  to
    remain which resulted in the decision under challenge.

 5. The Secretary of State considered the  Immigration  Rules  relating  to
    family and private life but reached the  conclusion  that  neither  the
    first or second Appellant could rely on family life as a partner  or  a
    parent because neither the  first  or  second  Appellant  were  British
    citizens or in the United Kingdom with refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
    protection nor were the children British citizens.  As to private life,
    the first two Appellants were considered under paragraph 276ADE but for
    the reasons given at [paragraphs 23  to  28  of  the  decision  letter]
    reached the conclusion they could not  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules
    taking into account their length of  residence,  the  nature  of  their
    private life and that there were  not  very  significant  obstacles  to
    their integration into India.  In relation to the third  Appellant,  it
    was accepted that he had lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  more  than
    seven years but for the reasons set out at [paragraphs 30 to  31],  the
    Secretary of State did not consider that it would be  unreasonable  for
    him to leave the United Kingdom based on his length of residence,  that
    he had been in the UK at a time which were not his formative years  and
    that he would not have established strong ties in  regards  to  private
    life.  It took into account that English  was  a  primary  language  in
    India and that he could also speak Gujarati and that free education was
    available for children until the age of 14 and that thus  he  would  be
    able to continue his studies.  In relation to the fourth Appellant, she
    could not satisfy paragraph 276ADE for the reasons given at  [paragraph
    33].  The decision  letter  also  considered  whether  there  were  any
    compelling circumstances to warrant a grant of  leave  outside  of  the
    Rules.

 6. The Appellants appealed the decision and the  matter  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 27th May.  In  a  determination  promulgated  on
    22nd June 2016, the judge, having heard the evidence from both  of  the
    adult Appellants and considered the written  and  documentary  evidence
    allowed the third Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules having
    found that it would not be reasonable to expect the third Appellant  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  As a result of that conclusion, the  appeals
    of the first, second and fourth Appellants were allowed on human rights
    grounds, outside of the Rules.

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to challenge that decision  on
    two grounds and permission was granted by Judge Baker on  13th  October
    2016.

 8. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  I had the  opportunity
    of hearing the submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of State  by
    Ms Ahmad and  the  reply  to  those  submissions  made  by  Mr  Wilford
    representing the Appellants.  His solicitors had also provided  a  Rule
    24 response which was in the papers.  Having heard those submissions, I
    retired to consider them and upon return informed the  parties  that  I
    had reached the conclusion that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    did not involve the making of an error on a point of  law  and  that  I
    would give my written reasons in this determination.

 9. Dealing with the grounds, the first  ground  advanced  in  the  written
    submissions asserts that the judge failed to give adequate reasons  for
    reaching the conclusion that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
    third Appellant to leave the UK on the  basis  of  his  education.   Ms
    Ahmad, in her submissions did not seek to rely on that ground.  She was
    right to do so.  The determination demonstrates  that  the  judge  gave
    adequate and sustainable reasons as to why he reached those conclusions
    at [paragraphs 45, 52 and 53] having taken into  account  the  evidence
    from all sources.  The judge's reasoning  is  identifiable  and  firmly
    evidence based and the first ground advanced was simply a  disagreement
    with the findings made by the judge concerning  the  third  Appellant's
    education and does not demonstrate any arguable error of law.

10. I therefore turn to the second ground.  The written grounds assert that
    the judge made a material  error  of  law  by  failing  to  "adequately
    scrutinise the evidence concerning the third Appellant in the light  of
    the first Appellant's attempts to present an untruthful picture".   The
    ground ends by saying "it is submitted that  it  would  in  no  way  be
    unreasonable to expect the third Appellant to leave  the  UK  with  the
    rest of the family who have lived in the UK without leave since  2012".



11. However  the  fact  that  the  judge  when  considering  the  issue  of
    reasonableness  of  return  placed  greater  weight  on  the   evidence
    concerning the level of integration in the UK as opposed to the  likely
    circumstances in India, does not demonstrate an error of  law  and  the
    second ground as pleaded must fail.  However in her  oral  submissions,
    Ms Ahmad relied on a different argument.  Since the  determination  was
    promulgated, the Court of Appeal  had  given  guidance  concerning  the
    issue of reasonableness in the decision of MA (Pakistan) and  Others  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  In the light of this decision, she submitted
    that the judge misdirected himself in law by failing  to  consider  all
    the material factors  in  reaching  the  conclusion  on  the  issue  of
    reasonableness, including the adverse findings made in relation to  the
    evidence of  the  third  Appellant's  parents.   The  adverse  findings
    related to the first Appellant's claim of  having  no  family  ties  to
    India [see paragraphs 28, 33 and 34],  which  was  disbelieved  by  the
    judge and his evidence as to the availability of education [page 29 and
    43).  The judge also found that he would not face economic  destitution
    on  return  to  India  [36].   Thus  she  submits  that  the   parents'
    immigration history and those findings are relevant  considerations  in
    reaching the overall balance that had not been taken  into  account  in
    reaching the decision.

12. By way of reply Mr Wilford submitted that the Secretary  of  State  had
    failed to identify any material factors that had not  been  taken  into
    account.  The findings of  the  judge  were  clearly  set  out  in  the
    determination relating to the family's likely circumstances in India as
    were the circumstances and the extent of the Appellant's integration in
    the UK [52] including the stage he had reached in his  education  [45],
    his length of residence and its importance [45], his lack  of  ties  to
    India [53].  Thus he  submitted  that  the  judge  had  carried  out  a
    "careful analysis" as referred to in the decision of MA  (Pakistan)  at
    paragraph [47].  He further submitted that the  judge  was  correct  in
    reaching the conclusion that the third  Appellant  could  not  be  held
    responsible for the actions of his parents and that this was considered
    within the decision of MA at [paragraph  42]  but  nonetheless  he  had
    taken into account  the  parents'  adverse  history  in  the  balancing
    exercise [see paragraph 52].

13. Having considered the submissions of the parties in the  light  of  the
    determination and the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal,
    I do not consider that the judge erred of law in his  approach  to  the
    issue under consideration and in particular whether it  was  reasonable
    for the third Appellant to return to India.  The judge did not have the
    advantage of the decision MA (Pakistan) which was reported on 7th  July
    2016 some  weeks  after  the  judge's  determination  was  promulgated.
    However, I am not satisfied that the submissions made by the  Secretary
    of State demonstrate that the judge erred in his approach based on that
    decision.  MA  (Pakistan)  (as  cited)  made  reference  to  the  legal
    framework relating  to  the  importance  and  length  of  residence  of
    children and the reasonableness of their removal noting  that  in  this
    context it arose under the Immigration Rules,  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    and also under Section 117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  The court reached the conclusion  at  [13]  that  the
    test is the same in all different contexts meaning that  the  issue  of
    reasonableness involves the same analysis.  The lead judgment is  given
    by Elias LJ who heard arguments on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State
    that the issue of "reasonableness" including consideration of the other
    Section 117B considerations such as relevant to the parents  and  their
    conduct [see paragraphs 36-45].  Notwithstanding  that,  when  applying
    the reasonableness test, the court recognised  that  the  fact  that  a
    child had been in the UK for seven years  must  be  given  "significant
    weight when considering the proportionality exercise" and by  reference
    to the Secretary of State's own guidance  in  which  it  was  expressly
    stated that once the seven years' residence requirement  is  satisfied,
    there need to be "strong reasons" for refusing leave [see paragraph  46
    of the decision].  The court also gave reasons why such an approach was
    valid at [46] in which it was said:

         "After such a period of time the child will have put down roots and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK.  That may be less so when the  children  are  very
         young because the focus of their lives will be on  their  families,
         but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
         Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong  expectation
         that the child's best interest will be to remain in the UK with his
         parents as part of a family unit, and that must rank as  a  primary
         consideration in the proportionality assessment."

14. The judge went on to state at [47]:

         "47. Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness test  where
             the focus is on the child alone,  it  would  not  in  my  view
             follow that leave must be granted whenever  the  child's  best
             interests are in favour of remaining.  I  rejected  Mr  Gill's
             submission that the  best  interest  assessment  automatically
             revolves  the  reasonableness  question.   If  Parliament  had
             wanted the child's best interests to dictate  the  outcome  of
             the leave application, it would have said so.  The concept  of
             "best interests" is after all a  well-established  one.   Even
             where the child's best interests are to stay, it may still not
             be unreasonable to require the  child  to  leave.   That  will
             depend upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the
             links with the UK and in the country where it is  proposed  he
             should return.  What could not be considered,  however,  would
             be the conduct and immigration history of the parents".

15. In my judgment, the First-tier Tribunal Judge did carry out  a  careful
    analysis of the nature and extent of  the  links  in  the  UK  and  the
    country in which it  was  proposed  that  the  third  Appellant  should
    return.

16. As to  the  circumstances  in  India  it  is  plain  from  reading  the
    determination that  the  judge  did  not  find  the  first  and  second
    Appellant's evidence credible as to the extent of their family ties  in
    India [see paragraphs 33, 34 and 35] and that the first Appellant  also
    would not be facing destitution on return.  The judge also  found  that
    the first Appellant's claim as to the costs of education in India  were
    not accurate [29], that English was the medium of  education  in  India
    [43] and that the third  Appellant  could  speak  some  Gujarati  [44].
    However balanced against  those  findings,  the  judge  considered  the
    evidence in its totality and reached the following findings.  The third
    Appellant had resided in the UK for over seven years having entered  at
    the age of 2� [see 42] and was aged 11 at the hearing [44].  As to  the
    stage that he had reached in his education  he  was  on  the  verge  of
    completing primary school and were  beginning  secondary  school  along
    with the friends who would join him there [45].  Whilst  he  took  into
    account that there were English speaking schools in  India,  the  judge
    found on the evidence that the third Appellant was of an age and  at  a
    stage in his education which was of "critical importance" not  only  to
    his educational development but to  his  personal  development,  having
    passed all the critical milestones of his  educational  development  in
    the UK and also by his  transition  to  secondary  school.   The  judge
    considered  his  ties  to  his  country  of  origin  finding  that  any
    connection that he had with  that  country  was  "minimal"  and  barely
    extended beyond his nationality.  The  judge  further  found  that  the
    strength of his integration in the UK based on his length of  residence
    and the ties to the UK and reached the conclusion at [paragraphs 52 and
    53]  that  his  integration  into  the  UK  society  and  culture   was
    "complete".

17. When looking at the determination, the judge did  have  regard  to  the
    wider public interest and was plainly aware of the parents' immigration
    history and the adverse  findings  of  fact  that  he  had  taken  into
    account.  However having properly considered all the  material  factors
    in play, the judge was entitled to reach the conclusion  that  he  did,
    that he it would not be reasonable for the third Appellant to leave the
    UK.  On the basis of the  written  and  oral  evidence  the  judge  was
    plainly entitled to reach that  conclusion  this  being  a  fact  based
    assessment whereby he made a careful analysis of the  competing  issues
    but struck the balance in favour of the third  Appellant.   The  weight
    attached to the particular factors was a matter for the judge  and  the
    overall findings of the judge relating to  the  Appellant's  length  of
    residence and his level of integration in the UK and his lack of  links
    to the country of origin would have to  have  been  outweighed  by  the
    other factors.  The Secretary of State's submissions do not demonstrate
    that the judge was wrong in attributing weight in the way that he did.

18. As set out by Carnworth LJ in the decision of Mukarkar  v  SSHD  [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1045 about the assessment of Article 8 claims;

         "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy,  but  they  are
         not  made  easier  or  better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
         analysis.  It is of the  nature  of  such  judgments  at  different
         Tribunals, without illegality or irrationality, may reach different
         conclusions on the same  case  (as  is  indeed  illustrated  by  Mr
         Fountain's decision after the second hearing).  The mere fact  that
         one Tribunal has reached what may seem an unusually  generous  view
         of the facts of a particular case does not mean that it has made an
         error of law, so as to justify an appeal under the old  system,  or
         an order for reconsideration under the new.  Nor does it create any
         precedent, so as to limit the Secretary of State's right  to  argue
         for a more restrictive approach on a similar case  in  the  future.
         However, on the facts of the particular case, the decision  of  the
         Specialist Tribunal should be respected."

19. It was for the judge to assess the evidence and make a decision  having
    struck the balance between the competing interests in play.   In  doing
    so, he had regard to all  the  material  considerations  and  thus  the
    conclusion that he had reached was open to him.   The  grounds  are  in
    reality  a  disagreement  with  the  conclusions  reached  and  do  not
    demonstrate that the judge erred in law.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not demonstrate the  making  of
an error on a point of law.  The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 22/11/2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

