
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/07623/2014
     IA/07625/2014
     IA/07630/2014
     IA/07631/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2016                            |On 2 February 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                mr Hamayoun Pervez Chughtai (first Appellant)
                    mrs Shazia Riffat (second Appellant)
                    miss Ameena Fatima (third Appellant)
           master Muhammad Ali Subhani Chughtai (fourth Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Bhachu, Counsel, instructed by UK Migration
Lawyers Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants appeal from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Nixon sitting at Birmingham on 13 August 2014) dismissing  their
    appeals against the decision of the Secretary of State to  remove  them
    as persons subject to administrative removal under Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, their human rights (Article 8)  claims
    having been refused.  The First-tier Tribunal do not make an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider that the appellants are required to be
    accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. Mr Pervez and his wife, Shazia Riffat and their  two  children  entered
    the UK on 8 December 2006 with entry clearance as visitors.  Mr Pervez
    applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds on 4 May 2007  with
    his wife and children as dependants.  This was refused on 1 August 2007
    because there were no sufficient compelling or compassionate grounds to
    justify a grant of leave, and there was no reason why Mr Pervez and his
    wife and two children could not return to  Pakistan.   Mr  Pervez  then
    applied for leave outside the Rules on 24 January 2012  with  his  wife
    and children as dependants.  This was refused on 20 March 2013  because
    Mr Pervez, his wife and children were not British citizens  or  settled
    in the UK and at the time of the application his children had only been
    in the UK for five years.

 3. The Secretary of State gave  fresh  consideration  to  the  appellants'
    application for further leave to remain on 22 January 2014.

 4. The older child, Ameena, had been born in Pakistan on 12 May 1996,  and
    the younger child, Muhammad, had been born  in  Pakistan  on  24  April
    1998.  Specific consideration had been given as to whether the children
    qualified for leave to remain under Rule 276ADE.  The oldest child  was
    aged 15 at the date of application, and she was now aged 17.   Although
    she had lived continuously in the UK for at least seven years,  it  was
    reasonable to expect her to leave the UK because she would be returning
    to Pakistan with both of her parents, who were Pakistani citizens, as a
    family unit.  They could help her to adjust to change and  provide  her
    with maintenance and accommodation.  Having lived with her parents, who
    were both Pakistani citizens, and having lived in the UK,  which  is  a
    multicultural society with a resident Pakistani  diaspora,  Ameena  had
    not lost social, cultural and family ties to  her  home  country.   The
    same considerations applied to the younger child, save that he was aged
    13 at the date of application, and was now aged 15.

 5. A decision was also made under exceptional  circumstances.   Mr  Pervez
    stated in his witness statement that he  wished  for  an  extension  of
    leave to allow him to recover from  a  fall  and  to  resolve  problems
    relating to a family dispute over the ownership of his father's estate.
     But, as stated in the refusal of his application for leave  to  remain
    raised in May 2007, in view of the fact that  he  had  been  discharged
    from  hospital,  the  Secretary  of  State  was  satisfied  there  were
    insufficient grounds preventing him from returning  to  Pakistan  where
    relevant medical treatment was available  for  his  current  condition.
    Furthermore, the Secretary of State did not consider the family dispute
    to be sufficient grounds to  amount  to  compelling  and  compassionate
    circumstances.




The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Both parties were legally  represented  before  Judge  Nixon.   In  her
    subsequent  decision,  the  judge  set  out  the  appellants'  case  at
    paragraphs [6] to [11], and the respondent's case at paragraphs [12] to
    [14].

 7. At paragraph [16] the judge noted a concession by Mr Blundell,  Counsel
    for the appellants, that the appellants could  not  meet  the  criteria
    under the Rules and  that  the  appeal  was  on  human  rights  grounds
    (outside the Rules) only.  She found that the appellants could not meet
    the eligibility criteria of Appendix FM, and did not propose to go into
    further detail, owing to this concession.

 8. At paragraph [17], the judge said there was no dispute that  the  first
    two appellants could not meet the criteria under  paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Rules.

 9. At paragraph [18] she said that before considering whether or  not  the
    removal of the adult appellants would breach their  Article  8  rights,
    she  would  consider  the  position  of  the   children.    The   first
    consideration for her was  their  best  interests  in  accordance  with
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

10. At paragraph [19], she held that the children met  the  first  part  of
    Rule 276ADE(1)(iv).  The remaining question was  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for them to be expected to leave the UK.  She agreed with Mr
    Blundell  that  whether  their  position  was   assessed   under   Rule
    276ADE(1)(iv) or under Article 8, the outcome would be the  same.   She
    said she would take into account when assessing  their  best  interests
    the principles set out in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

11. In paragraph [20] she said it was undoubtedly in their  best  interests
    to remain with their parents, and it was not suggested by  either  side
    that she should consider the question of whether they should remain  in
    the UK without their parents.  They had been in  education  in  the  UK
    since 2007.  Whilst they had  not  been  entitled  to  state  education
    because of their status, she could not hold the actions of Mr Ilyas,  a
    man who should have known better, against the children.  They  were  at
    GCSE and A level stage respectively, and had done well  in  integrating
    into both the education system and the local community.

12. At paragraph [21] she took into account the  evidence  that  the  third
    appellant spoke and wrote Urdu, whilst the fourth appellant  stated  he
    could not write Urdu, although he had no difficulties speaking Urdu  or
    in understanding  Urdu.   She  found  that  the  children  lived  in  a
    household where Urdu was the spoken tongue and that  they  lived  in  a
    part of Birmingham where Urdu was predominantly spoken.  She noted that
    the third appellant had  candidly  stated  in  her  evidence  that  she
    remembered her friends and school in  Pakistan.   She  had  found  that
    having left the country for seven years only and having  not  distanced
    themselves totally from the  culture  and  the  language,  it  was  not
    unreasonable to expect them to reintegrate into Pakistani  culture  and
    society without too much difficulty.

13. At paragraph [22] she found that whilst they had done well at school in
    the UK, she had not been presented with any evidence  to  suggest  that
    moving from the UK to Pakistan at this stage would  have  a  disastrous
    effect on their  future  education.   As  for  the  fourth  appellant's
    literacy, she did not accept his evidence about him not being  able  to
    write in Urdu, as he left Pakistan when he was  aged  9  and  he  would
    therefore have been taught at least the basics  of  how  to  write  the
    language. Also, much of the teaching in Pakistan was in English.

14. At paragraph [23] she noted that the children had been in the  UK  with
    their parents without leave for some seven years.  While they had  done
    well at school and had made some strong connections, she kept  in  mind
    the statutory public interest considerations in  Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act.  She found it was not overwhelmingly in their best  interests
    to remain, and their interests did not outweigh the  need  to  maintain
    immigration control.

15. The judge went on to give detailed reasons as to why she did  not  find
    the second appellant to be a credible witness and as to why  she  found
    Mr Ilyas to have been dishonest in  his  evidence.  Mr  Ilyas  and  his
    brother had provided the family with accommodation  and  had  supported
    them financially. So she did not accept Mr  Ilyas's  evidence  that  he
    would not give  his  sister  (the  second  appellant)  and  her  family
    financial assistance if they were returned to Pakistan.  She found that
    the appellants would have sufficient finances available  to  them  from
    family in the UK and from proceeds from the property  in  Pakistan,  to
    enable them  to  resettle  in  Pakistan.   She  noted  that  the  first
    appellant continued to receive medication, but she had  not  been  told
    that he would be unable to receive such medicine or  ongoing  treatment
    in Pakistan.

16.  She  concluded  at   paragraph   [31]   that   the   public   interest
    considerations, namely the length of time  they  had  been  in  the  UK
    unlawfully, their willingness to receive NHS treatment  to  which  they
    were not entitled, and to obtain education for the  children  to  which
    they were not entitled, outweighed the interference with any family  or
    private  life  that  the  appellants  may  have  established.   So  she
    dismissed the appeals under the Rules, and also on human rights grounds
    outside the Rules.

The Initial Refusal of Permission

17. I set out below Judge Brunnen's reasons for refusing permission as they
    provide a convenient summary of the grounds upon which  permission  was
    sought.  Also,  the  reasons  given  by  Judge  Brunnen  for   refusing
    permission foreshadow the stance taken by the respondent in her Rule 24
    response:

    1.   In a Determination promulgated on 2nd September 2014 Judge of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Nixon dismissed the Appellants' appeals against
         the Respondent's decisions to remove them from the UK.

    2.   The grounds on which permission to  appeal  is  sought  submit  in
         Ground One that  the  Judge  erred  in  law  by  referring  to  the
         Immigration Rules as amended by HC194 as the applications on  which
         the Respondent's decisions were based  had  been  made  in  January
         2012.  This is immaterial, since the  Judge  actually  decided  the
         appeals on the basis of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

    3.   The grounds submit in Ground Two that the Judge erred in that  she
         did not direct herself that it was for the Respondent to  establish
         that her decisions were proportionate.   It  is  correct  that  the
         Judge did not expressly direct herself in this manner.  However the
         Judge  carried  out  a  proper  balancing  exercise,  weighing  the
         competing private interests of the Appellants  against  the  public
         interest and concluded that the public interest prevailed.   It  is
         not arguable that had the Judge expressly directed  herself  as  to
         the burden of establishing proportionality she might have come to a
         different conclusion.

    4.   Ground Three submits that the Judge failed to make any  sufficient
         findings as  to  whether  the  best  interests  of  the  two  minor
         Appellants were  against  their  removal  and  conflated  different
         issues.  However it is implicit in the Judge's  statement  that  it
         was not overwhelmingly in their best interests to stay  in  the  UK
         that she did consider that to do so was in their best interests but
         that, for the reasons she expressly identified, their interests  in
         so doing was outweighed by other factors.  In  this  ground  it  is
         also submitted that it was impermissible  for  the  Judge  to  have
         regard to S.117B of the 2002 Act when assessing the best  interests
         of these Appellants.  However, in referring  to  that  section  the
         Judge was weighing the  public  interest  against  the  Appellant's
         private interests.  When so doing she was required to  have  regard
         to that section.

    5.   Ground Four  submits  that  in  making  his  findings  as  to  the
         credibility of the evidence  of  the  Second  Appellant  the  Judge
         failed to take account of the incorporation  by  reference  to  her
         husband's statement into her evidence and the reference therein  to
         assistance from an acquaintance.  However, the  perceived  lack  of
         any early reference to this person  was  but  one  of  the  several
         reasons given by the Judge for  rejecting  the  existence  of  this
         person and finding the actions of the adult Appellant's and  family
         members to be culpable.  It is not  arguable  that  had  the  Judge
         noticed the incorporation of husband's evidence it might  have  led
         to a different conclusion.

    6.   The grounds do not identify any arguable, material error of law.

The Eventual Grant of Permission

18. On a  renewed  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Richard Chalkley granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         I am persuaded the judge's consideration of  the  Article  8  claim
         outside the  Rules  may  have  been  influenced  by  the  fact  the
         appellants could not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.   All
         challenges are properly arguable.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

19. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Bhachu abandoned ground 1, in the light of the decision of  the
    Court of Appeal in Singh and Khalid [2015] EWCA Civ 74.  She sought  to
    support ground  3  by  reference  to  Treebhawon  and  Others  (section
    117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 0064 (IAC), a decision  of  a  Presidential  panel
    promulgated on 19 November 2015.  Paragraph (i) of the head note  reads
    as follows:

         Section 117B(6) is a reflection of the distinction which parliament
         has chosen to make between persons who are, and who are not, liable
         to deportation.  In any case  where  the  conditions  enshrined  in
         Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
         are satisfied, the Section 117B(6) public  interest  prevails  over
         the public interests identified in Section 117B(1)-(3).

20. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Richards adhered to the Rule 24
    response which had been settled by his colleague, John Parkinson.  When
    the determination was read  in  the  round,  it  was  clear  the  judge
    adequately considered the best interests of the only  remaining  child.
    Any inadequacies were those of style, rather than  substance.   It  was
    submitted that, shorn of peripheral detail, this was a mundane case  of
    overstayers remaining in the UK without leave, assisted by perhaps well-
    meaning  relatives.   There  was   nothing   compelling   about   those
    circumstances such that would lead  the  appellants  to  demonstrate  a
    disproportionate breach.  The adult  appellant  was  found  to  be  not
    credible, as was Mr Ilyas.  The appellants  and  their  relatives  have
    deliberately invented unlikely and untruthful stories to  support  them
    remaining here,  and  to  exaggerate  the  difficulties  on  return  to
    Pakistan.

Discussion

21.  EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 provides  the  most  recent
    guidance from the senior courts on the approach to best  interests  and
    the question of reasonableness.  Clarke LJ said:
       34. In determining whether or not, in a case such  as  the  present,
           the need for immigration control outweighs the best interests of
           the children, it is necessary to determine the relative strength
           of the factors which make it in their best interests  to  remain
           here; and also to take account of any  factors  that  point  the
           other way.


       35. A decision as to what is in the best interests of children  will
           depend on a number of factors such as (a)  their  age;  (b)  the
           length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they  have
           been in education; (c) what stage their education  has  reached;
           (d) to what extent they have become distanced from  the  country
           to which it is proposed that  they  return;  (e)  how  renewable
           their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent  they  will
           have linguistic, medical or other difficulties  in  adapting  to
           life in that country; and (g) the extent  to  which  the  course
           proposed will interfere with their family life or  their  rights
           (if they have any) as British citizens.


       36. In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic an answer
           falls to be given to the question: is it in the  best  interests
           of the child to remain? The longer the child has been here,  the
           more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his  education,  the
           looser his ties with the  country  in  question,  and  the  more
           deleterious the consequences of  his  return,  the  greater  the
           weight that falls  into  one  side  of  the  scales.  If  it  is
           overwhelmingly in the child's best interests that he should  not
           return, the need to maintain immigration control  may  well  not
           tip the balance. By contrast  if  it  is  in  the  child's  best
           interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with  some  factors
           pointing the other way), the result may be the opposite.


       37. In the balance on the other side there falls to  be  taken  into
           account the strong weight to be given to the  need  to  maintain
           immigration control in pursuit of the economic well-being of the
           country and the fact that, ex hypothesi, the applicants have no
           entitlement to remain. The immigration history  of  the  parents
           may also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers, or have acted
           deceitfully.
22.  Lewison LJ said:

         49.  Second, as Christopher Clarke LJ points out, the evaluation of
             the  best  interests  of  children  in  immigration  cases  is
             problematic.  In the  real  world,  the  appellant  is  almost
             always the parent who has no right to remain in the  UK.   The
             parent thus relies  on  the  best  interests  of  his  or  her
             children in order  to  piggyback  on  their  rights.   In  the
             present case, as  there  is  no  doubt  in  many  others,  the
             Immigration Judge made two findings about the children's  best
             interests:

             (a)  the best interests  of  the  children  are  obviously  to
                  remain with their parents; [29] and

             (b)  it is in the best interests of the  children  that  their
                  education in the UK [is] not to be disrupted [53].

         50.  What, if any, assumptions are to be made about the immigration
             status of the parent?  If one takes the facts as they  are  in
             reality, then the first of the  Immigration  Judge's  findings
             about  the  best  interests  of  the  children  point  towards
             removal.  If, on the other hand, one assumes that  the  parent
             has the right to remain, then one is assuming  the  answer  to
             the very question the Tribunal has to decide.  Or is there  is
             a middle ground, in which one has to assess the best interests
             of the children without regard to the  immigration  status  of
             the parent?

23.  The judge went on to analyse ZH (Tanzania) v  Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 in order to elicit an answer to  this
    question.  He reached the following conclusion:

         58.   In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis the  facts
             are as they are in the real world.  One parent has no right to
             remain, but the other parent  does,  that  is  the  background
             against which the assessment is conducted.  If neither  parent
             has the right to remain, then that is the  background  against
             which the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question
             will be is it reasonable to expect the  child  to  follow  the
             parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?"

      On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
      follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the family would be
      separated and the children would be deprived of the right to  grow  up
      in the country of which they were citizens.  That was a long way  from
      the facts of the case before them.  No one in the family was a British
      citizen.  None had the right to remain in the country.  If the  mother
      was removed, the father had no independent right to remain.  With  the
      parents removed,  then  it  was  entirely  reasonable  to  expect  the
      children to go with them:

         Although it is, of course a question of fact for  the  Tribunal,  I
         cannot see that  the  desirability  of  being  educated  at  public
         expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to  the  children  of
         remaining with their parents.  Just as we  cannot  provide  medical
         treatment for the world, so we cannot educate the world.

      Jackson LJ agreed with both judgments.

The relationship between s117B(6) and the Rules

24.  In AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held  that  the
    duty of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  quite  clear.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal was required  to  have  regard  to  considerations  listed  in
    Section  117B.   It  had  no  discretion  to   leave   any   of   those
    considerations out of account, if  it  was  a  consideration  that  was
    raised on the evidence before it.  The Tribunal continued in  paragraph
    [13]:

         There is also in our judgment no requirement that  the  FtT  should
         pose and answer the same question  more  than  once,  simply  as  a
         matter of form.  Thus since both  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
         Immigration Rules, and S117B(6), both raise the  same  question  in
         relation to a particular child, of  whether  or  not  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK: it is  a  question
         that need only be answered once.

The alleged error identified in the grant of permission

25.  The reasons  given  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley  for  granting
    permission  to  appeal  are  Delphic.   Following  the  Nagre  line  of
    authority, and also SS (Congo), the judge was right to be influenced by
    the fact that the appellants could not meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules when considering an Article 8 claim outside the  Rules.   If,  as
    was conceded, the appellants could not meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules, there needed to be compelling circumstances  outside  the  Rules
    for an Article 8 claim to succeed.

Ground 2

26.  It was for the appellants to identify and prove the existence  of  such
    compelling circumstances.  I do not consider that the judge  needed  to
    formally direct herself that it was for  the  respondent  to  establish
    that the proposed interference was proportionate to the legitimate  aim
    pursued.  The public interest considerations in play under Article 8(2)
    were self-evident and beyond argument.

Ground Three

27.  Ground 3 was that the judge misdirected himself in law in her  approach
    to assessing the best interests of the  third  and  fourth  appellants.
    This error of law challenge gains some traction because the  judge  has
    not clearly  distinguished  between  the  exercise  of  balancing  best
    interests in favour of the children returning  with  their  parents  to
    their country of origin against the best interests militating in favour
    of  them  remaining  here,  before   going   on   to   consider   wider
    proportionality considerations.  Instead, these  wider  proportionality
    considerations feature periodically in her discussion of the children's
    best interests.

28.  The way it is put in paragraph 11 of the renewed grounds of  appeal  is
    that Judge  Nixon  expressed  a  conclusion  which  suggested  she  had
    impermissibly considered the public interests codified by Section  117B
    of the 2002 Act when assessing the best  interests  of  the  third  and
    fourth appellants.

29.  The way it is put by Ms Bhachu is that the judge's  approach  is  shown
    to be impermissible by the decision in Treebhawon.   She  also  submits
    that the judge erred in law by not taking account of (a) the wishes  of
    the third and fourth appellant, (b) their level  of  their  integration
    into UK society, and (c) the principle that they should not  be  blamed
    for their parents' conduct.

30.  Although the judge did not clearly distinguish  between  best  interest
    considerations and wider proportionality considerations,  I  find  that
    the judge has made sufficiently clear findings on both questions,  such
    as to produce a sustainable conclusion that the  proposed  interference
    is  a  proportionate   one.    Although   the   wider   proportionality
    considerations are interwoven with best interest  considerations,  they
    do not contaminate them.  In short, I am wholly unpersuaded that if the
    best  interest  considerations  were  separated  out  from  the   wider
    proportionality  considerations,  the  result  would  have   been   any
    different.

31.  The judge's approach was also not necessarily wrong  in  the  light  of
    the different approaches sanctioned  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  EV
    (Philippines).  For in that case the  Court  of  Appeal  simultaneously
    endorsed the conventional approach (best  interests  for  and  against,
    followed by wider proportionality considerations) and also a real world
    approach, where the starting point is whether it is reasonable for  the
    child to follow her parents with no right of remain to the  country  of
    origin.

32.  At paragraph [23] of Treebhawon, a Presidential panel held that when  a
    Tribunal is  first  considering  an  appellants'  Article  8  claim  by
    reference to the Immigration Rules, the purpose of the exercise  is  to
    decide whether relevant qualifying  conditions  are  satisfied  by  the
    person concerned, and that the exercise is performed without  reference
    to part 5A.  The latter reasoning was engaged directly only  where  the
    decision making process reaches a stage of concluding the  person  does
    not satisfy the requirements of the Rules.

33.   The  judge  did  not  clearly  distinguish  between  the  exercise  of
    assessing reasonableness under Rule 276ADE(1)(iv) from  the  assessment
    of the same question in the context of Section 117B(6).  But the  judge
    did not materially err in this  regard,  because  Mr  Blundell  rightly
    submitted that the outcome would be the same in both cases.

34.  The outcome  could  only  be  the  same  in  both  cases  if  the  same
    considerations applied in both cases.  They do, as is apparent from the
    passage in AM (Malawi) cited above.

35.  Part 5A does not apply to  the  exercise  conducted  under  the  Rules,
    following  Treebhawon.  But  this  is   academic,   as   the   domestic
    jurisprudence requires the decision-maker  to  assess  relevant  public
    interest considerations arising under Article 8(2) - such as the strong
    weight before reaching a conclusion under Rule 276ADE as to whether  it
    is reasonable to require a child who has accrued seven years' residence
    to leave the UK.

36.  When considering proportionality, it was not essential that  the  judge
    should direct herself that the  sins  of  the  parents  should  not  be
    visited on the children.  There is, for example, no reference to such a
    principle in the guidance on Article 8(2) given by Lord Justice  Clarke
    at paragraph [37].  But in any  event,  at  paragraph  [20]  the  judge
    directed herself to similar effect by saying that she  could  not  hold
    the actions of Mr Ilyas, a man who should have  known  better,  against
    the children.

37.  I do not consider that the judge failed to take account of  the  wishes
    of the children or of their level of social integration in the UK.

Ground 4

38.  Ground 4 is that the judge  failed  to  take  a  material  matter  into
    account.   At  paragraph  [14],  the  judge   considered   the   second
    appellant's oral evidence that the  family's  dealings  with  the  Home
    Office, and the aftermath of the first appellant's accident,  had  been
    handled by a non-lawyer called Mrs Adam.  The judge held that the first
    mention of the elusive Mrs Adam had  come  in  the  second  appellant's
    evidence, despite a lengthy and detailed witness statement.

39.  But at paragraph 3 of the same statement, the second  appellant  stated
    she would not be repeating the contents of her husband's statement.  In
    her husband's witness statement (dated 2014) and in  the  letter  which
    accompanied the appellants' applications in  January  2012,  there  had
    been reference to the fact that the first application was  made  by  an
    acquaintance who was not a qualified lawyer.  Whilst Mrs Adam  was  not
    named in the first appellant's witness  statement,  or  in  the  letter
    which accompanied the application, the account given to the  judge  was
    not new.  It had been part of the appellants' account for more than two
    years.

40.  I do not consider that the evidence  relied  on  discloses  a  material
    error by the judge.  It does not appear to be disputed that  the  first
    time that the name  of  Mrs  Adam  was  mentioned  was  in  the  second
    appellant's oral evidence.  If it had been mentioned two years earlier,
    the Home Office could  have  made  inquiries  into  her  existence  and
    whereabouts.  The burden rested with the second appellant to prove  her
    case that the family had been a victim of misfortune at  the  hands  of
    Mrs Adam, to whom the second appellant had allegedly entrusted the  sum
    of �2,800 in order to regularise the family's status.  The  judge  gave
    adequate reasons for finding neither the second appellant nor Mr  Ilyas
    was truthful regarding the handing over of this claimed sum of money to
    Mrs Adam, and indeed that Mrs Adams was a complete fabrication designed
    to, "distance themselves from the fact  that  they  had  'buried  their
    heads' regarding their status in the UK."

41.  For the reasons given above, I find that the  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  These appeals to  the  Upper  Tribunal
are dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

















