
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07876/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26 July 2017                       |On 18 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                NAZMUL AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Karim, Counsel instructed by Apex Law
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This appeal arises from the decision of the respondent on 10 February
   2015 to refuse the appellant's application for further leave to remain as
   a Tier 4 (General) Student. The appellant appealed to the First-tier
   Tribunal where his appeal was heard by Judge Parker. By a decision
   promulgated on 21 April 2016, Judge Parker dismissed the appeal. The
   appellant is now appealing against that decision.

Background


2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 15 February 1989 who
   entered the UK on 18 September 2012 on a Tier 4 (General) Student visa.


3. On 22 August 2013 the appellant submitted an application for further
   leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student. He included with the
   application two Test of English for Internal Communication (TOEIC)
   certificates issued by Educational Testing Service (ETS) in respect of
   tests taken on 28 June 2013.


4. On 20 September 2013 an email was sent from a Home Office email address,
   by a person identified as "Catherine T HST11- Temporary Migration Team"
   to the following email address: contactuk@etsglobal.org.  The email
   stated:


         "To whom it may concern
         Please can you verify the details of a TOEIC test submitted as part
         of a leave to remain application. The relevant details are:
         Name: Nazmul Ahmed
         DOB 15 February 1989
         Registration number 0044203041001078
         ID Number: 2559210
         Test date (both certs) 28 June 2013
         Scores: Listening 440, reading 395, speaking 190, writing 180
         Test location: ETS Global, 707 High Road, London N12 0BT

5. On the same day, a response was received from a person named Michael
   Kossow, whose title on the email is TOIEC Administrator, ETS Global UK
   and ES Africa. His email stated:


         "Please can you send me a scanned copy of this candidate's score
         reports to help me verify them accurately"


6. On 23 September 2013 he was emailed the scanned copies.


7. On that day (23 September 2013) Mr Kossow replied, stating as follows:


         "Thank you for the scans
         We confirm that after checking our databases ETS Global B.V. has NO
         RECORD of Nazmul Ahmed having undertaken English tests with
         TOEIC/ETS in the UK."


8. Following this correspondence, the respondent rejected the appellant's
   application on the basis that the TOEIC certificates were not genuine.


9. In the Secretary of State's letter dated 10 February 2015 it is stated:

         "I am satisfied that the documents were false because we have 3rd
         party confirmation from ETS Global UK who are the issuing authority
         that, after searching their databases, they have no record of you
         undertaking these tests with them in the United Kingdom. This was
         after they had receive scanned copies of the two TOEIC certificates
         you submitted with your Tier 4 (General) application."


Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

10. The judge directed himself that as deception was being alleged, the
   burden of proof fell on the respondent.


11. The judge stated that he was satisfied that the email exchange between
   the respondent and ETS (which I have set out above in paragraphs 4-9) was
   "sufficiently cogent evidence" that the appellant did not sit tests with
   ETS.


12. The judge noted that the details in the respondent's email of 20
   September 2013 were consistent with the information provided by the
   appellant. However, he noted that the address provided in the email of 20
   September (ETS Global, 707 High Road, London N12 0BT), whilst consistent
   with the certificate submitted by the appellant, does not match where the
   appellant claims to have sat the test, which is Colwell College in
   Whitechapel. The judge did not attach significance to this difference as
   ETS stated that there was no record of the appellant taking a test at any
   location in the UK. The judge's conclusion, at paragraph 23, was that
   "the respondent was entitled to seek verification of the appellant's test
   results and, having done so, was entitled to rely upon the unequivocal
   response of the testing body".


13. At paragraph 24 the judge stated that it was open to the appellant to
   rebut the claim he had never sat a test with ETS, but had failed to do
   so. The judge described the appellant's rebuttal as "vague, evasive and
   lacking in credibility."


14. The judge drew an adverse inference from the absence of evidence of the
   appellant taking steps to contact ETS to try and resolve the issue, which
   the judge considered the appellant would have done if this had been a
   misunderstanding or mistake by ETS. The appellant claimed to have sent a
   letter to Colwell College (where he claimed to have sat the test) but
   there was no copy of the letter or evidence to support this. He claimed
   to have emailed ETS in 2014 but there was no evidence of an email being
   sent. The appellant claimed that the account from which he sent the email
   has been closed due to him forgetting the password but the judge did not
   find this credible. The judge noted that the only other attempt by the
   appellant to contact ETS was an email sent shortly before the hearing but
   that this was not sent to the email address with which the Home Office
   had corresponded despite this being available to the appellant for almost
   a year but instead to an address he found on the internet.


15. The judge noted at paragraph 28 that the appellant relied on a booking
   letter sent by Colwell College a week before the claimed test and a
   further letter advising of his results. The judge stated "I have had
   regard to these but no attempt has been made to put them to ETS for
   comment".


16. At paragraph 28 the judge also commented on the extent to which the
   appellant had improved between a test taken in 2012 and the 2013 test.
   The judge stated that the overall improvement from 5.0 to 6.5 was
   significant but he placed no weight on this in finding deception as such
   improvement is possible.


17. The judge noted the failure on the part of the appellant's
   representatives to submit evidence to rebut the respondent's evidence. He
   observed no steps had been taken by them to obtain such evidence.

18. An issue raised by the appellant was the respondent's failure to
   provide originals of the certificates whose genuineness was in dispute.
   The judge addressed this at paragraph 30 where he stated:


         "The appellant's representative has referred to the respondent's
         failure to provide originals of the certificates but I am not
         satisfied that this is necessary in light of the evidence from ETS
         that the appellant did not sit tests with them and is not,
         therefore, entitled to any certificate. I am not satisfied that the
         production of the original certificates would add or detract from
         that evidence."

19. In paragraph 30, the judge concluded that the certificates were false
   as:


        "The issuing body unequivocally stated that the appellant has never
        taken any test with them...The appellant has failed to provide
        evidence, or credible evidence of an attempt to obtain evidence, to
        counter ETS' statement."

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

20. The grounds argue that there was not sufficient evidence to support a
   finding that the TOEIC certificates supplied by the appellant were forged
   or counterfeit.


21. They also contend that the appellant was treated unfairly as the
   original test certificates, which had been submitted by the appellant to
   the respondent when he made his application, were not produced by the
   respondent so that they could be verified. It is alleged that this
   amounted to procedural unfairness. It is also submitted that as the
   respondent's case was that the certificates were forgeries, an adverse
   inference should have been drawn against the respondent for failing to
   provide originals to the appellant and Tribunal.


22. The grounds also argue that the email from ETS did not state that the
   appellant did not sit a test with them but only that "ETS Global BV" had
   "no record" of the appellant undertaking the test. The grounds observe
   that there was no verification of the email by a witness statement or
   statement of truth. They also note the absence of a document verification
   report or witness statement explaining the analysis of the appellant's
   certificate.


23. It is also argued that there was no evidence explaining the
   relationship between ETS and the entity referred to in the email "ETS
   Global BV" and it is therefore not clear why ETS Global BV would have
   records of the appellant's TOEIC test. It is also contended that given
   the unreliability of ETS in the UK, as highlighted in Upper Tribunal case
   law, information provided by ETS should be treated with a degree of
   circumspection.


24. A further argument in the grounds is that the judge erred by giving no
   weight to the appellant's score attained in a 2012 test, when this should
   have weighed in the appellant's favour by showing he did not need to use
   fraud.


25. It is also maintained that the judge erred in failing to give weight to
   the booking forms from Colwell College which provided additional
   documentary support for the appellant's case.


26. Finally, the grounds contend that undue weight was placed on the
   appellant failing to provide evidence from the centre where the test was
   taken.


27. Permission to appeal was refused by both the First Tier and Upper
   Tribunal. Following judicial review, permission was granted. Permission
   was granted on the basis that the judge arguably "went wrong" in applying
   the  burden and standard of proof by not engaging in the three step
   exercise enunciated in SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home
   Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC).


28. Mr Karim submitted that the judge failed to apply the three stage
   burden of proof test delineated in Qadir. His argument was that the
   appellant discharged the evidential burden of showing an innocent
   explanation in accordance with Qadir and the judge erred by failing to
   appreciate this.  He maintained that the judge had effectively reversed
   the burden of proof by drawing an adverse inference from the appellant
   failing to take proactive steps, when the burden should have been on the
   respondent.


29. Mr Karim questioned what basis there was for finding a nexus between
   ETS itself and the entity that responded to the respondent's email and
   submitted that the judge had failed to address this.


30. Mr Kotas argued that this case has nothing to do with Qadir, which was
   about widespread use of proxy test takers. This is a case about a person
   who never took the test and used fraudulent certificates. The judge
   correctly identified that the legal burden fell on the respondent and for
   clear reasons found the burden was discharged. The appellant's attempts
   to explain himself were feeble and it was clear why the judge found
   against him. Mr Kotas rejected the suggestion that the person responding
   to the Home Office was not the appropriate person as it was clear from
   the email correspondence that he was.


Consideration

31. As is well known, there have been a large number of cases arising from
   allegations of ETS/TOEIC certificates being obtained fraudulently through
   the use of proxy test takers. The Upper Tribunal in Qadir described there
   as being a "relatively substantial cohort of so-called "ETS/TOEIC"
   cases".


32. This appeal concerns an entirely different allegation: that the
   appellant used counterfeit TOEIC certificates to deceive the respondent
   into accepting that he took a test with ETS when no such test was ever
   taken.

33. The focus of Mr Karim's submissions was the contention that the burden
   of proof had been applied incorrectly. Accordingly, I address this point
   first.


34. In Qadir the Upper Tribunal considered the burden and standard of proof
   where it is alleged that an applicant for leave to remain has used
   deception and made clear that the party alleging deception bears the
   legal burden of proof. As stated in Shen (paper appeals: proving
   dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 00236 (IAC):


     "At the end of the day the SSHD bears the burden of proof. This is a
    proposition which is uncontroversial and has been confirmed on many
    occasions."


35. However, although the legal burden of proving that the appellant used
   deception lies on the respondent, there is a three stage process.


     a) Firstly, the respondent must adduce sufficient evidence to raise
        the issue of fraud/deception.


     b) Secondly, the appellant then has a burden of raising an innocent
        explanation which satisfies the minimum level of plausibility.


     c) Thirdly, if that burden is discharged, the Secretary of State must
        establish on a balance of probabilities that this innocent
        explanation is to be rejected.


36. In terms of the standard of proof, there is one civil standard of proof
    (which is the standard to be applied). The seriousness of the
    consequences does not require a different standard of proof but
    flexibility in its application will involve consideration of the
    strength and quality of the evidence. The more serious the consequence,
    the stronger must be the evidence adduced for the necessary standard to
    be reached.

37. I do not agree that the judge has misapplied the standard or burden of
    proof. At paragraph 22 he explicitly stated that the burden is on the
    respondent to establish that the deception occurred and that the
    standard of proof was "balance of probabilities." These are the correct
    legal tests. Although there is a shifting evidential burden, the
    fundamental point is that where, as in this case, the respondent  is
    alleging deception it is for the respondent to prove her case. It is
    clear from the decision that the judge appreciated this.


38. I accept that the judge did not explicitly set out the three stage
    process. However, it is apparent from reading the decision as a whole
    that this is the approach that has been taken.


39. The first of the three stages is whether the respondent adduced
    sufficient evidence to raise the issue of fraud. The judge dealt with
    this at paragraph 23, where he stated that the email exchange between
    the respondent and ETS (as set out above in paragraphs 4 -9) was
    "sufficiently cogent evidence that the appellant has not sat tests with
    ETS".


40. The second stage is whether the appellant has raised an innocent
    explanation that satisfies the minimum level of plausibility. Although
    it is clear from the decision that the judge did not find the appellant
    credible and did not accept his explanation, there is not an explicit
    finding as to whether the appellant's explanation was so lacking in
    credibility that it failed to meet the low threshold of a minimum level
    of plausibility. However, I do not consider this to be a material error
    as it is apparent that the judge proceeded in any event to the third
    stage, where he considered the innocent explanation along with the
    other evidence before concluding that the respondent had established
    that on the balance of probabilities the innocent explanation should be
    rejected.


41. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge has properly applied the
    burden and standard of proof and that this appeal is unable to succeed
    on that basis.

42. I am also satisfied that the judge did not make an error of law by
    failing to find procedural unfairness because the respondent failed to
    produce the original test certificates.  The judge was alive to the
    fact that the original certificates were not produced. However, he
    found that their production would not have made a material difference
    in light of the other evidence before him. In essence, the judge's
    position was that even if the ETS certificates looked (or indeed were
    evaluated as most likely being) entirely genuine, that would be
    insufficient to overcome the other evidence before him which indicated
    the test was never taken.


43. The judge had before him email correspondence between a "Catherine T
    HST11- Temporary Migration Team" in the Home Office and a "Michael
    Kossow TOIEC Administrator, ETS Global UK and ES Africa" using the
    email address contactuk@etsglobal.org that he considered to be strong
    evidence  the appellant did not take an ETS test. There are, as pointed
    out in the grounds of appeal, deficiencies in this evidence. It is no
    more than a print out of an email chain. It is not in the form of a
    witness statement. There is no explanation of the corporate structure
    in ETS to explain the connection between "ETS Global BV" and other
    parts of ETS. However, despite these shortcomings the email
    correspondence strongly indicates a test was not taken by the
    appellant. There is nothing about the email from Michael Kossow which
    suggests it is other than genuine and written after a proper search was
    carried out. It is notable that Mr Kossow asked to see the test scores
    before stating that there was no record of the appellant.


44. It was for the judge to weigh the evidence before him. After
    considering the email correspondence between the Home Office and ETS
    alongside the judge's findings about the appellant's credibility, I am
    satisfied that it was open to the judge to conclude that, even without
    the original certificates being disclosed (or subject to a verification
    analysis), the strength and quality of evidence indicating that
    deception took place was sufficient for the respondent to discharge the
    burden of proof.



 Decision


A. The appeal is dismissed.

B. The judge has not made a material error of law and the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal stands.


      |                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 17 August 2017                |


