
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07773/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport       |         Decision and Reasons       |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 14 May 2015                         |         On 5 June 2015             |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                                SUNDAS ZAHRA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Appellant:    Mr N Ahmed, of Counsel, instructed by Syeds Solicitors

Respondent:   Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal originates in a decision made on behalf of the Secretary of
    State for the Home Department  (the  "Secretary  of  State")  dated  20
    January 2014, whereby the application of the Appellant, a  national  of
    Pakistan aged 19 years, for indefinite leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom was refused.  The Appellant's ensuing appeal to  the First tier
    Tribunal ("FtT") was dismissed under both  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8 ECHR.

 2. The impugned decision of the Secretary of State hinged on paragraph 298
    of the Immigration Rules. This provides, under the rubric "Requirements
    for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the child of  a
    parent, parents or a relative present and settled or being admitted for
    settlement in the United Kingdom", in material part:

        "The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave to
        remain in the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents or a
        relative present and settled in the United Kingdom are that he:


             (i)  Is seeking to remain with a parent, parents or a relative
                  in one of the following circumstances ...........


         (d)  One parent or  a relative is present and settled in the United
             Kingdom and there are serious and compelling family  or  other
             considerations which make exclusion of the  child  undesirable
             and suitable arrangements have been made for the child's  care
             ...."

    The family unit in question  has  three  members:  the  Appellant,  her
    biological  mother  and  her  step  father  and  sponsor  to  whom  her
    biological mother was married (by a second marriage) in 2004, when  the
    Appellant was aged 8.  The Appellant has been lawfully present  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2011, living with her step father. During  2011  -
    2015 her mother has resided with the Appellant's  sister  in  Pakistan,
    visiting the United Kingdom intermittently.

 3. The second material provision of the Immigration Rules in this  context
    is  paragraph  6,  which  provides  a  definition  of  "parent",  which
    includes:

         "The step father of a child whose father is dead ....."


    By  the  impugned  decision  it  was  determined,  firstly,  that   the
    Appellant's step father did not satisfy this definition as there was no
    evidence that her biological father was dead.  The second limb  of  the
    Secretary of State's decision entailed a rejection of  the  Appellant's
    case under Article 8 ECHR.  As noted above, the decision  was  affirmed
    by the FtT.

 4. Upon the hearing of this  appeal  it  was  conceded  that  neither  the
    Secretary of State's decision nor that of the FtT is sustainable in law
    on the ground that both failed to consider the question of whether  the
    step father is a "relative" of the Appellant and neither  engaged  with
    the Appellant's case that she is related to the step father through the
    relationships of both uncle and second cousin. It is not disputed  that
    the relationships linking the Appellant and her stepfather are those of
    uncle/niece and second cousin.  These are blood connections. I consider
    that the word "relative" should be construed according to  its  natural
    and ordinary meaning, namely a person related  by  blood  or  marriage.
    This construction is satisfied in the Appellant's case by virtue of the
    two aforementioned relationships.  This was acknowledged by Mr Richards
    on behalf of the Secretary of State. Thus  I  conclude  that  on  these
    rather unusual facts the Appellant's stepfather is her "relative".


 5. It is appropriate to highlight one discrete issue  which  was  not  the
    subject of argument.  In both its heading and the  introductory  words,
    paragraph 298 of the Rules employs the  terminology  "the  child  of  a
    ..... relative".  By virtue of paragraph 298(i), it  is  necessary  for
    such child to be "seeking to remain with a .....   relative".   In  the
    qualifying circumstances which are then specified, a relative  features
    in paragraph 298(i)(d) only.  As the analysis  above  demonstrates,  in
    the particular circumstances of this case  the  Appellant's  stepfather
    satisfies the definition of "a relative .... present and settled in the
    United Kingdom" as he is her uncle and  second  cousin.   However,  the
    issue which was not addressed in argument is whether the  Appellant  is
    his child. This is a separate, cumulative  requirement  which  was  not
    invoked on behalf of the Secretary of State in this case.


 6. Clearly, the Appellant and her stepfather are not related by  blood  as
    parent and child.  Furthermore,  they  are  not  related  by  marriage.
    Rather, the members of this family unit who are related by marriage are
    the Appellant's mother and her stepfather/uncle.   Furthermore,  having
    regard to the definition of "parent" in paragraph 6 of the  Rules,  the
    Appellant's stepfather/uncle could not qualify as her  "parent"  absent
    evidence that her biological father is deceased.

 7. This leaves  but  one  remaining  question  to  be  determined,  namely
    whether, within the compass of  paragraph  298(i)(d),  the  Appellant's
    case  satisfies  the  "serious   and   compelling   family   or   other
    considerations" test.  Neither the Secretary of  State's  decision  nor
    that of the FtT engages with this test.  The  following  step  by  step
    analysis seems to me appropriate in cases of this kind.


 8. The First Question: are the family  or  other  considerations  advanced
    "serious and compelling"?


      I  consider  that  the  standard  of  "serious  and  compelling"   is
    illuminated by comparing and contrasting the terms of this  requirement
    with that in which other comparable requirements  are  phrased  in  the
    Immigration Rules.  These include the standards of  "very  compelling",
    "exceptional" and "insurmountable obstacles".  I am satisfied that  the
    standard of  "serious  and  compelling"  establishes  a  threshold,  or
    hurdle, lower than any of these. Giving these words their  natural  and
    ordinary meaning, a family or other  consideration  will  satisfy  this
    requirement if it is something more than trivial, minor  or  peripheral
    and  is  persuasive  to  the  extent  of   eclipsing   other   factors.
    Considerations will not  satisfy  this  standard  if  they  are  merely
    attractive or desirable, from whatever perspective.


 9. The  second  question:  if  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations are  demonstrated,  would  exclusion  of  the  child  be
    undesirable?


     In considering this, the second, question  one's  attention  is  drawn
    mainly to the standard of "undesirability".  This word  too  is  to  be
    given its ordinary and natural meaning.  In  my  view  this  entails  a
    threshold which is not particularly elevated.  "Undesirable" is  to  be
    contrasted with, for example, other familiar standards such as  "harsh"
    or "unduly harsh".  It prescribes a threshold which is lower than  each
    of these.   Furthermore,  I  consider  that  the  question  of  whether
    exclusion would be "undesirable" is to be viewed from the  perspectives
    of   all   members  of  the  family  unit  concerned.  These  will  not
    necessarily be determinative  since,  having  determined  all  material
    facts and identified all relevant considerations,  undesirability  will
    entail an objective assessment by the Tribunal.


10. The third and final question: if the first two questions  are  answered
    affirmatively, have suitable arrangements been  made  for  the  child's
    care?


    Once again, the adjective in this clause, "suitable", is the key  word.
    The exercise of according its ordinary and natural meaning conjures  up
    synonyms such as "adequate" or "appropriate".  Furthermore,  "suitable"
    does not, in my judgement, erect  a  unduly  high  threshold.  Finally,
    bearing in mind section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
    Act 2009, I consider that this requirement directs attention to what is
    suitable for the child concerned.   This  may  require  a  satisfactory
    social services  assessment  or  comparable  evidence  in  some  cases.
    Section 55 also applies, though less forcefully, to  the  determination
    of the second question above. The obligation  to  have  regard  to  the
    statutory guidance, enshrined in section 55 (3),  must  also  be  given
    effect.

11. Notably, in paragraph 298 of the Rules there is no  mention  of  public
    interest and no factors of this genre are  included,  with  the  result
    that there is no balancing exercise to be  performed.   However,  cases
    involving Article 8 ECHR are to be contrasted. Thus  if  Article  8  is
    invoked, a balancing exercise will be necessary if an interference with
    the  right  protected  is  demonstrated,  since  this  will  trigger  a
    proportionality assessment. Furthermore, in such cases effect  must  be
    given to the new regime  contained  in  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, specifically  section  117A(2)(a)  and
    section 117B.  This raises the potentially intriguing  question,  which
    did not arise  in  the  present  case,  of  whether  a  person  seeking
    indefinite leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  will  have  better
    prospects of a successful outcome, whether initially or in any  ensuing
    appeal, by not invoking this much maligned Convention  right.  In  this
    context, it is appropriate to observe that a court or  tribunal's  duty
    to have regard to the mandatory statutory factors arises only where  it
    is required - the statutory language - to determine whether a  decision
    under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for
    private  and  family  life  under  Article  8.  This   question   will,
    foreseeably, arise in paragraph 298 appeals.

12. In the present case, all of the undisputed evidence points firmly to  a
    finding that the absence of the Appellant's mother from the family unit
    in the United  Kingdom  has  proved  to  be  considerably  longer  than
    initially envisaged. Originally, the  family's  plans  for  the  future
    contemplated the reunification of the mother  and  two  daughters  with
    their stepfather in the United Kingdom. However, following the  arrival
    of the three ladies, these plans were thrown into disarray.  One of the
    daughters returned to Pakistan and a family crisis materialised  there,
    requiring the mother to return for the purpose of providing  protection
    and supervision. Thus the family unit was  fractured  and  their  plans
    were blighted. Subsequent visits by the mother to  the  United  Kingdom
    have been authorised but have been limited.  The  mother  continues  to
    make efforts to satisfy the exacting requirements for  re-entering  and
    residing in the United Kingdom.  It is common  case  that  all  of  the
    entry  requirements,  save  that  relating  to  English  language,  are
    satisfied.  The most likely outcome appears to  be  that  she  will  be
    successful in her efforts.


13. I consider it appropriate to take  into  account  the  involuntary  and
    unexpected fragmentation of the family unit which will be rectified  to
    a considerable extent by  re-unification,  a  scenario  which  will  be
    rendered impossible if the Appellant is required to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom,  which  would  exacerbate  the  fracture  that   has   already
    developed.   Applying  the  disjunctive   requirements   of   paragraph
    298(i)(d),  all of these  considerations  are  plainly  of  a  "family"
    nature and, in my view, they readily attract the adjectival appellation
    "serious and compelling", giving effect to the approach set out  above.
    For essentially the same reasons, exclusion of the Appellant  would  be
    "undesirable".  Thirdly, and finally, there has at  no  time  been  any
    issue about the suitability of the arrangements for the Appellant  who,
    in any event, was now no  longer  a  child  when  her  application  was
    determined, though her case was considered as if she were, by virtue of
    paragraph 298 (vii) of the Rules.  At  the  hearing  the  Secretary  of
    State's representative  was  not  disposed  to  seriously  contest  the
    evaluative analysis set forth above.

DECISION

14. Giving effect to  the  analysis,  findings  and  conclusions  rehearsed
    above:

    (a)  The decision of the FtT is set aside.

    (b)  I remake said decision by allowing the Appellant's appeal.

         (c)  A fee award is payable.






                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                           Date: 17 May 2015


