
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07319/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination promulgated  |
|on 19th September 2013                          |On 23rd September 2013     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                             mian muhammad zahid
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Miss S Ghafar, Solicitor, of Buchanan Macleod
Solicitors, Glasgow,   on instructions of M A Consultants, London

For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Balloch, promulgated on 6th  June  2013,  dismissing  the  appeal
    which he brought on grounds of family and private life under Article  8
    of the ECHR, both within and outwith the Immigration Rules.

 2. Miss Ghafar made her submissions along the lines of the grounds in  the
    application for  permission  and  of  the  grant  of  permission.   She
    submitted that the key error was in relation to the best  interests  of
    the children involved in the case, and that it was such as  to  require
    an entirely fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Mrs O'Brien submitted that insofar as the grounds attacked the  judge's
    reasoning on  credibility,  the  negative  conclusions  were  based  on
    properly identified inconsistencies in the evidence.  As  to  the  best
    interests of the children, Mrs  O'Brien  pointed  out  that  these  are
    nephews and a niece of the Appellant, only  the  youngest  of  whom  is
    still a child.  She will be aged 16 next month.  This was a family with
    a history of unfortunate circumstances, but  the  only  child  involved
    remains in her primary family unit with her father and  brothers.   The
    judge's approach was brief but sufficient.  A step-by-step analysis  of
    the best interests of the child under Article  8  would  have  made  no
    difference to the outcome, which could hardly have been otherwise.

 4. Miss Ghafar in reply stressed that all children of the family, even  as
    young adults, are still at an emotional  stage  of  their  lives.   The
    Appellant undertook daily household chores.  They all depend on him and
    spent considerable time with him.  The  Appellant's  role  enables  the
    father of the family to  attend  to  his  business  and  to  avoid  any
    reliance on public funds.  Removal should  have  been  found  to  be  a
    disproportionate step.

 5. I reserved my determination.

 6. Ground 1 of the application, which suggests that  the  judge  may  have
    applied a higher standard of proof than the balance  of  probabilities,
    is not made out.  The determination contains no such suggestion.

 7. The grounds make  no  meaningful  attack  on  the  adverse  credibility
    findings.  As the Presenting Officer pointed out, the judge  identified
    significant contradictions between what the Appellant said in  evidence
    and what his brother-in-law said.  The judge was entitled to  find  the
    evidence unreliable.

 8. It was of some significance in the  proportionality  balance  that  the
    Appellant's circumstances on return to Pakistan had not been  shown  to
    be as bleak as claimed.

 9. As Mrs O'Brien pointed out, there is only one child  in  the  case,  16
    next month.  The evidence did not disclose that her interests would  be
    significantly disadvantaged by the Appellant's  absence  from  the  UK.
    The Appellant's nephews and his niece would prefer to  have  him  here,
    but the judge was correct at  paragraph  49  to  note  that  while  the
    Appellant sought to give the impression of young children  in  need  of
    care, this is a family of young adults and one child, all of an age  to
    take responsibility for caring for themselves and for looking after the
    home.  The judge was also correct to note that there was no reason  why
    close contact could not be maintained after the Appellant's  return  to
    Pakistan.

10. The conclusion reached on proportionality, taking account of  the  best
    interests of the child for the relatively small relevance it  had,  was
    properly open  to  the  judge,  and  the  reasoning  given  is  legally
    adequate.

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

12. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




                           [pic]


                           20 September 2013
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
