
IAC-AH-DP-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07874/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 14th January 2015                  |On 27th January 2015                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                             mr muhammad shahbaz
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pratt, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1st January 1991.

 2. On 4th February 2014 a decision was made to remove the  Appellant  from
    the UK.  The Appellant appealed against that decision.  The appeal came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ransley sitting  at  Manchester
    on 23rd June 2014.  In a determination promulgated on  30th  June  2014
    the Appellant's appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  There were  two
    Grounds of Appeal.  Firstly it was contended there was no  jurisdiction
    to hear the appeal, secondly the judge had made a material misdirection
    in law without referring to the authority of Sabir (Appendix FM -  EX.1
    not freestanding) [2014] UKUT 63 (IAC) all of  provisions  of  Appendix
    FM.

 4. On 8th August 2014 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Davidge  refused
    permission to appeal.  The Grounds of Appeal were renewed and  expanded
    upon on 19th August 2014.  On 13th November 2014 Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Clive Lane granted permission to appeal.  Judge  Lane  considered  that
    the grounds as regards the jurisdiction of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    hear the appeal in-country were arguable.  On 4th December 2014 a  Rule
    24 response was filed and served by the Appellant's solicitors.  It  is
    appropriate to recite in its entirety  paragraph  2  of  that  Rule  24
    response and set it out.  In the circumstances as it would appear  that
    there is no in-country right of appeal in this matter it is not open to
    the Appellant to withdraw a non-existent in-country appeal.  That said,
    "the Appellant has no objection to this matter being terminated at this
    stage".

 5. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me.  The Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr  McVeety.   This
    is an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  for  the  purpose  of
    continuity throughout legal proceedings Mr Shahbaz is herein  described
    as the Appellant and the Secretary of  State  as  the  Respondent.   Mr
    Shahbaz appears by his instructing solicitor Mr  Pratt.   Mr  Pratt  is
    familiar  with  this  matter  having  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and also by being the author of the Rule 24 response.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr McVeety submits that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  have
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal and that I should find that  there  has
    been therefore a material error of law and set aside the decision.   He
    comments (and I agree) that no criticism can be levelled at the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and that it was the responsibility of the Secretary
    of State to draw this matter to her attention.  Mr  Pratt  acknowledges
    that the jurisdictional point is well made, and does  not  seek  to  go
    behind his Rule 24 response.

The Law

 7.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

 9. It is clear from the  position  set  out  herein  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not have jurisdiction  to  hear  this  matter.   The
    Appellant had been served with an IS151A Part 2 Notice  of  Immigration
    Decision.  This is the decision to remove him from the United  Kingdom.
    Consequently the decision is one  pursuant  to  Section  82(2)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and is appealable only out
    of country.  The Appellant attended before the First-tier Tribunal  and
    gave  evidence.   There  was  no  jurisdiction  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in such circumstances  to  hear  the  appeal.   In  such
    circumstances I do not need to  look  at  any  submissions  beyond  the
    jurisdictional point.

Notice of Decision and Remaking of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not  have  jurisdiction
pursuant to statute to hear the appeal.  In such circumstances having  found
that there is a material error of law I remake the decision  dismissing  the
appeal to Immigration Judge Ransley and  reinstating  the  decision  of  the
Secretary of State.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 27th January 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD



No application is made for a fee award and none is made.

Signed        Date 27th January 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
