
                                    [pic]
IAC-HX-DML-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/07901/2015
                                                               IA/07912/2015
                                                               IA/07913/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 July 2016                      |On 2 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway


                                   Between

                        SAMEER [L] (FIRST APPELLANT)
                        SALIMA [L] (second appellant)
                           [S L] (Third appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDERS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Blake
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of India.  They are husband, wife and child
    born in 1972, 1979 and 2003 respectively.

 2. They appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  on  12  February
    2015 to refuse to grant them leave to remain and to remove  by  way  of
    directions.

 3. In summary, the immigration history is that  the  first  Appellant  was
    granted entry clearance as a visitor in October 2002 valid until  April
    2003; the second Appellant was granted entry clearance as a visitor  in
    August 2005 valid until August 2006 with the  third  Appellant  as  her
    dependant.

 4. They overstayed.

 5. In July 2011 the first Appellant applied for leave to remain on Article
    8 grounds with the second and third Appellants as dependants.

 6. This was refused in August 2011.  Following a hearing in May 2012 their
    appeals were dismissed.

 7. In September 2012 the first Appellant sought leave  to  remain  outside
    the Rules with the second and third Appellants as dependents.  This was
    refused in June 2013.

 8. In February  2014  the  Respondent  reconsidered  the  application  and
    maintained the refusal as the Respondent did again in August 2014.

 9. In December 2014, following a Consent Order the application  for  leave
    to remain of September 2012 was again reconsidered and  refused.   They
    appealed.

10. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 9 September 2015  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Veloso dismissed the appeals under the Immigration Rules and
    under Article 8.

11. Her findings and reasons are at paragraph [21] ff.

12. She took as her starting point (at [25]) the dismissal of  the  earlier
    appeal in May 2012 and a finding therein:

         "Considering the family's personal history, character and  conduct,
         I can only conclude that in many respects it is admirable  in  that
         the family have done little other than trying to make a living  for
         the sake of their son.  Nevertheless, it is  clear  that  from  the
         outset that was their aim and it was only a very short  time  after
         they came here that the first Appellant  started  working  (without
         permission to do so) and the couple have made little pretence  that
         they were ever, in fact, genuine visitors.   This  means  that  the
         whole of their stay here was premised on the ultimate intention  to
         stay in the United Kingdom and is more  calculated,  I  find,  that
         they tried to lead me to believe."

13. Judge Veloso went on to find that "there has  been  no  change  to  the
    first and second Appellants' particular circumstances as found  in  the
    previous Decision over 3 years ago" [26].

14. She then noted (at [27)] that the third Appellant "has now been in  the
    United Kingdom for over 7 years, which  constitutes  a  key  change  of
    circumstance from that presented (before the previous Tribunal) and  an
    important consideration in the balance."

15. The judge went on to consider the appropriate provision under the Rules
    for the third Appellant namely, paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).   It  has  not
    been suggested that the parents would satisfy 276ADE(1)(vi).  She noted
    a letter from the third Appellant in which he described his wishes  and
    feelings particularly if he had to return to India [30].

16. At [31] the judge noted that  the  third  Appellant  attends  religious
    school and the mosque "which denotes a familiarity  with  the  religion
    and culture in India" which "means  he  has  not  forgotten  or  become
    distant from his home country, where he furthermore  has  a  number  of
    relatives."

17. The judge next found that he speaks Hindi.

18. She gave "very little weight" to a psychologist's report.   Also,  that
    there was no medical evidence that he  would  suffer  significantly  in
    India [35, 36].

19. She found that the circumstances the family would face if returned  had
    been exaggerated, that they have and are in contact with family  there,
    and that there is adequate accommodation there [37].  Also, that in any
    event, there was no reason why they could not relocate [38].   Further,
    that there is no reason why the parents would not  be  able  to  secure
    employment in India [39].

20. As for education for the third Appellant, the judge found that "in line
    with the previous Decision that there is a commitment to free education
    in India" and that while some schools may charge  fees  such  does  not
    mean all schools do [40].

21. The judge concluded that, considering all the evidence  in  the  round,
    "the Appellants have not shown it would not be reasonable to expect the
    third Appellant to leave the United  Kingdom  and  return  to  live  in
    India.  He would be doing so with the first and second  Appellants,  as
    part of a very tight and supportive family unit, whose  sole  focus  is
    his welfare and upbringing" [41].

22. Going on to consider Article 8 outside the Rules and the best interests
    of the child she found that he had been living in the UK for  10  years
    since the age of 2 years.  He is making  good  progress  and  had  "not
    reached a critical stage in his education" [45].  While, (at [46])  she
    noted the contents of a letter by the third Appellant in which he  said
    he has come to consider the UK as his home and where he wants to remain
    the previous Tribunal had found no  evidence  of  any  links  with  the
    community "outside his schooling and some play with friends and outside
    acquaintances."

23. The judge considered that it is "in his best interests to  remain  with
    the first and second Appellants, be it in  the  United  Kingdom  or  in
    India and that it would not go against his best interest to  return  to
    India.  There  has  been  no  suggestion  that  the  first  and  second
    Appellant would be unable  to  care  for  him;  to  the  contrary,  all
    evidence shows they have  and  continue  to  focus  completely  on  his
    wellbeing and upbringing" [47]

24. The judge ended by considering s117B and in respect of  117B(6)  stated
    "on the basis of my detailed assessment  of  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  and
    section 55 ... I find it would not be unreasonable to expect the  third
    Appellant to leave the UK."

25. The Appellants sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  on  a
    restricted basis by a judge on 2 June 2016.

26. At the error of law hearing before me  Mr  Blake,  for  the  Appellants
    submitted that the starting  point  is  PD  and  Others  (Article  8  -
    conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 108 where the facts were
    similar to the present case.  In assessing reasonableness the  analysis
    had to be fact sensitive.  In that regard the judge's approach had been
    wrong  and  some  of  her  findings  were  erroneous.   She  had   made
    assumptions that were not open to her.  First, on education  the  judge
    referred to the Country Information and Guidance (2015) as indicating a
    commitment to free education.  There was no such  reference.   In  fact
    such free education stops at age 14 years.  Also,  she  had  failed  to
    note that knowledge of  Marathi  would  be  required  which  the  third
    Appellant does not have.  The result would be he would not be  able  to
    access education.

27. Second, the judge's findings at [31] were not sustainable.  To say that
    the child had not forgotten or become distant from India because he was
    attending religious school and the mosque which  indicated  familiarity
    with the religion and culture, was inadequately reasoned.

28. The appropriate finding was that  the  child  had  no  connection  with
    India.  His history was clearly one of belonging to the UK.  There  was
    significant evidence not taken into account by the  judge  that  he  is
    effectively  British.   The  fact  that  the  parents   were   unlawful
    overstayers had to be  given  undeniable  weight  but  their  behaviour
    should not be visited on the child.

29. In conclusion the judge's decision was based on unsustainable  findings
    of fact and it should be set aside and remade to be allowed.

30. Mr Bramble's submission was that the judge's approach had been correct.
     She had properly taken  into  account  the  exaggerated  circumstances
    found by the earlier Tribunal and had dealt adequately with  the  issue
    of education.  Whilst there did not appear to be reference to education
    in the country report it was not clear what background  information  on
    education on India was before her.  The findings on the child having  a
    measure of connection with India through attendance at religious school
    and the mosque were open to her.  Further, it was clear that the  judge
    had taken into account that the child has been here more than 7  years.
    She was entitled on the  evidence  before  her  to  conclude  that  his
    connection with the UK in terms of education and society  was  limited.
    All in all the challenge amounted merely to  a  disagreement  with  the
    decision.

31. In considering this matter the correct approach to  the  reasonableness
    test is set out in MA (Pakistan) & Ors v UT (IAC) [2016] EWCA  Civ  705
    at [46];

         "... the fact that a child has been here for seven  years  must  be
         given significant weight  when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
         exercise ...  After such a period of time the child will  have  put
         down roots and developed social, cultural and educational links  in
         the UK such that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the  child
         is required to leave the UK.  That may be less so when the children
         are very young because the focus of their lives will  be  on  their
         families, but the disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get
         older.  Moreover, in these  cases  there  must  be  a  very  strong
         expectation that the child's best interests will be  to  remain  in
         the UK with his parents as part of the family unit, and  that  must
         rank as a primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."

32. However, at [47] the  Court  continued  "Even  when  the  child's  best
    interests are to stay, it may still be not unreasonable to require  the
    child to leave.  That will depend upon a careful analysis of the nature
    and extent of the links in the UK  and  in  the  country  where  it  is
    proposed he should return.  What  could  not  be  considered,  however,
    would be the conduct and immigration history of the parents."

33. In looking at the judge's  decision,  as  indicated  the  crux  of  the
    submissions is that in considering the child's links in the UK  and  in
    India the judge reached findings that were not properly open to her.

34. The first is that because he attended a religious school and mosque  it
    could be concluded that he had not forgotten or become distant from his
    home country.  As he had arrived in the UK at the age  of  2  years  he
    could have had no recollection or knowledge of India.

35. I agree with Counsel that saying the child had not "forgotten" his home
    country makes little sense when speaking of someone who came here  aged
    2.  However, what I take the judge clearly to mean  is  that  by  being
    brought up in his own religion and attending religious school  and  the
    mosque, the child will have a connection with the religion and  culture
    of India. In that regard also, the child speaks  Hindi  and  there  are
    family ties and accommodation in India.  The judge's findings  on  this
    matter were open to her on the evidence.

36. As for education it is correct that  in  the  Country  Information  and
    Guidance there is no reference to India  having  free  education.   The
    situation appears to be that free education is available up to the  age
    of 14 years. According to an article in the Appellant's bundle "29%  of
    Indian children are privately educated. With more than 50% of  children
    enrolling in private schools in urban areas  the  balance  has  already
    tilted towards private schooling in cities, and  even  in  rural  areas
    nearly 20% of the  children  in  2004-2005  were  enrolled  in  private
    schools." Thus, the child now 13 years, may have to pay fees.  However,
    I do not find the error  by  the  judge  about  free  education  to  be
    material.  She found that the parents who are "financially independent"
    [49] would be able to work, indeed, the mother has a degree,  [39]  and
    would thus be able to support the child.  As for  the  need  to  speak,
    read and write Marathi, whilst the judge did not deal specifically with
    this I note from the article in the Appellant's bundle that at  private
    schools "the medium of education is often English, but Hindi and/or the
    state's official language is also taught as a compulsory  subject."  In
    any event she finds that the family could if they  wished  relocate  to
    "different accommodation, a different village, city  or  even  part  of
    India."  Such finding was open to her on the evidence.   It  was  found
    that the Appellant had been untruthful about knowing only  English  and
    not Hindi.  The failure to address the matter of the child  not  having
    knowledge of Marathi (which is spoken mainly in Maharashtra) was not  a
    material error.

37. As for his links with the UK it is clear the judge was aware  that  the
    child has been living in the UK for more than  7  years  [45]  and  its
    significance [27].  She found that despite the length of stay there was
    limited evidence to show ties with the community beyond  schooling  and
    friends.  Also, that at his relatively young age  while  he  is  making
    good progress he has not reached a critical stage in his education.

38. These again were findings she was entitled to reach on the evidence.

39. I conclude that for the reasons given that the judge  was  entitled  to
    reach the decision in considering reasonableness under  the  Rules  and
    under Section 117B(6).

40. It may be that other judges would have stuck the  balance  differently,
    but the question is whether this judge reached a conclusion  which  was
    not open to her.  Given that she was required to  have  regard  to  the
    wider public interest in effective immigration control in my  judgment,
    she did not.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show any material error  of
law and the decision dismissing the appeals shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

