
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07256/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th January 2015                          |On 12th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                          Mr Kehinde Temidayo Alabi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTion not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss D Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel instructed by
                    Fitzpatrick & Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in this case is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 10th
    August 1970.  He appeals from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Paul, promulgated on 6th October 2014, to dismiss  his  appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's refusal to grant him further leave  to  remain
    on private and family life grounds.

 2. Before turning to the Grounds of Appeal, it  is  necessary  briefly  to
    give a  history  of  the  Appellant's  immigration  history  and,  more
    particularly, to the history of these proceedings.

 3. The Appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom, with leave to remain
    as  a  student,  in  2004.   He  has  remained   here,   lawfully   and
    continuously, ever since.  On 5th  December  2013,  Fitzpatrick  &  Co.
    Solicitors, acting on behalf of the Appellant, wrote to the Home Office
    enclosing  his  application  and  setting  out  his   case.    It   was
    substantially based upon a request to give him further leave to  remain
    in order to resolve the marital difficulties which he was  experiencing
    at that time, in the confident belief that if he  was  granted  further
    leave to remain he would be  able  to  resolve  them  and  thus  become
    reconciled with his wife.

 4. However, another ground was put forward in that letter,  from  which  I
    now quote the relevant passage:

         "Our client has resided lawfully in the United Kingdom continuously
         for over nine years and we urge you to take proper account  of  our
         client's length of lawful residence in the UK.

         This is particularly important given that the  Secretary  of  State
         operates a policy whereby if a  person  has  been  in  the  UK  for
         between six to eight years caseworkers can consider  granting  some
         form of leave.  This policy primarily applies to persons  who  have
         been  in  the  UK  without  any  leave  and  with  no   significant
         connections to the UK or  any  compelling  circumstances  in  their
         case.

         Our client on the other hand has strong links to the UK.  The  fact
         that such  a  policy  exists  is  significant  when  assessing  the
         Secretary of State's interests in the balancing exercise."

    I interpose briefly to mention that that was clearly a reference to the
    balancing exercise when weighing the proportionality of removal,  as  a
    result of refusal of leave to remain, as against the public interest in
    maintaining a firm and consistent policy  of  immigration  control.   I
    resume my quotation from the letter:

         "This policy is referred to at page  6  of  the  attached  briefing
         paper.  Although the reference to the policy is in the  context  of
         the legacy exercise, it is clear that the policy is a  freestanding
         policy applicable to all persons in  respect  of  whom  removal  is
         being contemplated."

    The letter proceeds to quote, at some  length,  the  relevant  passages
    from the policy paper in question.

 5. That Appellant's application was refused on 17th  March  2014,  and  he
    exercised his statutory right of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    within relevant time limits.

 6. Notice of the hearing of the appeal was  issued  on  14th  March  2014.
    That notice stated that the  appeal  would  be  heard  on  Monday  22nd
    September 2014, at 10am.   The  notice  was  issued  not  only  to  the
    Secretary of State and to the Appellant, but also to Fitzpatrick & Co.,
    the solicitors who had lodged the application in the  first  place  and
    who had written the letter to which I have previously made reference.

 7. It follows from the above, that rather more than  six  months'  advance
    notice was given of the date of the hearing.  Nevertheless, just  three
    days before the hearing date, Fitzpatrick & Co. faxed a letter  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, which is dated  the  19th  September  2014.   This
    letter is critical to the basis upon which it is now suggested that the
    First-tier Tribunal made an error of law, and I therefore quote  it  in
    full:

         "Dear Sirs

         Hearing Date: Monday 22nd September 2014 [reference is  then  given
         to the details of this appeal]

         We write regarding the appeal of the above-named Appellant.

         We are instructed that due to financial constraint the Appellant is
         unable to afford the required  legal  representation  for  an  oral
         hearing and therefore requests for a paper appeal instead.

         The Appellant therefore requests that the oral hearing be adjourned
         and relisted to enable him to provide written submissions  for  the
         paper appeal pursuant to the relevant procedure.

         We wait to hear from you with confirmation that the appeal  is  now
         listed as a paper appeal and the time limit for him to  submit  the
         written submissions."

 8. In his determination, Judge Paul noted the  contents  of  that  letter,
    which he summarised at paragraph 5 of his decision.  He questioned  the
    Appellant with a view to seeking further and better particulars of  the
    nature of the request for the adjournment, and the Appellant's  replies
    are summarised in paragraph 7 of the determination:

         "First of all, the [Appellant's] separation had come about from his
         wife when she had refused to let him return  to  the  family  home.
         That was a continuing  situation  and  it  explained  the  lack  of
         presence at the appeal or indeed the fact that her passport had  at
         no stage been provided to the Secretary of  State.   The  Appellant
         explained that he did have a mother in Nigeria but he had a sibling
         resident in the UK and that he was currently employed.  If  at  all
         possible he wanted more time to consider ways  in  which  he  could
         present  his  case.   Mr  Zukunft  did  not   make   any   contrary
         observations" [Mr Zukunft being the Presenting Officer].

 9. The judge gave his reasons for refusing the application to  adjourn  at
    paragraphs 8 and 9 of his decision:

         "8.  I decided that, rather than adjourning the case  for  a  paper
             appeal, it  was  prudent  to  deal  with  the  case  with  the
             Appellant here.  Once it became plain that the backbone to the
             Appellant's case - namely that his  marriage/relationship  was
             at an end - he clearly had no  basis  under  the  family  life
             provisions for remaining  in  the  UK.   Furthermore,  as  was
             foreshadowed in the refusal letter, he could not claim private
             life under the Rules either.  Once the Appellant had confirmed
             that he had a mother in Nigeria, combined with the  fact  that
             he had spent the major part of his life there, it seemed to me
             impossible for the Appellant in any way to improve his case by
             having it adjourned so that he could make written  submissions
             in respect of a paper appeal.

         9.   I therefore refused the adjournment and,  as  set  out  above,
             took evidence from the Appellant in  order  to  enable  me  to
             determine this appeal."

10. I turn now to the Grounds of Appeal in which  it  is  argued  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal made a  material  error  of  law  in  refusing  the
    application for an adjournment.  They begin by pointing  out  that  the
    Tribunal had before it the letter  of  19th  September,  which  I  have
    already quoted  (above).   It  is  then  said,  at  paragraph  2,  that
    regardless of any prospect of improvement in the Appellant's case,  the
    Appellant was entitled to advance his case  "completely  and  with  the
    assistance of submissions by his representative".  It argues  that  the
    reason given by the judge  for  refusing  to  adjourn  undermines  this
    fundamental right.  It continues as follows: "It was  not  the  judge's
    position  to  come  to  a  provisional  view  on  the  merits  of   any
    submissions".

11. The Grounds thereafter set out what those submissions would have  been,
    although this could not of course have been  known  to  the  judge  who
    refused the application to adjourn.  The essence of the argument, and I
    mean no disrespect by simplifying and summarising it,  is  as  follows.
    The Appellant had come very close to fulfilling the threshold  criteria
    under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules for indefinite  leave  to
    remain, namely, ten years' continuous lawful residence.  That  is  said
    to be an important factor in considering the proportionality of removal
    for the purposes of an assessment under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

12. Those grounds have been very eloquently and  ably  elaborated  upon  by
    Miss Ofei-Kwatia on behalf of the Appellant.   She  submitted  that  by
    proceeding with the hearing and not acceding to the request to adjourn,
    the judge had deprived the  Appellant  of  a  fair  hearing  and,  more
    specifically, what is said to be the fundamental right of being legally
    represented. She further submitted that in light of what  we  now  know
    would have been the Appellant's argument for holding that  his  removal
    would be disproportionate, that the failure to  grant  the  application
    for an adjournment was "more likely than not" to have been material  to
    the outcome of the appeal.

13. In response, Mr Whitwell expressed a certain degree of  cynicism  about
    the reasons for requesting an adjournment, by suggesting  that  it  may
    well have been with a view to extending the period of  the  Appellant's
    leave under Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 so as to be able  to
    claim the full period of ten years' continuous lawful residence for the
    purposes of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.  However, whilst I
    agree that the making of an application  for  an  adjournment  'at  the
    eleventh hour' is indeed suspicious, I am not satisfied, on  a  balance
    of probabilities, that it  was  made  with  such  an  ulterior  motive.
    Secondly, Mr Whitwell drew attention to the fact that the letter was  a
    request  to  adjourn  so  that   the   Appellant   himself,   not   his
    representatives, could make written representations. Thirdly, absent  a
    threat to a person's life or liberty, Mr Whitwell submitted that  there
    is no fundamental right of legal representation.

14. I have absolutely no hesitation in holding that the judge did  not  act
    unfairly in refusing this rather curious request for an adjournment.  I
    describe it as 'curious' because, if the Appellant  could  only  afford
    legal assistance in making written as opposed to oral submissions,  one
    might have expected the representatives  simply  to  request  that  the
    hearing of the 22nd September 2014 be vacated forthwith and for  it  to
    be determined on the papers instead. This would have  avoided  an  oral
    hearing altogether, and it would also have avoided the inconvenience to
    the appellant of attending it.

15. Moreover, there was no obvious reason why such a request could not have
    included the written submissions to which it is said that the  Tribunal
    should have had regard prior to determining the appeal. The failure  to
    take this simple and time-saving step is all the more surprising  given
    that the arguments that are now belatedly advanced in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal to the Upper Tribunal are essentially the  same  arguments  that
    the self-same representatives had put forward in their  letter  of  the
    5th December 2013, very nearly 9 months before the appeal was due to be
    heard. It is thus far from clear why the  representatives  should  have
    been making an application to adjourn, whether at such a late stage  in
    the proceedings or indeed at all.  Finally,  the  letter  of  the  19th
    September 2014  failed to give any indication  as  to  the  period  for
    which an adjournment was being sought in order  to  allow  for  written
    submissions to be provided.

16. Having regard to the all the above circumstances, including the  timing
    and vagueness of the reasons for seeking an adjournment,  and  applying
    the  overriding  objective  of  dealing   with   appeals   fairly   and
    expeditiously, I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal did not  err
    in law by deciding to refuse the application.

17. For the sake of completeness, I would add that even if I had held  that
    the judge erred in refusing the request for an  adjournment,  this  was
    not in my judgement material to the outcome of the appeal.  This is for
    the following reasons.

18. The effect of the arguments that are now being put forward is  that  it
    would be disproportionate to remove the Appellant  in  pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim of immigration control for the economic wellbeing of the
    country because it is the Secretary of State's policy, as expressed  in
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules,  to  allow  people  to  remain
    indefinitely if they can prove ten years' continuous  lawful  residence
    in the United Kingdom. However, the fact that  it  happens  to  be  the
    policy of the Secretary of State to grant leave to remain to a suitable
    candidate who  has  lawfully  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of 10 years, is in my judgment wholly  irrelevant  to
    the question of whether it would be  disproportionate  to  remove  that
    person for the purposes of Article 8 of the  1950  European  Convention
    for the Protection of  Human  Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms.   The
    argument  is  in  truth  what  has  often  been   described,   somewhat
    inelegantly, as a "near-miss" argument.

19. Moreover, a grant of leave under paragraph 276B is subject  to  further
    considerations. These include the  applicant's  age,  personal  history
    (including character, conduct, associations, and  employment  history),
    domestic circumstances, and  compassionate  circumstances.   It  cannot
    therefore be assumed that a person who has acquired ten  year's  lawful
    residence will necessarily  be  granted  leave  to  remain  under  that
    paragraph.  This serves further to emphasise the immateriality  of  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules  to   an
    assessment under Article 8 of the Convention.  That is not  to  suggest
    that length of lawful residence is immaterial to such an assessment. It
    does however mean that the question of whether that  period  meets  (or
    comes close to meeting) the requirements of any Immigration Rule, other
    than paragraph 276ADE, does not have any bearing upon the  issues  that
    arise for consideration when undertaking such an assessment.

20. So, for all the above reasons, I hold that the Tribunal did not err  in
    law by refusing the application to adjourn and, even if  it  did,  that
    the outcome of the appeal would not have been any different if  it  had
    granted the application.  This appeal is accordingly dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly


