
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07106/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2013                               |On 7 August 2013             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                             akinwumi oluwaleimu

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Osifeso, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant who is a national of Nigeria born 31 July 1969  has  been
    granted permission to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    V Cox who had dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision of
    19 February 2013 refusing to issue a residence card.  The Secretary  of
    State gave as her reason that the EEA family member  of  the  appellant
    had failed to provide evidence that she was a qualified person  as  set
    out in reg.6 of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.   The  judge
    noted the concession that when the appellant made his application on 27
    July 2012, his wife the EEA family member was already out of  work  and
    furthermore did not accept that his  wife  had  started  searching  for
    alternative employment based on an absence  of  corroborative  evidence
    apart from a statement.

 2. The appellant had however relied on his wife having started a course in
    London  as  a  student  at  Eden  College  evidenced  by  documentation
    including a letter from the college dated 16 October 2012  (D1)  and  a
    photocopy of the appellant's wife's ID card issued by the college (D2).
     The judge had before her a number of documents relating to the studies
    listed in the bundle as D1 to D19.

 3. The judge  was  concerned  that  D1  did  not  bear  the  name  of  the
    appellant's wife or her address.  The document at D2 was a "black page"
    and concluded thee was no ID document before her.  After reviewing  the
    other documentation, the judge concluded that it  was  not  credible  a
    student involved in attending a course for seven months  would  not  be
    able to  provide  evidence  of  this  directly  from  the  college  and
    concluded the appellant's wife was  not  a  student  so  dismissed  the
    appeal.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge had only a
    faxed bundle and that a hard copy version had  been  sent.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mailer concluded:

         "It is arguable that if as asserted the posted originals  were  not
         made available before the judge she might not  have  been  able  to
         properly determine whether the  wife  had  been  exercising  treaty
         rights.  The appellant will be expected  to  demonstrate  that  the
         originals were posted and that they showed that his wife  had  been
         exercising treaty rights at the  relevant  time.   To  that  extent
         there may have been a procedural irregularity, not referable to the
         judge, but the administration."

 5. Before hearing submissions I observed to the parties that although  the
    file contained a bundle of documents accompanying  a  letter  from  the
    appellant's advisors, Lannex Immigration  and  Legal  Advice  Services,
    dated 15 May 2013 ( the appeal was heard on 21 May), the file  did  not
    contain the faxed documents which were referred to in  the  application
    for permission to appeal.

 6. The judge does not reveal whether she had  regard  only  to  the  faxed
    version but it is clear to me that the hard copies were received at the
    hearing centre on 16 May according to a stamp on the  covering  letter.
    Significantly, notwithstanding the judge's observation otherwise in her
    determination, the letter from Eden College of  16  October  2012  does
    refer to the appellant's wife by name (Jirina Horvathova) with  a  date
    of birth of 20 August 1980.  Furthermore D2 is  an  enlargement  of  an
    identity card with Ms Horvathova's photograph and confirmation  of  her
    course (NVQ level 2 in business and administration).

 7. Ms Pal argued that there had been no  material  error  of  law  by  the
    judge.  She appreciated that D1 included a reference to  Ms  Horvathova
    and that D2 is a reasonably clear copy.  She argued  however  that  the
    appellant had plenty of time within which to adduce further evidence of
    her attendance on the course.

 8. Mr Osifeso argued that the judge had  applied  the  wrong  standard  of
    proof but in substance he  relied  on  the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    evidence to sustain his argument that there had been an error  of  law.
    He also sought to rely on a more recent letter from Eden College  dated
    6 June 2013 which had not been previously served on the Upper  Tribunal
    nor the Secretary of State and in respect of which no notice  had  been
    given  pursuant  to  Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.  He accepted that the judge could not  have  been
    in error in respect of evidence that was not before her.

 9. Although I had some sympathy with Ms Pal's position, I announced at the
    hearing that there had been procedural unfairness in that the judge had
    either failed to take into account the hard  copies  of  two  important
    documents the appellant had relied on either by  oversight  or  because
    these had not been linked to the  file  before  the  determination  was
    written up.  The evidence at D1 and D2 is important and it was a  clear
    mistake by the judge in failing  to  note  that  Ms  Horvathova's  name
    appears not only on the letter from the college of 16 October 2012  but
    in the identity document. This leads me to conclude that she  erred  in
    failing to correctly take into account the  evidence  that  was  before
    her.  That error was sufficiently material to require the  decision  to
    be set aside and re-made.

10. I return now to the letter from  Eden  College  of  6  June  2013.   Mr
    Osifeso was unable to provide an explanation why this had not been sent
    earlier to the Tribunal or why there had been a failure to comply  with
    the Procedure Rules despite the  clear  indication  in  the  directions
    issued with the grant of permission to appeal that he should do so.  Ms
    Pal indicated that she wanted the opportunity to contact the author  of
    the letter at the college as a basis for her argument that the document
    should not be allowed into evidence.  I stood the case down for her  to
    make a telephone call.  Ms Pal was unsuccessful in reaching the  author
    of the letter, Ms Jacobson, but she had spoken to the  receptionist  at
    the college giving her the appellant's reference number and  explaining
    why she had made the call.  I proposed to stand the matter down  for  a
    further period until later in the morning  by  when  it  was  hoped  Ms
    Jacobson  would  reach  the  college.   In  response,  Ms  Pal  took  a
    constructive approach.  She  explained  that  she  had  looked  at  the
    college when preparing for the hearing.  The letter of 6 June 2013  was
    well written and she had great difficulty in asking me  not  to  attach
    weight to it.  She was happy for the letter to be taken  into  evidence
    and furthermore noted  the  only  issue  outstanding  was  whether  the
    appellant's wife was a qualified person.  Based on  this  new  evidence
    she accepted that she was.

11. Without the need for further submissions  I  allowed  the  appeal.   In
    doing so I drew the attention of the parties to Boodhoo & Another  (EEA
    Regs:  relevant  evidence)  [2013]  UKUT  00346  (IAC),  in  particular
    paragraph 1 of the head note:

         "Neither Section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
         2002 nor the guidance in DR (Morocco)* [2005] UKAIT 38 regarding  a
         previous version of Section 85(5) of that Act has any bearing on an
         appeal under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
         2006.  In such an appeal, a Tribunal  has  power  to  consider  any
         evidence which it thinks relevant to the substance of the decision,
         including evidence which concerns a matter arising after  the  date
         of decision."

12. By way of conclusion therefore I am satisfied the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge erred in law.  I set aside her decision which I re-make and allow
    the appeal.




Signed


         Date 6 August 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

