
[pic]

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Numbers: IA/07348/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    IA/07349/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 December 2013                           |                             |
|And 27 January 2014                           |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                         MR MOHAMMED AKTHER-UL ZAMAN
                              MRS NAIMA SULTANA
                                                                  Appellants



                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Sayem, Legal Representative (19 December 2013)
     Mr S Karim, Legal Representative (27 January 2014)
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan promulgated on 20  September  2013  in
    which  he  dismissed  their  appeals  against  the  decisions  of   the
    respondent made on 15 February 2013 to refuse  their  applications  for
    leave to remain and to make removal directions pursuant to  section  47
    of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The first appellant was born on 2 February 1984; the  second  appellant
    was born on 1 July 1990.  They are married and both  are  citizens  of
    Bangladesh.  The first appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  15
    September 2004 with leave to enter as a student until 1  January  2008.
    He was subsequently granted further leave to remain  in  that  capacity
    and later as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant, the most recent  grant
    being until 29 October 2012.

 3. The second appellant entered the United Kingdom on 9 November 2010 with
    leave to enter as the dependent partner of the first appellant and  was
    also most recently granted leave to remain in that  capacity  until  29
    October 2012.

 4. On 29 October 2012 the appellants applied for further leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom as, in the case of the first appellant, a Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant and, in the case of the second appellant,  as
    his dependant.

 5. The first appellant's application was made on the  basis  that  he  had
    been awarded a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies ("CAS") issued by
    St Peter's College.  On 11 December 2012, whilst the  application  for
    further leave to remain was pending, the college withdrew the CAS.

 6. On 15 February 2013 the respondent  refused  the  applications  on  the
    basis that, as there was no longer a valid CAS in  place,  he  did  not
    fulfil the requirements of paragraph 245ZX with reference to  paragraph
    115A of Appendix A.  She refused the second appellant's application  in
    line.

 7. It is the appellants' case that  the  withdrawal  of  the  CAS  by  the
    college was in error; that that error had been admitted and that it was
    in the circumstances unfair for the Secretary of State to have taken  a
    decision in circumstances where  he  could  not  have  known  what  had
    happened; and, in the alternative, the respondent had erred in  law  in
    failing to  have  regard  to  the  flexibility  policy  (see  Rodriguez
    (flexibility policy) [2013] UKUT  00042  (IAC)  and  Naved  (student  -
    fairness - notice of points) [2012] UKUT 00014).

 8. The matter came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chohan  sitting  at
    Sheldon Court, Birmingham on 13 August 2013.  The judge concluded:-

      a) that the error in this case did not emanate from the respondent and
         that if he had any grievance then it was with the college [16];

      b) that the respondent could not have been expected to know  that  the
         letter withdrawing the CAS had not been sent to the  appellant  and
         that it was open  to  the  respondent  to  have  assumed  that  the
         withdrawal had been sent to him; and therefore

      c) that there is no duty on the respondent to notify the appellant and
         accordingly the respondent's decision did  not  fall  foul  of  the
         principles established in either Naved or Rodriguez [17];

      d) that requiring the appellants to return  to  Bangladesh  would  not
         amount to a breach of their right to respect for their family  life
         [20] and that any interference with  their  right  to  respect  for
         private life  would  not  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
         potentially to engage Article 8 [22].

 9. The appellants sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      a) the principles in established  case  law  imposed  a  duty  on  the
         respondent to inform the appellant of the withdrawal of the CAS and
         that a failure to do so rendered the decision unlawful;

      b) that despite being at fault,  the  judge  went  on  "ruthlessly  to
         dismiss the appellants' appeals unfairly" and  the  decisions  were
         unlawful;

      c) that Judge Chohan failed to declare that the Secretary  of  State's
         decision to remove the  appellants  pursuant  to  directions  given
         under Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
         2006 was wrong in law and to be set aside;

      d) that the judge had erred in his approach to Article 8 in giving  no
         weight to the first appellant's established private and family life
         in the United Kingdom.

10. On 6 November 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge Latter  granted  permission  to
    appeal on the grounds that the Section 47 removal decision needed to be
    clarified and there was an arguable issue in relation  to  fairness  in
    the operation of the flexibility policy in the context of the CAS being
    withdrawn without the  appellant's  knowledge.   He  stated,  "However,
    there is no substance in the earlier grounds relating to the burden  of
    proof, illogicality and failure to consider Article 8.   Permission  is
    granted only in respect of the grounds I have identified."

11. When the matter came before me I asked both parties to  address  me  on
    the question of whether the errors of law pleaded  were  in  any  event
    material given the length of time the appellant appears to  have  spent
    with leave to remain as  a  student  in  light  of  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 245ZX(h) and (ha).

12. Mr Whitwell produced a note  of  the  hearing  taken  by  a  Presenting
    Officer which indicated that the Section 47 notice had been  withdrawn.
    I have no reason to doubt that this was so and  that  the  judge  erred
    simply by failing to record this fact.

13. It is not in dispute that the judge should have proceeded to allow  the
    appeal against the Section 47 decision on  the  basis  it  was  not  in
    accordance with the law and on that limited basis I find that the judge
    did err in law with respect to that decision.

14. Despite Mr Sayem's submissions to the contrary, I am not satisfied that
    the factual matrix in this case where a CAS was issued by  the  college
    but was later withdrawn is a situation which falls within the terms  of
    the flexibility policy which was in force at  the  relevant  time.   Mr
    Whitwell provided a copy of that and I consider that  nowhere  does  it
    relate to the omission of a CAS.  In any event,  a  CAS  would  not  be
    submitted with the application; it is an electronic document  to  which
    the respondent has access.

15. That said, it was evident from the application form that a CAS had been
    issued.  It would have been evident from the system that  the  CAS  had
    been issued to the appellant  and  had  been  later  withdrawn  by  the
    college.  The issue of fairness does  not  have  anything  to  do  with
    fault.  The judge erred in concentrating on that issue when in  reality
    what occurred here was that the respondent took a decision  adverse  to
    the appellant when it was possible that the  appellants  did  not  know
    what had happened.  The difficulty is that in the circumstances,  given
    the effect of Section 85A of the 2002 Act, errors of this nature cannot
    be corrected on appeal.

16. It is established law that the right to be heard includes the  duty  to
    give relevant persons, in this case the applicant,  an  opportunity  to
    make representations as stated in R v SSHD ex parte Doody (1994)  1  AC
    531 560D-G Lord Mustill, "Fairness  will  very  often  require  that  a
    person who may be adversely affected  by  the  decision  will  have  an
    opportunity to make representations on his own behalf either before the
    decision is taken with a view to producing a favourable result or after
    it is taken with a view to procuring its modification; or both."

17. On that basis, I am satisfied that the Secretary of State  did  err  in
    law in acting unfairly when faced with the fact  that  the  appellant's
    CAS had been withdrawn, without knowing the reasons behind that and  in
    a situation where the appellant would be unable to make any  correction
    given the nature of Rule 85A.

18. It does not, however follow that this issue is  capable  of  materially
    affecting the outcome of the decision, given that it may well  be  that
    the application fell to  be  refused  in  any  event  by  operation  of
    paragraph 245ZX (h), (ha) or (hb).  As that was not an issue previously
    raised, I considered that it was appropriate to adjourn the  appeal  to
    hear further submissions on that issue.

19. When the matter reconvened, Mr Whitwell explained that for the  reasons
    set out in the skeleton argument produced by the respondent,  there  is
    no intention to take the point as to whether the first appellant  meets
    the  requirements  of  paragraph  245ZX  of  the   Immigration   Rules.
    Accordingly on that basis I am satisfied that  the  error  referred  to
    above is material and thus it is necessary to remake the  decisions  in
    respect of both appellants as that of the second appellant is dependant
    on the first.

20. Given my finding that the Secretary of State had erred in law in acting
    unfairly, it follows that the decision was not in accordance  with  the
    law and accordingly the matter  has  to  be  considered  again  by  the
    Secretary of State. The appeal is therefore remade by  allowing  it  on
    the basis that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

Summary of Conclusions

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law, and I set it aside.

 2. There is no longer any valid appeal against the section 47 decisions

 3. I remake  the  decisions  in  respect  of  the  refusals  to  vary  the
    appellants' leave to remain. I do so by maintaining the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appeals  on  the  basis  that  the
    decisions were in accordance with the law but I allow  the  appeals  on
    the basis that the decisions not  to  vary  the  appellants'  leave  to
    remain were not in accordance with the law.  The applications are  thus
    still outstanding before  the  respondent  and  await  a  fresh  lawful
    decision.

 4. Given that the appellants have been  successful  in  their  appeals,  I
    consider that it is appropriate to make  a  full  fee  order  in  their
    favour.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

