
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07007/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 November 2014                          |On 8 December 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D G ZUCKER

                                   Between

                                 SYEDA TAYAB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the United States of America.   Her  date
    of birth  is  recorded  as  7  December  1981.   On  28  December  2012
    application was made on the Appellant's behalf  for  further  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of her relationship with  her
    partner and children.  On 17 January 2014 a decision was made to refuse
    the application and to remove her by  way  of  directions  pursuant  to
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.   On  8
    August 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lobo considered the appeal
    and wrote a determination which at paragraph 21 said as follows:

         "The Appellant has failed to provide any response to  the  detailed
         points made in the reasons for refusal letter.  The  Appellant  has
         also failed to provide any evidence or  documents  to  support  her
         application.  The determination is dated 15 August 2014."

 2. There is, however, within the file a  bundle  of  papers  sent  to  the
    Tribunal under cover of letter dated 6 August 2014.  The  letter  makes
    reference to the "Hearing" for 8 August 2014.  The  bundle  however  is
    date stamped as having been received by the Tribunal on the  11  August
    2014.

 3. There is an endorsement at the end of the determination signed by Judge
    Lobo which reads as follows:

         "The appeal was listed for consideration and determined  on  the  8
         August 2014.  On the 11 August 2014 the Tribunal received a bundle,
         under cover of a letter dated 6 August, with no explanation  as  to
         the late delivery.  In these circumstances I refuse to  accept  the
         Appellant's bundle."

 4. That endorsement of 19 August 2014 post dates the draft Decision of the
    Judge which was not promulgated however until 20 August 2014.  It is to
    be borne in  mind  that  the  Decision  was  not  final  until  it  was
    promulgated.

 5. Not content with the Decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  by  Notice
    dated 1 September 2014 the Appellant made application for permission to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal making reference  to  the  fact  that  the
    further evidence was sent to the Tribunal by recorded delivery and that
    the Judge should have considered the bundle which was  submitted.   The
    grounds then went on to join issue with the approach of  the  Judge  to
    the appeal generally.

 6. On 8 October 2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen
    granted permission stating:

         "The grounds on which permission to appeal is sought submit that  a
         procedural error amounting to an error of law has occurred in that,
         whereas her bundle  of  documents  was  sent  to  the  Tribunal  by
         recorded delivery on 6 August (and is in the file stamped as having
         been received at  Taylor  House  on  11  August),  when  the  judge
         prepared his determination on 15 August he did so on the basis that
         the Appellant had filed no evidence.  This ground is arguable."

Was there an error of law?

 7. Although this was the Appellant's appeal, Mr Nath, for  the  Respondent
    agreed that this appeal albeit a paper appeal, when before  the  First-
    tier should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with a view  to  the
    determination being set aside and dealt  with  again  by  the  Tribunal
    having regard to  Rule  60  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005.

 8. Since both parties were present at the hearing in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and agreed that that was the proper course, I find  that  that  is  the
    course that should be followed.

 9. A simple visit to the Post Office Track  and  Trace  service,  on-line,
    using the reference number attached to the letter  of  6  August  2014,
    would have demonstrated that the document was sent by recorded delivery
    with delivery on 8 August 2014, and not on 11 August 2014 as the  Judge
    believed was the case.

10. I bear in mind that there were directions given in this case issued  as
    long ago as 6 March 2014 stating:

         "If you have not already done so, you must send to the Tribunal and
         to the other party a bundle of all documents you wish to rely on in
         support of the appeal, to arrive no later than three weeks from the
         date of this letter."

11. On 4 August 2014 the Appellant's solicitors had written to the Tribunal
    requesting that the appeal be decided on the papers without a  hearing.
    Clearly the Tribunal had decided to follow that  course  but  if  there
    were any concerns about documents that had been served late,  or  might
    be served late, or which the Secretary of State might not have had  the
    opportunity to consider then consideration should have  been  given  to
    whether or not to accede to that request.

12. As matters stand there appears to be and I find  procedural  unfairness
    in that having agreed to consider the appeal without a hearing the only
    basis upon which the bundle appears to have been rejected  was  because
    they were filed after  the  date  upon  which  the  matter  was  to  be
    considered with no reasonable explanation when in  fact  the  documents
    did arrive on the date when the appeal was to be considered, albeit  in
    the afternoon.  It was open to the Judge to reject  the  bundle  having
    regard to the overriding  objective  if  thought  appropriate  but  the
    Appellants were entitled to a more reasoned Decision for the  rejection
    of the documents than the one given. Whilst the case of BO  and  Others
    (Extension of time for appealing) Nigeria [2006]  00035,  is  concerned
    with extension of time, there is helpful guidance  in  that  still  one
    must have some regard to the merits of the case, which in this case the
    Judge appears simply not to have done; he seems to have taken exception
    to the late service  of  documents  which  in  the  event,  because  of
    administrative error, gave the impression that they arrived later  than
    they did.

13. Consideration was given as to whether or not I should  deal  with  this
    matter in the Upper  Tribunal  and  remake  the  decision  particularly
    because there had been a clear administrative error on the part of  the
    Tribunal or its staff. However I am concerned  that  whilst  there  has
    been an error of law there was a request by the Appellant's  solicitors
    for the appeal to be dealt with without a hearing  made  close  to  the
    date when  there  was  to  be  a  hearing  followed  by  submission  of
    documents. Those acting for the Appellant must have known or  ought  to
    have known that there was the real risk that the Respondent  would  not
    have had the opportunity to consider those papers.

14. In all the circumstances I find an error of law. It matters not whether
    I set aside the determination pursuant to Rule  60  or  otherwise,  the
    effect is the same. I have decided however  that  the  matter  will  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal but  direct  that  without  further
    order there shall be a hearing and that any request for the  appeal  to
    be decided on the papers  shall  be  referred  to  the  Resident  Upper
    Tribunal Judge.

15. In summary, I  would  observe  that  the  Appellant  was  late  in  the
    submission of the documents and in breach of directions. However regard
    is to be had to the  overriding  objective  if  evidence  submitted  is
    simply to be rejected out of hand. In this case there is the real  risk
    of the perception that the appeal was dismissed  without  consideration
    of the further documents simply because it had not been  received  when
    indeed they had.

16. This is a case in which the Presidential direction  relating  to  cases
    being remitted applies.

Decision

There was an error of law in the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
The decision is set aside to be decided afresh  at  a  hearing  by  a  Judge
other than Judge Lobo.

Signed                              Date


Judge Zucker
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


