
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07828/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 July 2015                      |On 24 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                         MUHAMMAD RAHEEL ASGHAR AWAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wheeler [ McKenzie Friend]
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan,  born  on  2  April  1995.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 25 July 2013 on  a  visitors  visa  valid
    until 19 December 2013.

2.   On 16 December 2013 he sought a variation of  his  leave  to  enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of his private  life  and  of
    his desire to study.

3.   The application was refused by the respondent on 23 January  2014.   It
    was not considered that the appellant met any of  the  requirements  of
    the  Immigration  Rules  nor  were  there  were  any  compassionate  or
    exceptional circumstances warranting the grant of leave outside of  the
    Rules.  Removal directions under 47 of the 2006 Act were made.

4.   Of some significance  in  this  particular  case  was  the  indication,
    contained in the refusal  letter,  that  if  the  appellant  wished  to
    undertake studies in the United Kingdom it was open to him to make  the
    appropriate application in the correct way.

5.   It was also noted that the appellant in his application  had  contended
    that he was in fear of his life upon return.  It was pointed out to the
    appellant in the decision that in such a situation it was open  to  him
    to make an asylum application. That should be made  in  person  via  an
    appointment at an asylum screening interview.

6.   Neither  of  those  suggestions  seemingly  were  followed  up  by  the
    appellant by any subsequent application.

7.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  the  decision  of  23  January
    2014, which appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Berry  on  23
    September 2014.  At that  hearing  the  appellant  was  assisted  by  a
    Mckenzie friend, Mr Wheeler.

8.   Notwithstanding the failure of the appellant to avail  himself  of  the
    proper channels to bring an asylum claim,  the  judge  considered  both
    that aspect and Article 3 in the  course  of  the  determination.   The
    judge concluded that there was no substance to the claims and therefore
    upheld the decision of the respondent  dismissing  the  appeal  brought
    under the Immigration Rules and under human rights.

9.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson refused to grant permission
    and the reasons for that refusal were well set out in the  decision  of
    24 November 2014.

10.  The appellant sought to renew the application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and it is in those circumstances that the matter comes  before  me,  to
    determine whether or not there was a material error in the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

11.  In that connection I  note  detailed  submissions  made  on  behalf  of
    appellant prepared by Mr Wheeler, who  also  appears  as  his  McKenzie
    friend before me.  I note also  the  respondent's  written  submissions
    dated 13 July 2015.

12.  Further documentation acquired subsequent to the hearing  is  contained
    in the bundle at pages 156 to 243, served pursuant to  Rule  15(2A)  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   This material was
    served under cover of that notice dated 5 May 2015.

13.  Part  of  the  grounds,  contained  in  the  original  application  for
    permission, was the complaint that the judge ought  to  have  adjourned
    the  matter  in  order  for  the  appellant  to  have  received   legal
    representation. Criticism was also made that it would be wrong for  the
    judge to find that the appellant had been at fault in failing to  avail
    himself of the proper channels  to  bring  an  asylum  claim.   It  was
    contended that in those  circumstances  there  ought  to  have  been  a
    recognition of a full asylum claim as well as a claim  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

14.  Looking at the determination of Judge Perry arising  from  the  hearing
    of 23 September 2014 I cannot find  any  specific  application  for  an
    adjournment. It would seem to be  clear  that  the  appellant  did  not
    follow the procedure as he was invited to do so by  the  respondent  in
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter. Nevertheless it is clear that the judge
    considered the case as presented by the appellant, particularly  as  to
    the risk on return. The judge heard from the appellant  and  also  from
    his brother and has set out in the  determination  the  nature  of  the
    claim.

15.  In those circumstances I can detect little by way of  criticism  as  to
    the Judge for those reasons.  Indeed significantly they were not argued
    before me.

16.  In essence the claim of the appellant is that he  has  had  an  abusive
    relationship with his father  in  the  past  and  there  came  a  time,
    particularly in 2013 when his father wanted him to marry  a  particular
    girl selected by him.  The appellant refused and as a result was  badly
    assaulted by his father.  He reported the assaults to  the  police  but
    they took no action. He moved in with his brother but  since  then  his
    father has disinherited him, publicly announcing that fact in the press
    and issuing legal proceedings to confirm such matters.

17.  The appellant claims that he remains at risk of further assault by  his
    father and/or by the family of the girl.

18.  Further it is contended that the way in which the father has  expressed
    the matter in the  press  and  to  the  court,  particularly  that  the
    appellant has behaved in an unIslamic fashion towards  his  family  and
    others, will expose the appellant to the charge of blasphemy were he to
    return and/or  be  at  risk  of  action  from  others  because  of  the
    perception of his blasphemy.

19.  Criticism is made of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in his  approach  to
    the documentation that was presented.  It is contended by Mr Wheeler in
    his detailed submissions that the Judge has failed  to  appreciate  the
    real significance of the matter so far as the safety of  the  appellant
    is concerned and has fundamentally erred in the approach taken  to  the
    documentation itself.

20.  At the hearing a number of documents were presented. In  general  terms
    the documentation that is central to the claim was  considered  by  the
    Judge at paragraphs 35 to 40 of the determination.

21.  Two newspaper articles were relied upon, the first as published in  the
    Daily Pakistan Islamabad on 29 November 2013.

22.  The text of that as translated reads as follows:

          "Notice of disinheritance.

         I disinherit my son Muhammad Raheel Asghar Awan  from  my  moveable
         and immovable property due to his disobedience.  In future  I  will
         not be liable for his acts  and  promises.   Muhammed  Aksar  Malik
         Aawam, of [address].

23.  The other article seems to be in the Daily Din Rawalpindi.  It  is  not
    translated but Mr Wheeler accepts it is in similar terms.

24.  Such articles provide little indication  of  any  anti-Islamic  conduct
    but rather giving the indication that the  father  does  not  want  any
    further to do with his son.  The Judge considered  those  documents  at
    paragraph 39 but  did  not  find  that  they  were  evidence  that  the
    appellant would  be  subjected  to  cruelty  or  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment were he to be returned to Pakistan.

25.  The next document, and one which upon considerable reliance is  placed,
    is that to be found at pages 45 to 47 of the bundle and purports to  be
    a suit for a declaration and permission injunction filed in  the  court
    of the Senior Civil Judge in Islamabad.

26.  It appears that the father is a law abiding citizen  whereas  his  son,
    the appellant, is disobedient, disloyal, unfaithful, untrustworthy  and
    not obeying the golden order of Shari regarding respects to the  elders
    in Islamic society. It goes on to say that the  appellant  is  naughty,
    mischievous and ill disciplined, although what he is supposed  to  have
    done  is  not  expressly  stated.   Essentially  the  purpose  of   the
    proceedings is to disassociate the family from  the  appellant  and  to
    declare that the  appellant  has  no  entitlement  to  the  assets  and
    properties of the plaintiff and family.

27.  The document concludes as follows:-

         "Prayer

         It is therefore, respectfully prayed  that  this  Honourable  court
         very graciously be declared the assets and properties belonging  to
         the plaintiff has no concern with anyone else especially  defendant
         No. 2 and declare to the effect that the plaintiff will not be held
         responsible for any act of the defendant No 2  with  anybody  else,
         the plaintiff has dissociated with the defendant No. 2

         A decree for permanent injunction to refrain the  defendant  No.  2
         from entering into any type of acts with anyone and  the  plaintiff
         will not be held responsible for the said act of the defendant  No.
         2."

28.  That is briefly considered by the judge at paragraph 38.

29.  The Judge is of the impression that this document is a  translation  of
    an original Urdu document but the document has  not  been  placed  into
    evidence. It is said that the Judge is  incorrect  in  that  assumption
    because this is a document that is a copy of the original  in  English.
    As already conceded by all parties the  judge  was  in  error  on  that
    matter.

30.  However the Judge goes on to  comment  that  there  are  no  supporting
    court documents to  evidence  that  such  a  suit  has  been  filed  or
    processed or determined and accordingly gives  little  weight  to  that
    document.

31.  The Judge went on to consider other documents which  are  relied  upon,
    in particular the legal opinions received  from  A  Zahoor  Ellahi  and
    another from Chaudhary Nazir. The Judge highlights in paragraphs 34 and
    35 of the determination shortcomings in relation  to  those  documents.
    Although they purport to come from lawyers there are no headings to the
    letters and no CVs for the  witnesses.  The  document  from  Ellahi  is
    undated.  It seems to be an uncritical acceptance  of  the  appellant's
    account. Similar criticisms were made of the second.  It  seems  to  me
    that those criticisms are properly to be made.

34.  The Judge also noted the affidavit of the appellant's  sister  and  her
    general comment "he may be persecuted".  The judge finds that affidavit
    to be speculative and adding very little to the case.

35.  Looking at the documents cumulatively, which the judge is  entitled  to
    do in the overall case as presented by the appellant, I find  that  the
    judge's comments and approach, particularly having  regard  to  Tanveer
    Ahmed were properly to be upheld.  It is suggested  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant by Mr Wheeler that had the  judge  properly  appreciated  the
    nature of the suit for declaration and  permission  injunction  as  not
    being a translation but a copy that would or could have made a material
    difference to the approach taken.

36.  Looking at the comments of  the  judge  overall  I  do  not  find  that
    reasonably likely to be the case.

37.  The document referring to the  behaviour  of  the  appellant  as  being
    dissident to Sharia law is the document claimed to have been  filed  at
    the court in Islamabad.  There is no indication as to what has happened
    to that document, whether there has been a  hearing  or  whether  there
    needs to be no hearing or merely a note filed as to the injunction. The
    two newspaper articles do not speak in any terms as to any disobedience
    to Sharia law.  It is difficult therefore without  more  to  understand
    how it would be that the wider public would be alerted to the behaviour
    of the appellant, particularly where at no stage, even within the court
    documents, does that behaviour seem to be clarified in its nature.

38.  As to the claim that the appellant's father is seeking him to  do   him
    harm, such seems to be in strange contrast to  the  expression  by  the
    father that he does not want anything further to do with his  son.   It
    is said by Mr Wheeler that in effect the filing of the law suit by  the
    father is  a means to bring the  appellant  back  into  the  family  in
    obedience to marry.  It is  difficult  without  more  to  envisage  the
    situation of the potential bride of the appellant wishing to  marry  an
    individual who has been so publicly described as disobedient and acting
    in breach  of  Islamic  principles.  The  judge  has  considered  those
    documents at  face  value  and  could  find  no  basis  to  conclude  a
    continuing interest in the appellant by the family.   It  seems  to  me
    that is a reasonable approach to have been taken.

39.  The Judge has gone on  in  paragraph  40  to  look  at  the  issues  of
    internal relocation and has found that that was properly  open  to  the
    appellant.

40.  The burden of the submissions, made in  great  detail  in  writing  and
    expanded upon by Mr Wheeler before me, is to the extent that the  judge
    had  fundamentally  misunderstood  the  nature  of  blasphemy  and  the
    potential effect of a declaration of blasphemy. The  situation  is  far
    more volatile than the Judge has been prepared  to  recognise  and  the
    letters from the lawyers have sought to make that clear.

41.  In that connection my attention was drawn to  the  Country  Information
    and Guidance Report on Pakistan of 9 August 2013 to be found  at  pages
    65 onwards of the original  bundle  presented  before  the  Judge.   My
    attention was drawn particularly to  paragraph  19.33  of  that  report
    which highlights the misuse of blasphemy laws.  It  is  said  that  the
    blasphemy allegations which  are  often  false  have  resulted  in  the
    lengthy  detention  and  occasional  violence  against  Christians  and
    others.  It speaks of the filing  of  blasphemy  cases  being  used  to
    harass rivals in business or personal disputes.

42.  The article goes on to  speak  of  the  consequences  of  a  number  of
    individuals  who  were  the  victim  of  charges  under  the  blasphemy
    regulations and of the blasphemy cases which had been registered.

43.   Mr  Wheeler  goes  on  to  expand  upon  the  situation,  namely  that
    vigilantes and extremists are often motivated upon hearing of blasphemy
    charges to take action into their own hands against the  individual  so
    accused.

44.  The practicalities of this case, however, are  essentially  those  that
    were highlighted by  the  Judge  in  the  determination.  There  is  no
    indication that the lodging of the document with the Court in Islamabad
    brings the matter into the public domain. There is no indication as  to
    what is the process upon lodging that document as to whether or not  if
    it is uncontested there is any further hearing on the matter other than
    a declaration from the court that is sought.  That  declaration  indeed
    has not been  produced.  There is no evidence that the police have been
    called in to take any action against the appellant nor  any  suggestion
    that charges of blasphemy have been brought against him.

45.  I merely repeat the comments which I  have  made  before,  that  it  is
    difficult to see simply from a statement  of  disinheritance  that  the
    events as purportedly described by the COI and  by  the  lawyers  would
    necessarily take place or are reasonably likely to take place.

46.   It  is  difficult  to  imagine  that  anybody   would   remember   two
    advertisements or notices  put  into  a  newspaper  in  2013  were  the
    appellant to return in 2015.

47.  The detailed submissions as prepared by Mr Wheeler  I  have  considered
    in detail but I do not find that the Judge has materially misunderstood
    the nature of the case or reached findings upon it which were marred by
    legal error.

48.  On the material that was presented before the Judge I do not find  that
    there was such a misunderstanding of fact  or  an  overlooking  of  any
    important matters as to constitute any error of law.

49.  I am urged to consider the documents  that  have  been  produced  under
    Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  For
    some reason those documents  were  not  provided  to  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer and in any event they all postdate the decision.

50.  Were I to direct my mind to such documents  the  issue  of  credibility
    would immediately arise. Public notices of disinheritance would seem to
    have been filed at the weekly Ghairat of 12 November 2014. Also a  very
    detailed denunciation in the same newspaper of 25 December 2014.  There
    are other newspaper articles going into  great  detail  concerning  the
    appellant's behaviour and the humiliation caused by him to his parents.
     Leaving aside the issue as to  whether  a  father  who  is  a  fervent
    follower of Islam would wish to parade the shortcomings of his son  and
    of his failure to exercise parental guidance upon his son to the public
    at large is one matter. Of more concern, however, is that over  a  year
    has elapsed from the issue of the first notices to the  second  without
    any explanation as to why those second notices are  now  issued,  other
    than they follow very shortly after the dismissal  of  the  appellant's
    appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Whether  these  are  devices
    designed to boost an appeal  which  otherwise  is  unmeritorious  is  a
    consideration to arise.  Further  opinions  by  lawyers  with  CVs  and
    headed notepaper have also been presented.

51.  It seems to me that looking at those matters in the overall context  of
    the case it cannot be said that they are uncontroversial or capable  of
    belief in their own right, applying the principles in the case of  E&R.
    It seems to me that the proper course is  for  the  appellant  to  make
    application to the respondent for those matters  to  be  treated  as  a
    fresh claim and for the response to be  obtained as to whether that  is
    the case or not.

52.  However for the immediate purposes I do not find there to be  an  error
    of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  In  that
    circumstance the  appellant's  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

53.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand, namely  that  the
    appellant's  appeals  as  to  asylum,  humanitarian   protection,   the
    Immigration Rules and human rights stand dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed in all respects.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
