
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07472/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 January 2017                        |On 2 February 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DUPTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               Ms agnes daniel
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             IMMIGRATION OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Y Alabi, Solicitor, Kings' Court Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Abebrese sitting at Taylor House on 1  March
    2016) dismissing her appeal against  the  decision  of  an  Immigration
    Officer at Heathrow Airport made on 13  February  2015  to  refuse  her
    entry to the United Kingdom, and to cancel her existing leave to  enter
    as a visitor.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider that the appellant requires  anonymity
    for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant for Permission to Appeal

 2. On 6 December 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam granted the appellant
    permission to appeal on a renewed application for permission as it  was
    arguable "that the Judge did not apply the correct standard and  burden
    of proof (see [6])".

Relevant Background Facts

 3. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, whose date of birth is 24  June
    1948.  On 8 March 2013 she was issued with a multi-visit visa valid for
    5 years until 8 March 2018.

 4. The appellant arrived in Terminal 3 at Heathrow Airport on 13  February
    2015 by flight from Lagos.  She  was  interviewed,  and  following  the
    interview she was refused leave to enter.  She was issued  with  notice
    of refusal of leave to enter, which gave two reasons for the refusal of
    leave to enter, and for the concomitant decision to cancel her existing
    entry clearance.

 5. The Immigration Officer was satisfied that either false representations
    were employed or material facts were not disclosed for the  purpose  of
    obtaining entry clearance; or there had been a change of  circumstances
    since the visa was issued which removed  the  basis  of  her  claim  to
    admission.

Material Change of Circumstances removing basis of claim for admission as  a
Visitor

 6. The first reason given was that, since she was granted entry  clearance
    on 8 March 2013, she had visited the UK from 13 April 2013 to 5 October
    2013 (thus staying for 6 months); from 18 October 2013 to  15  December
    2013 (thus staying for 2 months); from 25 January 2014 to 10 June  2014
    (thus staying for 5 months); from 11 September 2014 to 31 January  2015
    (thus staying for 4 months); and today she  was  seeking  entry  for  6
    weeks.  But her daughter had stated that she was going to stay  in  the
    UK for 3-4 months, and the appellant did not have a  return  ticket  to
    Nigeria to confirm how long she was staying in the UK on this occasion.

 7. Accordingly, over the last 22 months she had stayed in  the  UK  for  a
    period of 17 months, with only brief absences from  the  UK.   She  had
    stated that her main reason for coming to the UK  for  extended  visits
    was to support her daughter with looking after her  children  who  were
    aged 13, 10 and 6.  The Immigration Rules did not  permit  visitors  to
    live in the UK for extended  periods  through  frequent  or  successive
    visits.

Deceptive entry stamp on Passport

 8. The second reason was that he was satisfied  that  the  Nigerian  entry
    stamp in her passport, dated 3 December  2009,  had  been  fraudulently
    obtained by her to disguise the length of time that she had  stayed  in
    the UK on her previous visit visa, which was issued to her on 7 October
    2009, and which had been valid until 7 April 2010.  Exit checks  showed
    that she had departed the UK on 3 April 2010,  staying  for  5  months,
    whereas the stamp suggested that she departed on 3 December  2009.   On
    challenging her with this evidence held by  the  Department,  she  then
    admitted (at further interview) that she had stayed in  the  UK  for  5
    months on the above visit, and not for the 3 weeks as suggested in  her
    passport.

 9. If the Entry Clearance Officer had been aware of the fact that she  had
    misrepresented the length of time she had stayed on her earlier  visit,
    by obtaining a fraudulent entry stamp in Nigeria,  he  would  not  have
    issued her with a subsequent visit visa.

The Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and the Response

10. In her grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant
    pleaded that the refusal of leave to enter  was  mainly  based  on  her
    allegedly falsifying an Nigerian entry stamp.  However, the  respondent
    had not provided any positive evidence to prove that she  had  lied  or
    submitted false documentation.

11. In response to the grounds of appeal, the Immigration Officer  prepared
    a lengthy report which addressed each of  the  10  pleaded  grounds  of
    appeal.  With respect to ground 1,  the  Immigration  Officer  did  not
    produce any  documentary  evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant  was
    recorded on a Home Office database, or elsewhere, as having returned to
    Nigeria on 3 April 2010.  Instead, he relied on what  he  characterised
    as "conflicting statements" which the appellant had given in interview.
     He said that these conflicting statements suggested that the appellant
    was being less than candid about the length of time that she  spent  in
    the UK on the visit which she had undertaken in the autumn of 2009.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

12. At the  hearing  before  Judge  Abebrese,  both  parties  were  legally
    represented.  The appellant was called as a witness, and she adopted as
    her evidence in chief her witness statement in the appellant's  bundle.
    She said that  the  Nigerian  entry  stamp  in  her  passport  was  not
    fraudulent.  She had not disguised the length of her visit to  the  UK.
    After a visit, she had left for Nigeria on 3 December 2009 as stated in
    her passport.  The allegation that she had left on 3 April 2010 had not
    been proven by documentary evidence.  In  the  absence  of  documentary
    evidence to support the assertion that the stamp on  her  passport  was
    forged, the Immigration Officer had not discharged the burden of proof.

13. In his subsequent decision, the Judge directed himself at paragraph [6]
    that the appellant bore the burden of proof and the  appellant  had  to
    satisfy this burden on a balance of probabilities.  At paragraph  [12],
    he found the appellant and  her  daughter  (who  had  given  a  witness
    statement) were not credible in respect of their evidence.  He accepted
    the evidence that the Nigerian stamp of 3 April 2010  was  a  roll-back
    stamp, and that on balance the appellant  must  have  known  that  this
    "false" stamp was entered in her passport.

14. At paragraph [14], the Judge expressed the view  that  there  had  been
    significant changes in the appellant's circumstances and that  material
    facts were not disclosed for the purpose of obtaining entry  clearance,
    so it was appropriate that her leave was cancelled.

15. The appellant claimed that under paragraph 320(7a) there was a need for
    there to be positive evidence to prove that she had lied  or  submitted
    false evidence.  The Judge set out the wording  of  paragraph  320(7a),
    and reached the following conclusion at paragraph [15]:

         "I find that on the evidence and the wording of the  above  section
         the appellant is caught by the provision that her knowledge or lack
         of knowledge according to her evidence is not a decisive factor  in
         her favour.  On the basis  of  my  findings  I  conclude  that  the
         appellant cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules and  her  appeal  is
         dismissed under the Rules."

Discussion

16. Paragraph 321 of the Rules provides that  a  person  seeking  leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom who holds an entry  clearance  which  is  duly
    issued to him and which is still current may be refused leave to  enter
    only where the Immigration Officer is satisfied that:

      i) false representations were made or false documents  or  information
         were submitted (whether or not material  to  the  application,  and
         whether or not to the holder's knowledge), or material  facts  were
         not disclosed, in relation to the application for entry  clearance;
         or in order to obtain documents from the  SSHD  or  a  third  party
         required in support of the application;

    (ii) a change of circumstances since it  was  issued  has  removed  the
         basis of the holder's claim to admission, except where the  changes
         of circumstances amount solely to the person becoming over age  for
         entry in one of the categories in paragraphs 296-316 of these Rules
         since the issue of entry clearance ...

17. The Judge wrongly referred to Paragraph 320(7A) instead of to Paragraph
    321(i). But nothing turns on this. His material error was not to direct
    himself that the burden rested with the respondent to  prove  that  the
    Nigerian entry stamp was fraudulent, in  that  it  conveyed  the  false
    information that the appellant had returned  to  Nigeria  on  the  date
    given in the stamp, when in fact her date of entry to Nigeria was  some
    months later, namely at the beginning of April 2010.

18. In addition, as Mr Bramble agreed in oral argument, the respondent  had
    to prove that the appellant was complicit in the fraud.  The respondent
    had to prove that the appellant knew  that  her  passport  contained  a
    false representation as to her date of return to Nigeria following  her
    visit to the UK in 2009.  Accordingly, the Judge was  wrong  to  direct
    himself that it did not matter whether the appellant was aware  of  the
    existence of the "false" stamp.

19. The position is not salvaged by the Judge  having  earlier  made  clear
    adverse credibility findings against the appellant on this issue.   For
    these findings are not adequately  reasoned.  There  has  also  been  a
    failure to engage with the central thrust of the  appellant's  case  on
    appeal, which is that there is no documentary evidence to show that the
    Nigerian entry stamp is in fact false.

20. In interview at question 7 the Immigration Officer  said  that  he  had
    done checks with "the airline" which showed that the appellant left the
    UK on 3 April 2010.  The airline in question has never been identified,
    and its records allegedly showing the appellant's date of departure  on
    3 April 2010 have never been produced.

21. In response to the grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    Immigration Officer did not take the obvious course  of  producing  the
    relevant records  from  the  airline,  but  simply  fell  back  on  the
    tendentious proposition  that  the  appellant  had  admitted  what  was
    alleged against her.  However, the  appellant  did  not  make  a  clear
    admission of guilt.  What she said in  answer  to  question  8  was  as
    follows:

         'If your checks state that I stayed for 5 months, then I must  have
         stayed for 5 months.'

22. Given that (a) she was being asked about a visit undertaken many  years
    earlier, (b) her age and  the  stressful  circumstances  in  which  the
    appellant found herself, and (c) the fact that in more recent times she
    had remained in the  UK  for  as  long  as  five  or  six  months,  the
    appellant's answer was not, on the face of it, evasive  or  lacking  in
    candour.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  a  reasonable  response  in  the
    circumstances.

23. Thus there has been a failure to give anxious scrutiny to the  evidence
    relied on by the respondent, and this has been compounded  by  a  clear
    misdirection that the burden rested with the appellant  to  prove  that
    the stamp was genuine, rather than upon the respondent to prove that it
    was false.

24. Accordingly, I find that the finding under paragraph 321(i)  is  unsafe
    and it must be set aside. There  is  no  justification  for  a  further
    hearing  to  remake  the  decision  under  paragraph  321(i),  as   the
    respondent has not sought to adduce further evidence pursuant  to  Rule
    15(2)(a).  Accordingly, the respondent  has  failed  to  discharge  the
    burden of proving that the refusal of leave to enter was  justified  by
    reference to paragraph 321(i).

25. There is, however, no error of law in the  Judge  implicitly  upholding
    the first ground of refusal relied on by  the  Immigration  Officer  as
    justifying  the  cancellation  of  the   appellant's   existing   entry
    clearance, namely that there had been a change of  circumstances  since
    the visit visa was issued such as to remove the basis of  the  holder's
    claim to admission.

26. The facts relied upon by the Immigration Officer with  regard  to  this
    ground of refusal have been largely admitted by the appellant. She does
    not dispute his account of her recent  immigration  history.  Moreover,
    her daughter told the Immigration Officer that her mother was coming to
    stay for another lengthy period, and the daughter did not retract  this
    in her subsequent witness statement. So the appellant has no  effective
    answer to the respondent's case that she was  not  a  genuine  visitor,
    because at the time of seeking entry to the UK she had effectively been
    residing in the UK for nearly two years,  with  only  relatively  short
    periods of absence in Nigeria, and she was proposing to carry on in the
    same vein.

27. Accordingly, there is no material error of law in the  conclusion  that
    the appeal should be dismissed under the Rules and on Article 8 grounds
    outside the Rules.



Notice of Decision

Although the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to find that there  was  a  false
Nigerian entry stamp in the appellant's  passport,  and  it  ought  to  have
found that the Respondent had not discharged the burden  of  proof  on  this
issue, the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  not  vitiated  by  a
material error of law, and so (with the exception of the above finding)  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and  the  appellant's  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

