
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal: IA/07121/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 28 September 2016                 |On 29 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ARIF HUSSAIN
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Khan, of counsel, instructed by AWS Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will refer  to  the
      original appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born on 12 December 1977  as
      the appellant herein. The appellant was granted  leave  to  enter  the
      United Kingdom on 15 July 2005 until 2007 as a student and was granted
      further leave to remain until 30 November 2014. However an application
      made on 27 November 2014 for leave to remain on the basis  of  private
      life was refused on 5 February 2015.

   2. The appellant appealed and his appeal came before a  First-tier  Judge
      on 9 October 2015. The appellant had by the time of the appeal hearing
      completed 10 years lawful residence and he relied on  a  notice  under
      s.120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act, 2002 (a one-stop
      warning having been issued by the Secretary of State)  to  the  effect
      that he had now completed 10 years  lawful  residence  in  the  United
      Kingdom and there was no reason why it would be undesirable for him to
      be granted indefinite leave to remain.

   3. The judge records in paragraph 7 of his decision that  the  Presenting
      Officer asked that the case be remitted back to the Secretary of State
      for consideration by her of the appellant's case under Rule 276B along
      with any further documents the appellant chose to submit.

   4. The judge however considered that he could only allow or  dismiss  the
      appeal rather than remit and he allowed the appeal.

   5. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal on  the  basis
      that the judge had had a  third  option  following  Greenwood  (No  2)
      [2015] UKUT 00629 (IAC), making a decision  to  the  effect  that  the
      Secretary of State must or may make a fresh decision.

   6. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Judge  Davies  on  17
      August 2016 on the footing that the First-tier Judge had misunderstood
      his powers and he was able to remit the decision back to the Secretary
      of State without allowing the appeal outright.

   7. Before me the parties agreed that the judge  had  erred  in  that  the
      former appeal provisions applied in this case and that  the  power  of
      remittal to the Secretary of State was still an option for the  First-
      tier Judge as First-tier Judge Davies had recognised.

   8. I was requested by both parties to remit the appeal to  the  Secretary
      of State for the Secretary of State to consider the application of the
      10 year rule.

   9. I find the judge made a material error of law, as did the Secretary of
      State in the grounds of appeal. The errors were understandable as  the
      commencement orders bringing the changes to the appeal  provisions  of
      the 2002 Act into effect are not free of difficulty in  interpretation
      and application - see  Nkomo  (Deportation:  2014  rights  of  appeal)
      [2016] UKUT 00285 (IAC).

  10. However it is clear as the parties accepted that the appeal  falls  to
      be decided under the former appeal provisions. In  the  grounds  issue
      was taken with the judge's record of what transpired at  the  hearing.
      The judge's minute is clear on the issue of the remittal  request  and
      in any event I am now requested to do what the judge understood he was
      to do - remit the matter to the Secretary of State.

      The determination is flawed by a material error of law.

      I re-make the decision.

      The appeal is allowed to  the  extent  that  it  is  remitted  to  the
      Secretary of State to consider the appellant's case under the 10  year
      rule - Rule 276B.




      Anonymity Direction

      The First-tier Judge made no and I make none.




      Fee Award

      The First-tier Judge made a fee award of any fee paid or  payable  and
      there is no reason to disturb that decision




      Signed
                               G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                       28 September 2016
