
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07562/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 April 2016                              |On 6 May 2016                 |
|Oral Judgment                                 |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MR ADESOJI ORIYOMI ADEROWALE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Ume-Ezeoke, Counsel instructed by Nathan Aaron
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Nigeria
    born on 7 November 1984.  The Secretary of State made a decision to
    remove him from the UK pursuant to Section 10 of the Immigration and
    Asylum Act 1999 on the basis that he was a person who had sought leave
    to remain in the UK by deception.  The deception of which he was
    accused was obtaining a certificate of Educational Testing Service
    fraudulently.

 2. The Notice of Immigration Decision IS.151A ("the Notice") states that
    the claimant is entitled to appeal the decision after he has left the
    UK.

 3. The claimant's appeal was heard by Judge Morgan who, in a decision
    promulgated on 21 September 2015, allowed the appeal.  The decision
    includes no consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal had
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

 4. The grounds of appeal submit that the Tribunal erred by failing to
    recognise that it did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal because
    the claimant was only entitled to appeal from outside the UK.

 5. The grounds also allege a procedural irregularity in that the Tribunal
    stated there was no evidence submitted to support the Secretary of
    State's position as to fraud having taken place when such evidence was
    in fact served.

 6. A further issue raised in the grounds concerns a signed copy of the
    Notice being handed to the judge after the appeal had concluded and the
    parties not having an opportunity to make representations in respect of
    it.  Because of this alleged irregularity, Judge Morgan was given an
    opportunity to make a comment. In a letter, he stated that (a) the
    jurisdiction point was not pursued at the hearing, (b) there was no
    evidence before the Tribunal of the purported deception and (c) the
    original IS.151A was not provided by either party at the hearing. A
    copy was left behind by the claimant but he did not consider it in any
    event to be material to the outcome of the decision.

Consideration

 7. Having heard submissions from Mr Bramble and Mr Ume-Ezeoke, my decision
    is as follows.

 8. The claimant's right of appeal was pursuant to Section 82 of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") (as then
    in force).

 9. At the material time, Section 82 of the 2002 Act specified types of
    immigration decision against which there is a right of appeal.

10. One of the immigration decisions listed in Section 82, and the decision
    relevant to this appeal, is that found at sub-Section (g). Sub-Section
    (g) states:

         "a decision that a person is to be removed from the UK by way of
         directions under Section 10(1)(a), (b), (ba) or (c) of the
         Immigration and Asylum Act 1999"

11. Section 92 of the 2002 Act identifies which immigration decisions can
    be appealed whilst an appellant is in the UK. The immigration decision
    identified in sub-Section (g) does not allow for appeals whilst the
    claimant is in the UK.

12. Accordingly, as made plain in the Notice, because the Immigration
    Decision being appealed is a decision specified in sub Section (g) for
    which there is not an in-country right of appeal, the claimant only has
    a right of appeal after leaving the UK.

13. Mr Ume-Ezeoke submitted, inter alia, that the jurisdiction point had
    not been raised by the Presenting Officer in the First-tier Tribunal. I
    accept this is the case but the First-tier Tribunal is a creature of
    statute whose jurisdiction is limited by Section 82 of the 2002 Act.
    Although there may be circumstances where a decision taken without
    jurisdiction will become irreversible, (see, for example, Virk & Ors v
    SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 652) that stage has not been reached in this case
    and it is my finding that the First tier Tribunal made a material error
    of law by failing to recognise that there was no jurisdiction for this
    appeal to be heard whilst the claimant remained in the UK.

14. Having found that the First-tier Tribunal did not have jurisdiction
    there is no need for me to consider the Secretary of State's other
    grounds of appeal.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of a
    material error of law and is set aside.

16. I re-make the decision and dismiss the claimant's appeal.

17. No anonymity direction is made.


|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 2 May 2016                    |

