
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07329/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 January 2016                   |On 25 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ANDREW MAURICE NICOL
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

History of Appeal

 1. The Respondent, who was born on 4 February 1989, is a citizen of  South
    Africa. He first arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 October 2004 as  a
    dependent of his father who had been granted leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of his UK ancestry. He was initially  granted  limited  leave  to
    remain until 29 October 2008 and this leave was  subsequently  extended
    until 5 January 2014.

 2. He applied to vary his leave to remain once more on  12  December  2013
    but his application was refused on 23 January 2014 and a  decision  was
    made to remove him from the United Kingdom.  He appealed  against  this
    decision on 6 February 2014 and his appeal was listed before First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boyd on 29 May 2014. The Respondent had flu and was  not
    able to attend but First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyd  continued  with  the
    hearing in  his  absence  and  dismissed  his  appeal  in  a  decision,
    promulgated on 13 June 2014.

 3. The Respondent appealed against this decision and on 19 September  2014
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hollingsworth  granted  him  permission  to
    appeal. On 3 November 2014 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington  found
    that First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyd  had  made  an  error  of  law  and
    remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro allowed  his  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 May 2015.

 5. The Appellant appealed on 12 May 2015  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lambert granted her permission to appeal on 15 July 2015.

Error of Law Hearing

 6. At the hearing I heard from the Home Office Presenting Officer and then
    provided the Appellant with the opportunity to respond. He addressed me
    about his family's present circumstances and the fact  that  his  older
    brother was planning to migrate to work abroad and would no  longer  be
    living in South Africa.

 7. In paragraph 28 of  her  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro
    reminded herself that in order to meet the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules the Respondent would have  to  show
    that there were very significant obstacles to his integration in  South
    Africa.

 8. She noted  that  the  Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  on  Family
    Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b, Private Life in the  UK  sets  out
    matters which should be considered when  assessing  whether  there  are
    "very significant obstacles". She partially referred to three of  these
    factors in paragraph 30 of her decision and noted in paragraph 32  that
    he had arrived here at the age of 15 and would not  at  that  age  have
    been exposed to all the facets and culture  of  South  Africa  and,  in
    particular, would not have been exposed to world of work. She  did  not
    take into account the fact that he had been educated  in  South  Africa
    until the age of 15 and that he had been employed here  in  the  United
    Kingdom. In addition, she did not explain why he would now be returning
    to a country whose cultural norms were alien to him when  he  had  been
    born and brought up there until the age of  15.   She  also  failed  to
    reflect the totality of the content  of  the  IDI,  which  specifically
    stated that the fact that a person may have no family  members  in  the
    country of return does not necessarily give rise  to  very  significant
    obstacles to re-integration.

 9. Crucially, she did not provide any definition  of  the  test  of  "very
    significant obstacles" which she was applying but appeared to  conflate
    it with the earlier test in paragraph 276ADE(v) which merely required a
    person to show that he had  no  ties  (including  social,  cultural  or
    family) in South Africa. This led her to rely on Ogundimu  (Article  8-
    new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 and to pick out the  factors  in  the
    IDI which related to cultural, social and family ties.

10. She failed to take into account the fact that the IDI said that a  very
    significant obstacle to integration means something which would prevent
    or seriously inhibit the applicant from integration into the country of
    return and means more than mere obstacles. It  also  states  that  very
    significant obstacles will exist where the applicant demonstrates  that
    they would be unable to establish a private  life  in  the  country  of
    return or where establishing a private life would entail  very  serious
    hardship for the applicant. She did not apply this or any other similar
    test to the facts of the Respondent's case. Therefore, I find that  she
    made a material error of law  when  finding  at  paragraph  33  of  her
    decision  that  the  Respondent  met  the  requirements  of   paragraph
    276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

11. However, from paragraph 34 to 36 of her  decision  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Garro considered whether, in the alternative, the Secretary  of
    State  had  also  failed   to   consider   whether   the   Respondent's
    circumstances were exceptional and should have been considered  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

12. In her decision letter,  dated  21  January  2014,  the  Appellant  had
    included a paragraph headed:  Decision  on  Exceptional  Circumstances.
    However, it was a stock paragraph, which did not refer to  or  consider
    any of the Respondent's individual circumstances.  In  particular,  she
    did not comply with her own policy, referred  to  above,  which  stated
    that:
         "The degree of private life an individual has established in the UK
         is not relevant to the consideration of whether there  are  serious
         obstacles to integration into the country of return. However,  this
         will be  relevant  to  the  consideration  of  whether,  where  the
         applicant falls for refusal under the Rules, there are  exceptional
         circumstances which would make refusal unjustifiably harsh for  the
         applicant".

13. I agree with First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro  that  the  test  to  be
    applied in paragraph 276ADE(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  does  not
    address the aspects of his private life, which arise  from  him  living
    here in the United Kingdom, and that, therefore, the Appellant decision
    was not in accordance with the law.

14. For these reasons I find that  the  alternative  basis  for  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Garro's decision did not include  material  errors  of
    law and I uphold her decision that the Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department had failed to consider the Respondent's  case  sufficiently,
    or at all, outside the Immigration Rules.

Decision

15. I uphold First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro's decision in so far as  she
    found that the Appellant has not yet given sufficient consideration  to
    the Respondent's case outside the Immigration Rules.

16. The case remains before the Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    to make a decision on this aspect of the application.


Date: 18 January 2016

    Nadine Finch

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
