
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA076162015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th April 2016                            |On 9th June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                               Mr gozie okebae
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Pararajasingam, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 26th November  1971.   On
    1st March 2015 the immigration office at Terminal  3  Heathrow  Airport
    refused the Appellant leave to enter the United Kingdom  and  therefore
    cancelled his continuing leave which had been issued on 16th May  2013.
    The reason for refusal was that the Immigration Officer  was  satisfied
    that Nigerian re-entry stamps had been obtained in an attempt to create
    a false travel history in and out of Nigeria disguising the true length
    of the Appellant's stay and that as a result  the  Immigration  Officer
    was satisfied that the situation described  represented  a  significant
    change in the Appellant's circumstances since the issue of the visa  on
    which he relied for admission.

 2. A formal notice was served on the Appellant on  5th  April  2015.   The
    Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Oliver sitting at Richmond on 24th September 2015.  In a  very
    short decision the Appellant's appeal was allowed under the Immigration
    Rules in a decision and reasons promulgated on 2nd October 2015.

 3. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal on  2nd  October  2015.
    Permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson  on  15th
    February 2016.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged on 25th  February
    2016.  Those grounds contended that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had
    erred in law at paragraph 5 of his determination by  stating  that  the
    evidence from Virgin Atlantic was an anonymous email.  They noted  that
    it was clear from the Respondent's appeal bundle that in fact the email
    was not anonymous  and  that  it  was  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  had  consequently  materially  erred  in  law  by  not
    considering the evidence which was clearly attached to the Respondent's
    bundle appropriately.  Secondly it  was  further  reiterated  that  the
    judge  had  failed  to  allow  the  Presenting  Officer  to  make   any
    submissions.  The Presenting Officer's minute  was  attached.   It  was
    therefore submitted that the judge's conclusions were  unsafe  and  the
    decision needed to be remade.

 4. The Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal on 3rd March 2016.   In
    giving reasons the judge noted that the Respondent had submitted a note
    from the Home Office Presenting Officer who appeared before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oliver stating that the appeal was allowed  without  him
    having an opportunity to make submissions.  Although the Appellant  was
    present he had not given evidence and there  were  clearly  significant
    matters in issue between the parties concerning  which  the  Respondent
    was entitled to advance submissions.  The judge contended  that  if  it
    was established that the Respondent's  representative  wished  to  make
    submissions  but  was  not  permitted  to  do  so  then  that  arguably
    constituted a procedural irregularity giving rise to unfairness such as
    to amount to an error of law.  No Rule 24 response has been filed.   It
    is on that basis that the appeal comes before me to  determine  whether
    or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by his instructed  Counsel,
    Miss Pararajasingam.  Miss Pararajasingam is familiar with this  matter
    having appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Walker.

 5. In addition I am greatly assisted by the production of  two  documents.
    Firstly, a note from the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and secondly, a memorandum  served  on  14th  March
    2016 from the Appellant's representatives.

Submission/Discussion

 6. Mr Walker takes me to two documents being emails from  Virgin  Atlantic
    which he submits show clearly that the exchange  from  Virgin  Atlantic
    regarding the flights taken by the Appellant are clearly not  anonymous
    and that they reflect different dates for the flights to those  stamped
    in the Appellant's passport.  Further Miss Pararajasingam  acknowledges
    that she was present before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   She  does  not
    entirely agree the minute that  is  produced  but  quite  properly  and
    understandably is reluctant to give evidence in the case in  which  she
    is appearing.  She takes me to the minute respectfully submitting  that
    the  Respondent's  representatives  were  not  precluded  from   making
    submissions and  that  the  basis  of  a  procedural  irregularity  was
    inaccurate.  To  the  contrary  they  contend  the  representative  was
    required by the First-tier Tribunal Judge to make submissions on issues
    in support of the serious allegation of forgery in  response  of  which
    the Home Office Presenting Officer admitted to being unable  to  assist
    the Tribunal.  The issue  she  contends  upon  which  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer was invited to make submissions by Judge Oliver were
    detailed at paragraph 5 of his determination and  that  the  Presenting
    Officer had further confirmed that the two disputed entry  stamps  have
    not been submitted to an expert for testing  to  discover  evidence  of
    forgery.  Therefore, in the absence of any expert evidence,  a  serious
    allegation of fraud was made against the Appellant following  which  he
    was refused entry and then detained for some two weeks.

 7. It was on this basis she contends that Judge Oliver ruled that  he  was
    not going to allow the Home Office to seek  further  instructions.   In
    precluding  the  Presenting   Officer   from   seeking   such   further
    instructions, she contends that the judge explained his position and he
    felt that it would be unjust to the Appellant,  particularly  when  the
    Appellant had been detained for some two weeks on the strength  of  the
    extremely serious allegation and secondly, since despite months  having
    elapsed the Respondent still attended the hearing without  satisfactory
    evidence to hand.  Miss Pararajasingam relies on the  authority  of  RP
    (Nigeria) [2006] UKIAT  86  in  support  of  her  submission  that  the
    standard of fraud had not been met.  She asked me to find that there is
    no material error of law.

 8. Mr Walker in response submits that the difficulty  with  this  is  that
    does not concur with the minute produced by the Home Office  Presenting
    Officer and that the documentation on the  Secretary  of  State's  file
    addresses the issue  of  the  evidence  regarding  the  stamps  on  the
    Appellant's passport which were before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    and then when looked at, as they should have been properly against  the
    non-anonymous documents from Virgin Atlantic, it shows  that  there  is
    conflicting evidence regarding the facts and the stamps in the passport
    which the Home Office were not given the  opportunity  to  investigate.
    On such basis he submits that there is  procedural  unfairness  to  the
    Secretary of State and that the decision of the First-tier Judge should
    be set aside and the matter remitted back for rehearing.



The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. There are two quite specific issues relating to this matter.  The first
    relates to whether or not the email from Virgin Atlantic was  anonymous
    or not.  The fact remains that although considered anonymous it clearly
    was not an anonymous document.  That  in  itself  would  not  create  a
    material error of law.  However when looked at in the round,  alongside
    other issues in this matter, it is a factor that needs to be considered
    because it was instrumental in part seemingly in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

12. Secondly, and perhaps  more  importantly,  is  the  issue  relating  to
    potential procedural unfairness due to the  allegation  made  that  the
    Secretary of State was not granted the opportunity to make submissions.
     Despite her attempts to the contrary to contend that she is not giving
    evidence that exactly is what Miss  Pararajasingam  has  done  both  by
    virtue of her additional statement and the submission she has made.   I
    accept she is in a position of some difficulty because  after  all  she
    was the legal representative present but it does seem clear that  there
    is an acceptance, albeit quite possibly for different reasons, that the
    judge curtailed the evidence without giving the Secretary of State  the
    opportunity to make submissions.  To a certain extent that is shown  by
    the length of the decision and by the comment expressed  in  the  final
    sentence of the  judge's  decision  which  whilst  not  constituting  a
    material error  of  law,  is  clearly  an  inappropriate  step  for  an
    Immigration Judge to make.

13. In such circumstances I  find  that  when  all  issues  are  looked  at
    together the judge has not addressed his mind  fully  to  the  relevant
    factors that were extant before him and that there has been  procedural
    unfairness to the Secretary of  State  in  the  failure  to  allow  her
    representative to make  proper  submissions.   That  has  to  create  a
    material error of law and which would make the findings of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge unsafe.  It is  not  ultimately  to  say  that  the
    outcome will be different but clearly the matter should  be  progressed
    and addressed without any form of procedural unfairness.

14. In such circumstances the  correct decision and approach is to  find  a
    material error of law and to set aside the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge with none of the findings  of  fact  to  stand  and  the
    matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Decision and Directions

(1)  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contains  a  material
    error of law and is set aside.

(2)  None of the findings of fact are to stand.

(3)  The matter is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross or Richmond on the first available date 28 days hence with an ELH
    of two hours.

(4)  That the remitted hearing is  to  be  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge other than Immigration Judge Oliver.

(5)  That there be leave to either  party  to  file  an  updated  bundle  of
    evidence upon which they seek to rely at least seven days pre-hearing.

(6)  That in the event of the Appellant requiring an interpreter  his  legal
    representatives do notify the Tribunal service at least  fourteen  days
    pre-hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 3rd June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made






Signed                              Date 3rd June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

