
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07403/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 28th August 2014                  |On 30th September 2014               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 SAYDA BEGUM
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Martin of Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Sangha promulgated on 8th May  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
       Birmingham on 16th April 2014, in which he dismissed the appeal under
       both the immigration rules and on human rights  grounds  against  the
       refusal to vary the Appellant's leave to remain and a  direction  for
       her removal from the United Kingdom.

    2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 18  April  1991  who
       entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 22nd June 2013 with  leave
       to remain valid to 2nd  December  2013.  On  26th  October  2013  the
       Appellant submitted an application for leave to remain on  the  basis
       of being a partner of a British citizen present and  settled  in  the
       United Kingdom. The application was  refused  and  a  contemporaneous
       removal direction issued pursuant to section  47  Immigration  Asylum
       and Nationality Act 2006 on the basis the Appellant did not meet  the
       requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.

    3. Having considered the oral and documentary evidence the Judge set out
       his findings from paragraph 16 of  the  determination  which  can  be
       summarised as follows:

       i.  Some  elements  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  were  lacking  in
           credibility. The assertion she would not be able  to  return  to
           Bangladesh because her  family  had  disowned  her  as  she  has
           married a man with two children  was  found  to  be  lacking  in
           credibility bearing in mind the Appellant and her  partner  knew
           each other when they were in Bangladesh meaning it is likely the
           family were aware of the circumstances. The evidence in relation
           to whether the Appellant  maintained  contact  with  her  family
           lacked credibility as did the claim that she had married without
           consultation with her family and whether her partner  was  aware
           of her immigration status as the evidence in  relation  to  this
           matter was contradictory when given by  the  Appellant  and  her
           partner [17].

       ii.    It is accepted by the Appellant's representative that she does
           not meet the requirements of Appendix MM of  the  Rules.  During
           the course of the hearing arguments based on Articles  2  and  3
           ECHR were withdrawn leaving the only outstanding issue  that  of
           Article 8 ECHR [18].

       iii.   Having considered the domestic case law  the  Judge  concluded
           there were no  compelling  compassionate  circumstances  in  the
           case. The application was made at a time the  Appellant  was  in
           the United Kingdom with a visit visa and clearly  falls  outside
           Appendix FM. The Appellant is not married to her  partner  in  a
           marriage recognised in English law [19].

       iv.    The Judge specifically finds "the reality in this case is that
           the Appellant and her  partner  simply  feel  that  it  is  more
           convenient for her to  remain  here,  rather  than  to  properly
           comply with the Rules in order to seek entry  clearance.  In  my
           assessment there is nothing to stop the Appellant from returning
           to Bangladesh in order to  apply  for  entry  clearance  in  the
           proper manner in order to join her husband in  the  UK  and  her
           removal is not unjustifiably harsh" [19].

       v. There are no non-standard features of this case that persuaded the
           Judge otherwise.  The  partner  can  remain  looking  after  his
           daughters in the UK whilst the Appellant applies from Bangladesh
           and they can maintain contact with  one  another.  It  was  also
           found there are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
           continuing in Bangladesh and/or unjustifiably harsh consequences
           resulting.  Both  parties  were   aware   of   the   Appellant's
           immigration status.  The Appellant's partner is in  sole  charge
           of his children and has cared for them a number of years [19].

    4. Permission to appeal was sought by the Appellant acting in person  in
       which she asserts legal  error  in  the  findings  of  the  Judge  in
       relation to Article 8 ECHR.  Permission  was  granted  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge V Osborne on the basis she considered it arguable that
       the Judge failed to give full consideration to the Appellant's rights
       under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules; especially bearing  in
       mind there are three  children  involved,  the  Appellant  was  eight
       months pregnant with the child due to be born in May 2014, and living
       in a family unit with her husband who cares for the two  children  of
       his previous marriage aged seven and eight years respectively and had
       been doing so for over a year.

Error of law

    5. A number of the heads of challenge have no  arguable  merit  or  have
       been properly rejected by the  judge  granting  permission  who  also
       noted that the background gives the appearance of a somewhat  cynical
       attempt to bypass the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

    6.  It  was  submitted  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  that   exceptional
       circumstances exist. The parties had lived together from 18th October
       2013, a child had been born to the Appellant in May 2014 and she  was
       pregnant with that child at  the  time  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       hearing. It was submitted there was a strong relationship between the
       Appellant acting as a stepmother and the children of her partner that
       has existed for over a year, and that  the  Judge  had  not  properly
       weighed  the  evidence  or  considered  the   factors   relevant   to
       undertaking a proper Razgar assessment.  It was submitted the Judge's
       ultimate decision to split the family was unjustifiably harsh in  all
       the circumstances of the case.

    7. A reading of the determination shows the Judge was clearly  aware  of
       all relevant issues. The Judge refers to the relationship between the
       Appellant and her partner's  children  and  for  sustainable  reasons
       found that it was an attempt to get round the Rules.  He  arrived  at
       the proportionate decision as  a  result  of  having  considered  the
       competing interests.

    8. The Appellant was unable  to  succeed  under  Appendix  FM  which  is
       section 55 compliant. She was unable  to  succeed  under  either  the
       partner or parent route and in relation to the older  children,  they
       are the children of her partner and the Appellant's removal  was  not
       shown on the available evidence to result in any adverse impact  upon
       them.  It was not shown that their needs will not continue to be  met
       by their father in the absence of the Appellant.

    9. The jurisprudence in relation to Article 8 within the Rule  continues
       to develop. Three of the more recent cases are R (on the  application
       of Ganesabalan [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin) in which it was held that (i)
       Unlike  other  Rules  which  have  a  built-in  discretion  based  on
       exceptional circumstances, Appendix FM and  Rule  276ADE  are  not  a
       "complete code" so far  as  Article  8  compatibility  is  concerned.
       Appendix  FM  and  Rule  276ADE  have  no   equivalent   "exceptional
       circumstances"  provision.   "Plainly",  as  was  held  in  Amin   at
       paragraph 26, they are not  "exhaustive";  but  there  is  "always  a
       residual discretion" (see paragraph 42).   As  the  Court  of  Appeal
       explained in MM (Lebanon) (paragraph 134):  "  ...  if  the  relevant
       group of [Immigration Rules] is not ... a 'complete  code'  then  the
       proportionality test will be more at  large,  albeit  guided  by  the
       Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law".  The  Immigration  Rules
       are the important first stage and the focus of Article 8 assessments.
       Indeed it will be an error  of  law  not  to  address  Article  8  by
       reference to the Rules.  The position is explained by  the  Court  of
       Appeal in Haleemundeen at paragraphs 40 to 42, 47 and  51.  (ii)  The
       Immigration Rules  operate  alongside  important  guidance  which  is
       itself  part  of  the  relevant  overall  code  and  which   guidance
       recognises the discretion outside the Rules and the duty on the  SSHD
       to consider exercising that discretion in the individual case. So far
       as this is concerned, the relevant guidance for the purposes of  this
       case was in the IDIs December "Family Members Under  the  Immigration
       Rules"  (December  2012)  at  paragraph  3.2.7d  headed  "Exceptional
       circumstances".  This states 'Exceptional' does not mean 'unusual' or
       'unique'.  Whilst all cases are to some extent unique,  those  unique
       factors do not generally render them exceptional. For example, a case
       is not exceptional just because the criteria  set  out  in  EX.1.  of
       Appendix FM have been missed by a small margin. Instead, exceptional'
       means circumstances in which refusal would  result  in  unjustifiably
       harsh consequences for  the  individual  such  that  refusal  of  the
       application would not be proportionate. That is likely to be the case
       only very  rarely.  In  determining  whether  there  are  exceptional
       circumstances, the decision maker must consider all relevant factors.
        The guidance describes in mandatory terms a  duty  to  consider  all
       relevant factors in order to make a determination as to whether there
       are exceptional circumstances.  That  follows  from  the  phrase  "in
       determining whether there are exceptional circumstances, the decision
       maker must consider all relevant  factors".  So  far  as  exceptional
       circumstances are concerned, the guidance  makes  clear  that  it  is
       describing  "circumstances  in  which   refusal   would   result   in
       unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  individual  such  that  the
       refusal of the application would not  be  proportionate".  The  court
       held that it follows from the factual premise in this  case  and  the
       analysis of the law that there was   an  error  of  law  because  the
       decision letter and notice contained no indication or reasoning which
       demonstrates that the SSHD had considered the exercise of  discretion
       or the question of  exceptional  circumstances  or  the  question  of
       proportionality.  In order to be  a  lawful  decision  the  SSHD  was
       required to address her mind to the question of  the  discretion  and
       was required in her reasons to demonstrate that she had done  so  and
       what conclusion she had reached.

   10. In MM(Lebanon) and others [2014] EWCA Civ 985 it was said that  where
       the  relevant  group  of  Immigration  Rules,   upon   their   proper
       construction, provide a "complete code" for dealing with  a  person's
       Convention rights in the context of a particular  Rule  or  statutory
       provision, such as in the  case  of  "foreign  criminals",  then  the
       balancing exercise and the way the various factors are  to  be  taken
       into account in an individual case must be done  in  accordance  with
       that code, although references to "exceptional circumstances" in  the
       code will nonetheless entail a proportionality exercise. But  if  the
       relevant group of Immigration Rules is not  such  a  "complete  code"
       then the proportionality test will be more at large, albeit guided by
       the Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law. Aitkens LJ also  said
       at para 128 "...Nagre does not add anything to the debate,  save  for
       the statement that if a particular person is outside the rule then he
       has to demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration  outside  the
       rule, that he has an arguable case that there may be good grounds for
       granting leave to remain outside  the  rules.    I  cannot  see  much
       utility in  imposing  this  further,  intermediary,  test.    If  the
       applicant cannot satisfy the rule, then there either is or  there  is
       not a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to  be  determined  by
       the relevant decision-maker..."

   11. In Meera Muhiadeen Haleemundeen [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558  Lord  Justice
       Beatson confirmed that the FTT Judge who allowed the appeal erred  in
       his approach to Article 8 because he did not consider  the  case  for
       remaining in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  of  his  private  and
       family life against the Secretary of State's policy as  contained  in
       Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  In  order  for
       leave to remain to be  granted  outside  of  the  provisions  of  the
       Immigration Rules, there  needed  to  be  compelling  or  exceptional
       circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the  new  rules  that
       outweighed the public interest in deportation. In  the  instant  case
       the FTT gave no  explanation  of  why  the  case  was  compelling  or
       exceptional. It identified no particular features which justified the
       consideration of proportionality outside the rules.  The  declaration
       that the Immigration Rules worked harshly against  the  Claimant  did
       not suffice. These new provisions in  the  Immigration  Rules  are  a
       central part of the legislative  and  policy  context  in  which  the
       interests of immigration control are balanced against  the  interests
       and rights of people who have come to this country and wish to settle
       in it. Overall  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  as  to  when  an
       interference  with  an  Article  8  right   will   be   regarded   as
       disproportionate is more particularised in the new Rules than it  had
       previously been. The new Rules require stronger bonds with the United
       Kingdom before leave will be given under them. The  features  of  the
       policy contained in the Rules include the requirements of twenty year
       residence, that the applicant's partner be a British citizen  in  the
       United Kingdom, settled here, or here with  leave  as  a  refugee  or
       humanitarian protection, and that where the basis of the  application
       rests on the applicant's children that they have been  residents  for
       seven years.

   12. In this appeal the Judge addressed his mind to the correct legal test
       but found on the facts it had not been  proved  that  there  are  any
       exceptional  circumstances.  In  this  context  'exceptional'   means
       circumstances in which refusal would result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
       consequences for the individual such that refusal of the  application
       would not be proportionate. That is likely to be the case  only  very
       rarely and the Judge was required, when assessing  this  element,  to
       consider all relevant factors, which he did. Other than  the  parties
       wish to remain for their convenience it was not found there  was  any
       evidence to support a finding other than that which the Judge made in
       the circumstances of this case.

   13. As the Judge considered all the material he  was  asked  to  consider
       with the required degree  of  anxious  scrutiny,  and  gave  adequate
       reasons for findings made within a properly conducted proportionality
       assessment, the decision is only susceptible to challenge  on  Public
       Law grounds which, in this case, must be those of irrationality. That
       admits a high threshold which has not been shown to  be  met  on  the
       facts of this case.

   14. There was no evidence of any sufficiently adverse impact as a  result
       of removing the Appellant from the family unit in the United  Kingdom
       and Mr Martin was in some difficulty in arguing what  may  happen  if
       she was removed as the  content  of  the  statements  and  the  other
       supportive evidence is inadequate and has to be considered  in  light
       of the adverse credibility findings.

   15. The six factors relied upon by Mr Martin as evidence  of  exceptional
       circumstances being (i) a partner settled in the United Kingdom, (ii)
       the partners daughters living with him in the United Kingdom who  are
       British citizens, (iii) the children being  7  and  8  years  of  age
       without a full-time maternal influence at this time,  (iv)  the  fact
       the Appellant and her partner have  been  living  together  with  the
       children of approximately 12 months, (v) that  at  the  date  of  the
       hearing before the Judge the Appellant was pregnant and  expecting  a
       child within weeks of the hearing, (vi) the  partner  was  prohibited
       from removing the children from the United Kingdom for  a  period  in
       excess of one month, do  not  prove  exceptional  circumstances.  The
       latter element relates to the standard  endorsement  on  a  Residence
       Order which permits the parent with residence to remove the  children
       for 28 days for  the  purposes  of  a  holiday  but  not  thereafter,
       although there is no evidence of an application  being  made  to  the
       Family Court for leave to remove from the jurisdiction for  a  longer
       period or permanently. As a result this is a bare statement  of  fact
       and nothing more.

   16. In addition to the points in  favour  of  the  applicant  upon  which
       weight could be placed, the Judge also took into account  the  strong
       argument in support of the Secretary of State that the  Appellant  is
       unable to meet the requirements of the Rules and has  been  found  to
       have attempted to subvert immigration control by entry as  a  visitor
       when it appears her intention was otherwise, and possibly  conceiving
       with a child knowing her status was precarious, which is not a  trump
       card in any event.

   17. The conclusion of the Judge to dismiss the appeal for the reasons set
       out in the determination is within the range of  findings  the  Judge
       was entitled to make on the evidence and no legal error  material  to
       that decision has been established.

Decision

   18. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.




  Anonymity.

   19. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005. I make no such order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 30th September 2014
