
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07693/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 9 September 2016                  |On 16 September 2016                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                Amrutben [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, Anglo-Thai Legal
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant challenges the decision of FtT Judge Row to consider  her
    appeal even though she was unable to attend the hearing. The  appellant
    relies on other grounds but in essence her challenge is  whether  there
    was a procedural error that amounts to an error of law.

 2. The appellant had asked the First-tier Tribunal to  adjourn  because  a
    psychiatrist's report  had  been  commissioned  and  was  awaited.  The
    appellant had been examined by a psychiatrist but the  report  had  not
    been received by the date of hearing. Neither  the  appellant  nor  her
    five witnesses attended the hearing. The appellant  indicated  she  was
    too ill to attend.

 3. It is evident from Judge Row's decision and reasons statement  that  he
    considered whether an adjournment should have been  granted.  Mr  Mills
    informed me that his file notes showed the judge  spent  over  an  hour
    discussing and considering the adjournment request.

 4. It is clear from what Judge Row records and from the  time  taken  that
    this was not a situation where the judge only paid passing attention to
    the request. In other words, it is not possible for anyone to  conclude
    that  Judge  Row  was  placing  administrative  efficiency  above   the
    interests of justice.

 5. Therefore, the question for me is whether the decision  itself  not  to
    adjourn was correct in law at the time it was taken.

 6. The first point I must note is that the content of  the  psychiatrist's
    report is irrelevant to my consideration. The fact the  report  is  now
    available adds nothing other than to confirm it had  been  commissioned
    and would be provided. But  those  facts  were  evident  through  other
    documents that were available at the date of hearing.

 7. The second point I mention is that Judge  Row  considered  a  range  of
    relevant factors. He took account of the fact  an  earlier  adjournment
    had been refused because the relevance of a psychiatrist's  report  had
    not been identified and there had been plenty of time to obtain such  a
    report. To this extent the late commissioning of  the  report  and  the
    speculative nature of why a report was needed appeared to be an attempt
    to delay the proceedings. Judge Row made further enquiries about  these
    matters but Mr Khan (who appeared in the FtT) had been unable  to  shed
    any light on them.

 8. Judge Row went on to look at the application to adjourn in the  context
    of the other  evidence  provided  and  concluded  nothing  indicated  a
    sufficient reason to adjourn. The failure  of  the  appellant  and  her
    witnesses was inadequately explained and was therefore  potentially  an
    attempt to force an adjournment.

 9. In these circumstances the decision to refuse  would  appear  to  be  a
    reasonable decision and therefore to be sustainable.

10. But there is a third issue. Judge Row needed  to  know  the  evidential
    basis as to why a psychiatrist's report had been commissioned.  Mr Khan
    was unable to give him a reason and Judge Row relied  on  the  lack  of
    representation and did not examine the evidence provided. It is natural
    for a judge to proceed in this way because it would  be  reasonable  to
    assume that Mr Khan had acted appropriately.

11. In making this assumption it would appear Judge Row overlooked the fact
    the appellant had claimed in the statement she submitted  to  the  Home
    Office with her application that past events meant  she  suffered  from
    and continued to suffer from depression. It was reasonable for evidence
    about the severity of that mental  illness  to  be  obtained.  Mr  Khan
    should have brought that to the judge's attention and did not do so. It
    is clear that Mr Khan failed to act in his client's best  interest  and
    failed to cooperate with the judge.  But those failures  cannot  excuse
    the  judge  from  not  noticing  it  himself,  particularly  since  his
    enquiries as to why a psychiatrist's report was sought were fundamental
    to his decision whether to adjourn.

12. Furthermore, when considering the merits of the appeal  Judge  Row  did
    not record in the section of his decision and  reasons  statement  sub-
    headed "medical issues" that the appellant claimed  she  was  suffering
    from depression. This adds to my concerns that the appellants  evidence
    on this matter had been overlooked.

13. Because of this finding I conclude  an  adjournment  should  have  been
    granted and not to have done so amounts to a  legal  error.  The  error
    means the appeal must be remitted de novo.

14. Before I end I mention that in this case Mr Khan failed his client  and
    the Tribunal. No doubt he will learn  from  such  errors  and  will  in
    future recognise that no one is entitled to an adjournment. I say  that
    because the manner in which he approached the issue in  both  Tribunals
    has more than a whiff of trying to force an adjournment. There  remains
    no reasonable explanation for the failure of the  witnesses  to  attend
    the hearing. If there is a repeat of such behaviour, the  First-tier  a
    Tribunal may exercise its powers more strongly particularly in response
    to any unreasonable conduct.



Decision

The decision and reasons statement of Judge  Row  contains  an  error  on  a
point of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing
before a judge other than Judge Row.

No findings are preserved from the earlier decision and reasons statement.


Signed                                  Date

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal           16 September 2016
