
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07233/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Centre City Tower|Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14th April 2016                   |On 27th April 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                SANSAR SINGH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr M Hoare of H & S Legal Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. In a decision promulgated on 8th  July  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge Shergill allowed Mr Singh's  appeal  against  a  decision  to
         refuse to vary his leave to remain and to remove him  from  the  UK
         pursuant to s47 Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act  2006.  The
         judge decided

             "19. I am satisfied that the appeal should be allowed.

             20.  That is on the basis that the respondent  has  failed  to
             consider the impact on  the  community  with  regards  to  the
             Article 8 assessment; and/or that it  has  proceeded  to  deal
             with two like-cases in a different manner.

             21.  As there is no lawful decision  the  application  remains
             outstanding before the respondent and must now be  decided  in
             accordance with the law and the respondent's own policies.

             22.  The appeal is allowed on the Immigration  Rules  (to  the
             extent that the respondent's refusal is not in accordance with
             the law and so is still outstanding before  the  Secretary  of
             State)"

         In concluding not to make a fee award, the judge says

             "... I note that the application for variation was on personal
             rights matters  which  I  have  not  been  persuaded  by;  the
             community issues which is the reason for my findings were only
             raised relatively recently. The  respondent  was  entitled  to
             reach the conclusion that they did (the fact that they  should
             have  reconsidered  this  after  the  appeal  was  lodged   is
             immaterial as far as the fee award is concerned).

         The SSHD sought  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
         grounds, in essence, that it was arguable firstly that  the  appeal
         was only ever a  'private  life'  appeal,  based  upon  Mr  Singh's
         employment and the judge should have  reached  his  own  conclusion
         upon the Article 8 ground of appeal;  and  secondly  that  reliance
         upon an un-evidenced assertion that another similar case  had  been
         returned to the SSHD for reconsideration thus meant that a  similar
         process should have  been  undertaken  in  this  case  was  plainly
         unlawful.

      2. Mr Singh, date of birth 16 June 1971, arrived  in  the  UK  on  1st
         March 2002 for religious work with Shri Guru Ravidass. He  returned
         to India on 2nd August 2002. He re-entered on 13th May 2003 for the
         same employer until 2nd November 2003 when he  returned  to  India.
         Similar periods of entry occurred between 8th March 2004  and  10th
         August 2004, 12th October 2006 and 21st  March  2007,  18th  August
         2007 and 30th January 2008. On 13th August 2008 he  re-entered  the
         UK and on 10th July 2010 he was granted an extension  of  leave  to
         remain as a minister of Religion Tier 2 until 17th September  2012.
         A further application led to a further grant  of  an  extension  of
         stay until 30th September 2015. That leave was curtailed to  expire
         on 15th  December  2014  subsequent  to  the  Gurdwara  losing  its
         licence. I was informed the licence had not  been  renewed  by  the
         date  of  the  hearing  before  me  although  there  is  continuing
         correspondence between  the  Gurdwara  and  the  SSHD  in  relation
         thereto. Before me Mr Hoare indicated that he had no other detailed
         knowledge of the position and no significant correspondence copies.

      3. Judge Shergill in his decision  found  that  the  respondent  acted
         properly in providing Mr Singh 2 months within  which  to  find  an
         alternate employer; that  it  was  up  to  Mr  Singh  to  make  the
         appropriate arrangements to find another employer;  that  Mr  Singh
         made an in-time application to  the  SSHD  to  vary  his  leave  to
         remain. Judge Shergill found:

             "14.  All  things  being  equal,  in  an  ordinary  employment
             situation I would have been satisfied that the refusal  letter
             was a lawful decision and correctly applied the provisions  of
             276ADE. I am also satisfied that the 'personal' aspect of  any
             Article 8 rights, on the evidence, would have been  adequately
             dealt with (such that the appellant failed). I would not  have
             reached a different decision on the evidence before me if this
             was an  'ordinary  employee'.  I  was  not  persuaded  by  the
             arguments put forward by the appellant of 'personal' Article 8
             rights on the evidence. His status was "precarious" within the
             meaning of section 117B of the 2002 Act.

             15.  However the employer is a  religious  establishment  with
             charitable status. It serves a  not  insignificant  number  of
             people from the  community.  That  has  been  ignored  in  the
             refusal letter despite the respondent being aware of:  a)  the
             nature  of  the  employer;  b)  the  specific  role  that  the
             appellant himself had as of the date of appeal; c) that  there
             was active pursuance by both the appellant and  Gurdwara  with
             the MP; and d) that the employer was  attempting  to  re-apply
             for the licence. I was unclear whether  the  respondent  would
             have been aware of any "duties" that the appellant would  have
             undertaken by virtue of any Tier 2 application; but if it  had
             this information on the original Tier 2  application  then  my
             reasoning is more apposite.

             16.  ... Put simply the respondent should have considered  the
             community aspect of Article 8 rights but  it  may  still  have
             decided that was not sufficient.

             17.  ... I was made  aware  that  a  second  priest  from  the
             Gurdwara had found himself  in  a  similar  position  as  this
             appellant. My understanding was  that  the  other  appellant's
             case  has  been  "returned"  to  the  Home  Office.  That   is
             presumably for  reconsideration  or  after  a  withdrawal.  It
             cannot be right that the two appellants in ostensibly the same
             position have the potential for two differing outcomes."

      4. In support of the proposition articulated  in  [15]  and  [16]  the
         judge was referred to and relied  upon  Zermani  [2015]  EWHC  1226
         (Admin), a decision by HHJ Worster sitting as a High  Court  Judge.
         The first point to make in  this  regard  is  that  Zermani  was  a
         judicial review of a decision by the SSHD challenging  the  claimed
         failure of the SSHD to consider Mr Zermani's application for  leave
         to remain on Article 8 grounds 'outside the Rules'. It  was  not  a
         statutory appeal. Mr Zermani had no statutory  appeal  rights,  his
         application for leave to remain having been made whilst he  was  an
         'overstayer'. The issue before the Administrative Court was whether
         the SSHD's decision adequately considered the matters placed before
         her in the context of an application for leave to remain  on  human
         rights grounds. Reference is made in that decision to the  possible
         desirability of a decision maker considering the contribution  made
         by an individual to society in determining whether the consequences
         of the SSHD's decision were disproportionate. In the  circumstances
         of Mr Zermani's application, the court found that the  SSHD  should
         have  considered  those  matters  in  reaching  her  decision.  Her
         decision was thus  quashed.  That  case  is  a  far  cry  from  the
         situation of Mr Singh. It cannot by any stretch of the  imagination
         be said that Zermani is  authority  for  the  proposition  that  an
         asserted failure (or even an actual failure) on  the  part  of  the
         SSHD to refer to or apparently consider Mr Singh's contribution  to
         the  community  amounted  to  the  making  of  a  decision  not  in
         accordance  with  the  law  such  that  the  SSHD  is  required  to
         reconsider her decision and make a lawful decision. Mr  Singh  made
         an application for leave  to  remain  on  Article  8  human  rights
         grounds. He put  such  evidence  before  the  SSHD  as  he  thought
         relevant, such evidence including community involvement.  The  SSHD
         took a decision with which he did not agree and  he  exercised  his
         statutory right of appeal. It is the  function  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge to reach a decision on the grounds of appeal  before
         him on the basis of the evidence adduced. It is not his function to
         fail to take a decision on  the  very  matters  which  statute  has
         empowered him to make.

      5. In so far as Mr Hoare submitted that there had been  a  failure  on
         the part of the SSHD to  exercise  her  inherent  jurisdiction  and
         consider the application otherwise than under the Rules or  Article
         8 I admit to finding it difficult  to  recognise  that  application
         ever having been made to the SSHD never mind pleaded in the grounds
         of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal or in the Rule 24 response  to
         the grant of permission. The  Rule  24  response  states  that  the
         Executive has failed to exercise a discretion  vested  in  her  and
         thus the proper course is for the Tribunal to require the  decision
         maker to complete her task by reaching a  lawful  decision  on  the
         outstanding application - Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148.  However  nowhere
         is an 'outstanding application' identified. That the  SSHD  has  an
         inherent discretion to make any lawful decision she chooses  cannot
         be disputed but there has to be some sort of identification of  the
         basis upon which she can be expected to exercise this.  Mr  Singh's
         application has been throughout that the refusal to vary his  leave
         and to remove him is a disproportionate  breach  of  the  right  to
         respect for his private life. In support of that  he  asserts  that
         his value to the community is a matter to be  taken  into  account.
         His asserted value to the community is a matter that is an integral
         part of his Article 8 claim. That the  SSHD  did  not  specifically
         refer to it in her decision is not reflective of a failure to  make
         a lawful decision but an asserted failure on her part to take  into
         account all relevant matters in reaching her Article 8  decision  -
         an issue for which a statutory appeal provides the  remedy  and  in
         accordance with his statutory duties the judge is required to reach
         a decision. The judge stated that the SSHD should make  a  decision
         in accordance with her  own  policies.  No  such  policy  has  been
         identified to found such a direction.

      6. The judge referred to a second priest from the Gurdwara having  his
         claim "returned' to the Home Office; this is vague in the  extreme.
         The judge does not identify the second priest, or the basis of that
         priest's claim, or the basis upon which it was "returned".  He  was
         unable  to  identify  whether  it  was  for  "reconsideration"   or
         "withdrawal". He refers to two appellants in "ostensibly" the  same
         position and yet there does not appear to be any basis  upon  which
         he could draw such a conclusion. He was no more than  "made  aware"
         of the situation. In the Rule 24 response Mr Hoare refers  to  what
         appears to be an unreported decision of Singh IA/42721/2014, a copy
         of which is not produced and I have been unable  to  find.  In  any
         event there has been no compliance with the practice direction  for
         the quoting of unreported decisions and Mr Hoare does not appear to
         have taken account of Nasim and others (Article 8) Pakistan  [2014]
         UKUT 25 (IAC). There is plainly no basis upon which the judge could
         legitimately make  a  finding  that  the  respondent  had  made  an
         unlawful decision on such flimsy information as he had before him.

      7. For all these reasons it is plain that the decision of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal is significantly legally flawed. I set it aside to be
         remade.

      8. I gave  Mr  Hoare  a  short  adjournment  to  enable  him  to  take
         instructions and prepare his submissions as to the remaking of  the
         decision.







    Remaking the decision

      9. I heard submissions from Mr Hoare and Mr Diwyncz. I had  before  me
         the documents that were before the  First-tier  Tribunal  including
         the decision the subject of the appeal and  the  reasons  for  that
         decision; witness statements of Mr  Singh  and  Mr  Ram  Heer,  the
         grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the decision of Judge
         Shergill which set out the oral  evidence  heard;  the  application
         which resulted in the adverse decision, a letter dated 13th October
         2014 from the SSHD. The First-tier Tribunal decision is clear  that
         Mr Singh does not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.
         There has been no  challenge  to  that  finding  and  there  is  no
         evidence before me in any event to dislodge that finding.

     10. It is not disputed that, given the length of time Mr Singh has been
         in the UK, he has developed a private life, and  that  his  removal
         from the UK will interfere with his enjoyment of that private life.
         His application was of course for a period of  discretionary  leave
         on human rights grounds to await the grant  of  a  licence  to  the
         Temple. That licence has not yet been  granted  and  there  was  no
         evidence whether it was likely to be granted in the future. He  has
         been in the UK continuously since 13 August 2008, i.e. a period  of
         nearly  8  years,  and  throughout  that  time  he  has  undertaken
         religious work for Shri Guru Ravidass Temple.  He does not state in
         his witness statement what he does for the Temple but does say that
         he has grown accustomed to  life  in  the  UK  and  would  find  it
         difficult to adjust to life in India. He does not  explain  why  he
         would find it difficult to adjust and provides  no  information  on
         what he did in India prior to his arrival in  2008.  He  had  spent
         some periods of time in the UK undertaking religious work  for  the
         same Temple since 2002 but there was no information what he did  or
         where he lived during the time he was in  India  in  between  those
         periods or prior to 2002. There is no indication  why  he  did  not
         seek similar work in another Temple in the UK after  his  leave  to
         remain was curtailed. He refers in his  witness  statement  to  the
         Temple performing an important religious, cultural and social  role
         for around 500 to 1000 regular members. He does not explain what he
         does in that context. There are no witness  statements  from  other
         members of the Temple or friends or acquaintances.

     11. The only other witness statement is from Jasbir Ram Heer who is the
         General Secretary of Shri Guru Ravidass. His statement does not say
         when he took this position up but it does  refer  to  the  previous
         holder of the position dying on 7th  June  2013  in  India.  It  is
         difficult to ascertain from the statement how long he has known  Mr
         Singh but it does say that Mr Singh was a great asset to the Temple
         and the community it serves. He does not specify what Mr Singh does
         but says  that  the  Temple  undertakes  community  work  including
         providing food and shelter to the poor and homeless, counselling on
         alcohol and drug abuse,  outreach  sessions  to  promote  community
         cohesion and mutual interfaith respect. He says that permitting the
         appellant to remain would benefit the wider community in  Leicester
         and beyond.

     12. Whilst it is clear from this that  the  General  Secretary  of  the
         Temple holds Mr Singh  in  high  regard,  there  is  a  paucity  of
         evidence of what he actually does whether for the Temple or for the
         wider community. There is no indication of what  his  daily  duties
         were, whether he had any special responsibilities that  could  only
         be carried out by him and why that was the position.  There  is  no
         indication how or why the Temple and its community would suffer  if
         Mr Singh were not given leave outside the Rules and/or removed from
         the UK. There is no indication of why any  impact  on  the  Temple,
         such as it may be which has not been disclosed, could impact on  Mr
         Singh's private life.

     13. The Temple  appears,  from  Mr  Hoare's  submissions,  to  have  an
         outstanding application for  a  licence  to  employ  two  religious
         workers. A copy of that application  was  not  provided.  There  is
         nothing to indicate that the Temple is of the view that Mr Singh is
         essential to their work and if so why.

     14. As Judge Shergill said in paragraph 14 of his decision (see above),
         on a purely personal basis Mr Singh could not succeed in his  claim
         that  to  refuse  to  vary  his  leave  and  to  remove   him   was
         disproportionate. On the basis of the evidence before me  there  is
         nothing else that could be added to that assessment that would make
         any difference to that conclusion. There is nothing in the evidence
         from the Temple that could even  begin  to  show  that  Mr  Singh's
         contribution to the Temple and the community was to such an  extent
         or of such great value  that  his  employment  there  should  be  a
         significant factor to be taken into account. There is  no  evidence
         other  than  assertion  that  Mr  Singh   would   have   difficulty
         integrating back to his home country. The most  that  he  can  call
         upon to support his claim is the length of time he has been in  the
         UK (which is on a temporary time-limited visa). There is  a  dearth
         of evidence of the extent  of  and  nature  of  his  links  to  the
         community.

     15. In all  these  circumstances  I  dismiss  his  appeal  against  the
         decision of the SSHD.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision such that it is remade by me.

    I remake the decision and allow the SSHD's appeal such that Mr  Singh's
    appeal against the decision of the SSHD to refuse to vary his leave  to
    remain and to remove him from the UK is dismissed.


[pic]

     Date 15th April 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
