


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/07003/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 29 April 2016                     |On 12 May 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                            MOHAMMED MEHDI HASAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chowdhury, of Liberty Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Miles, promulgated on 29 September 2015, which dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born  on  5  January  1981  and  is  a  national  of
Bangladesh.

4.    On 18 June 2014 the Appellant applied for leave to remain  in  the  UK
as a student. On  4  February  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
Appellant's application.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Miles  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 4 April  2016  Judge  Kelly  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "4.    Permission to appeal on  the  first  two  grounds  is  therefore
    refused.

    5.     However, it is correct (as is contended in the third  ground  of
    the application) that the  Tribunal  failed  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant's removal would be in breach of his rights under Article 8 of
    the 1950 Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental
    Freedoms. This is despite the fact that it was raised as  a  ground  in
    the notice of Appeal. Moreover, it is just arguable that  this  failure
    was material to the outcome of the appeal having regard to the decision
    in Nasim & Others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025  (IAC).  Permission  to
    appeal on this ground is therefore granted."

The Hearing

7.    Mr Chowdhury, for the appellant, moved the grounds of appeal and  told
me that this appeal is in clear and narrow focus. He told me that the  Judge
had simply failed to take account of  article  8  ECHR,  even  though  those
grounds of appeal were specifically raised  in  the  notice  of  appeal.  Mr
Chowdhury told me that it was he who appeared  before  the  first  Tier  and
that he personally made submissions on article 8 ECHR grounds to the  Judge.
He relied on the cases of CDS (PBS: "available": Article  8)  Brazil  [2010]
UKUT 00305 (IAC) and Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC),  and
urged me to set the decision aside. He  asked  me  to  remake  the  decision
allowing the appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.

8.    Mr Bramble, for the respondent  adopted  the  terms  of  the  rule  24
response. He accepted that the Judge has not given consideration to  article
8 ECHR, but argued that the appellant could not have succeeded on article  8
ECHR grounds so that, in so far as that omission may be an error, it is  not
a material error of law. He relied  on  the  case  of  Patel  and  Others  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72, and the  case  of
AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC). He reminded me that section  117B
of the 2002 Act must be considered, and argued that, if  the  appellant  has
established private life UK, little weight can  be  given  to  that  private
life because at all times his immigration status  has  been  precarious.  He
told me that the outcome of appeal would have been exactly the same  if  the
Judge had given consideration to article 8 ECHR grounds,  and  urged  me  to
dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

9.    It is clear from the decision that the Judge  considered  this  appeal
under the immigration rules and also considered the question  of  common-law
procedural fairness.  The  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  both  grounds.
Permission to appeal the decision on those two  grounds  was  refused  on  4
April 2016. The Judges findings of fact and conclusions in relation to  both
the immigration rules and common-law procedural fairness stand.

10.   There were two grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier.  The  first  was
fairness. The second was "continuous study and article 8 of  the  ECHR".  Mr
Chowdhury told me that he addressed  the  Judge  fully  on  article  8  ECHR
grounds. It is clear from the decision that no consideration has been  given
at all to the article 8 ECHR grounds argued. That is  clearly  an  error  of
law. I find this is a material error of law because a  competent  ground  of
appeal has not been considered. I consider that this is a material error  of
law because no determination has been given  on  the  crucial  part  of  the
appellant's appeal; the Judge's decision is, therefore, incomplete.

11.   I am invited by Mr Chowdhury to substitute  my  own  decision  on  the
basis of the evidence placed  before  me.  There  is  no  challenge  to  the
Judge's fact finding  exercise,  nor  is  any  appeal  competently  directed
against the decision made by the Judge in relation to the immigration  rules
and procedural fairness. The Judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on
those two grounds stands. I find that I am able to consider  separately  the
remaining appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Findings of Fact

12.   The appellant entered the UK  on  23rd  of  April  2007,  having  been
granted leave to enter as a student on 14 April 2007.  The  respondent  then
granted the appellant further leave to remain as a post study  work  migrant
on 8 July 2009. That leave was valid until 8 July 2011.

13.   The appellant then switched to Tier 4 (general) category,  and  on  26
August 2011 was  granted  leave  to  remain  until  26  November  2014.  The
appellant's Tier 4 sponsor's licence was revoked, so the  appellant  applied
for further leave to  remain  in  the  same  category  in  April  2013.  The
respondent granted leave to remain until 19 June 2014.

14.   The appellant submitted an  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
student on 18 June 2014. That application was not supported by a valid  CAS.
The appellant's (then) representatives submitted the application  explaining
that the appellant had received a conditional  offer  to  study  on  a  ACCA
course at Blake Hall College, and that a valid CAS  would  be  submitted  as
soon as it became available.

15.   On 7 July 2014 the appellant's representative's submitted a  CAS  from
a different college to pursue a different course of  study.  On  4  February
2015 the respondent refused the appellant's application.

16.    In  September  2008,  the  appellant  was  awarded   a   postgraduate
certificate  in  business  Management  from  Oxford  business  college.  The
appellant  successfully  completed  a  level  7  diploma  in   health   care
management in June 2014.

Article 8 ECHR

17.    The  principle  difficulty  for  the  appellant  is  the  paucity  of
information provided. The appellant does not  produce  a  witness  statement
and has not provided oral evidence - neither to the First-tier  nor  to  the
Upper Tier. [5] & [6] of the decision make it clear that the Judge only  had
before him the documents submitted with the notice of appeal, together  with
additional documents produced during the course of submissions.

18.   At paragraphs 12 and 13 of the grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier,
the appellant's article 8 ECHR argument is set out. In the  second  sentence
of paragraph 12 of the grounds of appeal,  his  position  is  summarised  as
follows.

    "The appellant has been living in the UK since April 2007 and  by  this
    time he has established his private life through  his  education,  work
    and integration with the society"

That submission was repeated at paragraph 26 of the  grounds  of  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal.

19.   Even after considering each strand of evidence in this case,  I  still
know very little about the appellant's life in the UK. There is no  evidence
before me, nor was there evidence before the First-tier, of the  appellant's
hobbies and interests, nor of significant  friendships  that  the  appellant
has developed. There is no  evidence  of  contribution  to,  or  integration
into, UK society. There is no evidence addressing  just  how  the  appellant
passes this time in the UK. There is inadequate evidence  of  the  component
parts of  private  life  within  the  meaning  of  article  8  of  the  1950
convention.

20.   This appeal, in reality, is argued on the  basis  that  the  appellant
has been in the UK for nine years (now), and between 2014  and  2016  wanted
to pursue a course of study. In his Submissions,  Mr  Chowdhury  focused  on
the interruption of studies as a breach of the right to respect for  private
life, and relied on the cases of CDS (Brazil) & Nasim.

21.   In Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) it was held  that
the judgments of the Supreme Court in Patel and Others v Secretary of  State
for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 serve to re-focus  attention  on  the
nature and purpose  of  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  and,  in  particular,  to
recognise that Article's limited utility in private life cases that are  far
removed  from  the  protection  of  an  individual's  moral   and   physical
integrity. In Nasim and others (Article 8)  [2014]  UKUT  25  (IAC)  it  was
stated "it is important to emphasise that the appellant in CDS (Brazil)  was
faced with a hypothetical removal,  which  would  have  prevented  her  from
completing the course of study for which she had been given leave".   Whilst
not finding that CDS was no longer good law, it was clear that the  tribunal
considered that in the light of Patel and Others v Secretary  of  State  for
the Home Department  [2013]  UKSC  72  its  application  was  probably  very
limited.

22.   In Patel and others v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2013] UKSC 72 Carnwath LJ said "One may sympathise with  Sedley  LJ's  call
in Pankina for "common sense" in the application of the rules  to  graduates
who have been studying in the  UK  for  some  years  (see  para  47  above).
However, such considerations do not by themselves provide grounds of  appeal
under article 8, which  is  concerned  with  private  or  family  life,  not
education as such. The opportunity for a promising student to  complete  his
course in this country, however  desirable  in  general  terms,  is  not  in
itself a right protected under article 8".

23.   The appellant, despite having two opportunities to  provide  evidence,
has not provided adequate evidence of an established  private  life  in  the
UK. The appellant relies on a simple argument that as he is (or  intends  to
be) a student, then he falls into a  special  category  which  automatically
engages article 8 ECHR. That  argument  has  no  sound  basis  in  law.  The
appellant's argument relies almost entirely on CDS (Brazil).  That  decision
must be read in light of Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT  25  (IAC)
and Patel and Others v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
UKSC 72.

24.   The respondent's decision does not interrupt a  course  of  study.  It
might prevent the appellant from embarking on a course of  study,  but  that
is entirely different. The decision frustrates the  appellant's  hopes,  but
does not snatch away an established pattern of study, nor  does  it  deprive
the appellant of a qualification he  has  invested  in  and  worked  towards
since entering the UK in 2007. The argument presented for the  appellant  is
not supported by the evidence placed before me, nor  is  it  sustainable  in
light of the case-law set out above.

Decision

25.   The decision of the First-tier  tribunal  is  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. I set the decision aside.

26.   I substitute the following decision;

27.   The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules,

28.   The appeal is dismissed on Common law fairness principles,

29.   The appeal is dismissed on article 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed      Date 4 May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

