
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/07469/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 2 February 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               SURINDER SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Livingstone
                    Brown, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 15 August 1977.  He appeals
    against a decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Morrison promulgated on
    3 June 2015.  The case falls to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    on an unusual basis.

 2. The appellant's decision letter dated 10 February 2015 treats the case,
    as requested by the appellant's solicitors, as a reconsideration  under
    the ECHR  of  his  claim  to  remain  as  an  unmarried  partner.   His
    representatives pursued the case in the First-tier Tribunal as one  not
    falling within the Immigration Rules.  His grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal are on the same basis.  Only at the stage of the hearing
    in the Upper Tribunal did Mr Caskie seek to withdraw any concession  to
    that effect.  Mrs O'Brien agreed that the  case  had  been  incorrectly
    approached on both sides.   The  respondent's  decision-maker  and  the
    Presenting Officer in the First-tier Tribunal (among others) failed  to
    appreciate that the case did qualify for consideration under the Rules,
    and in particular under paragraph EX1.

 3. For the record, Mr Caskie drew attention to Sison IJR [2016] UKUT 00033
    as authority for the proposition that the situation of  the  two  adult
    children of the appellant's partner, if not amounting to  family  life,
    is relevant on the basis of joint private life.  He  also  stated  that
    there are at least two Upper Tribunal cases to the effect that where  a
    partner makes it plain that he or she simply will  not  leave  the  UK,
    that is a sufficient basis on which  to  allow  an  appeal.   On  those
    limited submissions, and as those points do not now fall for  decision,
    I express no opinion.

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal errs  in  law  (through  little
    fault of the judge) for the reasons sketched  out  above.   It  is  set
    aside.  No findings are to stand.  Under  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
    2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2, and as conceded, it is appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  member(s)  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case are  not  to  include
    Judge Morrison.

 5. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           5 February 2016


