
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07268/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 January 2017                   |On 02 February 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Adeel Aslam
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the claimant: In person, not legally represented
For the appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Broe promulgated 5.8.15,  allowing  the  claimant's
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State,  dated  11.2.15,
    to cancel his continuing leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4  Student
    Migrant, and to refuse entry to the UK.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 15.7.15.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    13.1.16. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb granted permission  to  appeal  on
    29.1.16.

 4. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pedro  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    18.5.16.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on 26.1.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 6. For the reasons summarised below I found no material error  of  law  in
    the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to require the
    decision of Judge Broe to be set aside.

 7. The claimant's application was refused pursuant to paragraph 320(7B) of
    the Immigration Rules because in an application resulting in the  grant
    of leave on 5.12.13, he submitted a TOEIC English language certificate.
    Entry clearance was refused on the basis that the certificate had  been
    fraudulently obtained by a proxy test taker and thus he used  deception
    in order to obtain leave.

 8. As in many other similar  cases,  ETS  concluded  that  the  claimant's
    certificate had been fraudulently obtained using a  proxy  test  taker.
    Reliance was made on the now familiar generic evidence.

 9. Judge Broe dealt with the case on the  papers  and  noted  the  generic
    statements in relation to voice recognition software at  [6],  [9]  and
    [10] of the decision, but  found  that  the  evidence  adduced  by  the
    Secretary of State made no reference at all to the claimant.

10. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge's  reasoning  for  allowing
    the appeal were entirely inadequate. Reliance was placed on the generic
    evidence, asserting that it  detailed  "extensively  the  investigation
    undertaken by ETS on this appellant's case ..."  It  is  also  asserted
    that paragraph 2 of the  Immigration  Officer's  explanatory  statement
    reveals that checks  with  ETS  confirmed  that  the  English  language
    certificate submitted by the appellant was fraudulently obtained."

11. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Grubb considered that the Judge
    "does not appear to take into account the IO's evidence in the decision
    notice and explanatory report concerning the ETS response in respect of
    the appellant as being such a person. In  failing  to  take  that  into
    account, the Judge arguably erred in law in finding that the respondent
    had not discharged the burden of proof upon her."

12. The recent decision of SM and Qadir (ETS - evidence - Burden of  Proof)
    [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC), promulgated on 21.4.16, held  that  the  generic
    evidence in combination with the evidence particular to the  appellants
    in that case, sufficed to discharge the evidential  burden  of  proving
    dishonesty, in which case the burden switches to the appellants, though
    the legal burden remains on the Secretary of State.

13. However, it is clear, and Mr Mills accepts, that there was no  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal specific to this  appellant.  The  usual
    computer printout linking the claimant's identity to the  test  centre,
    date of  test,  and  impugned  certificate,  was  not  present  in  the
    Secretary of State's bundle.

14. In the circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  quite  correct
    to find that none of the evidence related directly to this claimant. It
    follows that the evidence could not and did not cross the threshold  of
    the evidential burden on the Secretary of  State  and  thus  the  legal
    burden could not be discharged.

15. Judge Broe was entirely correct to allow the appeal.  For  the  reasons
    outlined above, the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal must fail.

Conclusion:

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such as to require decision to
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains allowed.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee has been paid by the claimant for these proceedings.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated
