
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07918/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 3rd March 2014                             |on 29th May 2014             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ZEESHAN ALI KHAN
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mrs Rackstraw - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: Ms McCrae instructed by Chauhan Solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
        of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shamash  promulgated  following  a
        hearing at Taylor House on  19th  July  2013  in  which  the  Judge
        allowed Mr Khans appeal under Article 8 ECHR.


     2. Mr Khan, a citizen of Pakistan, was born on 21st November 1985. His
        immigration history shows he entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  4th
        January 2002 lawfully with a student visa valid until 31st  January
        2003. He was subsequently granted three further periods of leave as
        a student valid until 31st January 2010. On 30th  January  2010  he
        submitted an application for further leave under the Tier 1  Highly
        Skilled Post Study route which was refused on 4th March  2010.   He
        appealed the decision on  26th  March  2010  but  left  the  United
        Kingdom on 5th July 2010. Accordingly his  appeal  will  have  been
        abandoned by virtue of section 104 (4) of the  2002  Act,  although
        the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  suggests  it  was  subsequently
        dismissed on 7th July 2010.  Mr Khan re-entered the United  Kingdom
        on 6th October 2010 with a Tier 1  visa  valid  until  11th  August
        2012.  On 9th August 2012 he applied for indefinite leave to remain
        on the basis of 10 years  continuous  lawful  residence  which  was
        refused by the Secretary of State who noted  from  the  immigration
        stamps in his passport and the schedule  of  absences  provided  in
        section 6.2 of the application form, that he had  a  total  of  602
        days or 20 months absence  from  the  United  Kingdom  between  4th
        January 2002 and 4th January 2012, and therefore could not meet the
        requirements of paragraph 276A (a)(v), as he was considered to have
        broken his period of continuous residence in the United Kingdom.


     3. The Secretary of State therefore refused  the  application  on  the
        basis of which Mr  Khan  applied  but  considered  his  family  and
        private life by reference to the Immigration Rules  in  force  from
        9th July 2012.  In relation to his  private  life  under  paragraph
        276ADE but as he had not submitted an  appropriate  application  on
        the correct specified form to allow consideration under Appendix FM
        in relation to any family life that he claims exists, this was  not
        considered.


     4. The Judge notes in paragraph 4 of the  determination  that  at  the
        beginning of the hearing, counsel for Mr Khan conceded that he  did
        not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  it  was
        accepted, as set out in the refusal letter, that he  did  not  have
        continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom for the requisite
        10 year period.


     5. The Judge notes the evidence and some legal issues  before  setting
        out her findings from paragraph 34 onwards. The Judge  specifically
        notes that in addition to it being conceded that Mr Khan was unable
        to meet the requirements of 276A he was also  unable  to  meet  the
        requirements of the Immigration Rules or Appendix FM [24].


     6. Even though it was accepted Mr Khan could  not  succeed  under  the
        Rules the Judge appears to have thought it appropriate  to  proceed
        to undertake a freestanding Article 8 assessment  by  reference  to
        the Razgar criteria, without more [30 and 34]. The  Judges  factual
        findings can be summarised as follows:


     i.   Mr Khan has family in Pakistan who he has visited regularly. He is
              27 years of age and the appeal  must  be  based  primarily  on
   private             life grounds although he clearly has family life both
   in the UK and           Pakistan [35].


     ii.  Returning Mr Khan to Pakistan will be  an  interference  with  his
          private and family life. It will be in accordance  with  the  law.
   The            only issue is whether the decision is proportionate [36].


     iii. The starting point must be that the Rules are there to  provide  a
   mark           for those who have lived legally in the UK for  10  years.
   People                  coming to study here on a temporary basis  should
   not build up any             expectation of a right to remain and further
   their ties and                        relationships in the United Kingdom
   [37].


     iv.  There is a question regarding the weight to  be  attached  to  the
   fact           Mr Khan arrived here aged 16 years of age  and  has  lived
   with his            uncle during what was clearly a difficult adolescence
   in a situation               where he was being  handed  to  a  different
   family member [38].


     v.   There is a question whether the fact Mr Khan came to the UK at  16
          and moved into a house has affected him so intensely as  Dr  Anjum
     stated in his evidence and that when he returned to  Pakistan  he  felt
     alienated and unable to fit in. It is accepted  Mr  Khan  can  use  his
     qualifications in Pakistan although the system there is  different.  He
   is             highly qualified and has much to contribute. The weight to
   be                  attached to the public interest in removal is  not  a
   fixed and               immutable quality, it varies and in this case  Mr
   Khan's own ability to            integrate into  his  community  and  the
   education and lifestyle that he           has had in the  United  Kingdom
   are very significant factors.  The fact            Mr Khan is westernised
   and highly qualified is a relevant factor too               [40].


     vi.  Although Mr Khan has been in the United Kingdom since the  age  of
     16, in 2001, the schedules shows that he returned  to  see  his  family
     every summer holiday remaining  in  Pakistan  for  periods  of  between
   five and six weeks [41].


     vii. The length of the visits became shorter bar  two  longer  extended
     periods, the first when he completed his degree and  sought  to  return
     to Pakistan to consider settling down, when  he  claims  he  could  not
     settle, and the second  when  he  returned  to  Pakistan  in  order  to
     obtain a visa to re-enter as a post study worker, when  he  was  absent
     for 102 days. He claims he took advice from the legal  adviser  at  the
     university and believed that he had to return. Had it not been for this
              period he would fall within the 18 months allowed  as  overall
   absence              and  for  this  reason  the   appeal   is   allowed.
   Considerable weight is           attached to the fact Mr Khan was  forced
   to return in order to abide           by the Immigration  Rules.  He  did
   what was required of him and               returned  immediately  to  the
   United Kingdom [42].


     viii.    Mr Khan was not absent from the United Kingdom voluntarily for
   an             extended period of time and he will find it very difficult
   to readapt to           life in Pakistan.  His right  to  a  private  and
   family life is far beyond             that of a formal  student  and  the
   appeal is allowed [43].



Error of law finding


     7. The Secretary of State challenges the determination  on  the  basis
        the Judge failed to give adequate reasons for material  matters  in
        allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds when Mr Khan was unable to
        demonstrate that he had spent 10 years continually in the UK and as
        such did not meet the requirements of the Rules.


     8. The grounds refer to the case of Miah in which it was  found  there
        was no near miss principle applicable to the  Rules  and  that  the
        requirement for immigration control is not weakened by  the  degree
        of non-compliance with the Rules.


     9. It is also asserted that Mr Khan is  currently  in  employment  and
        that he could return to Pakistan to  continue  his  employment  and
        that inadequate reasons have been given  for  finding  his  removal
        will be disproportionate.


    10. There is merit  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds.   It  was
        conceded that Mr Khan is  unable  to  succeed  under  the  relevant
        immigration rule relating to 10  years  lawful  residence  as,  not
        withstanding his having appealed against the  refusal  decision  on
        this ground, he chose to voluntarily leave the United  Kingdom  and
        abandon his appeal and did not re-enter for a further 102 days.  In
        paragraph 42 of the determination the Judge seems to  believe  that
        there was no formal requirement for him to do so and  that  had  he
        not done so he  may  have  been  able  to  succeed  on  appeal  and
        therefore allows this appeal. Such an approach is arguably  without
        legal merit. Mr Khan had the opportunity to remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom to pursue his appeal yet he chose not to. He was not forced
        to leave the UK and  did  so  voluntarily.  He  did  not  have  the
        required period of lawful leave and it was conceded  he  could  not
        succeed on this basis.  The Judge appears to have  found  that  the
        fact he could have remained somehow  adds  greater  weight  to  his
        private life. This must be a finding on a 'near miss' basis whereas
        the Supreme Court in Patel and others v Secretary of State for  the
        Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 has now effectively held that  there
        is no near miss argument as such albeit that all facts have  to  be
        taken into account and considered in context.


    11. The family and private  life  elements  of  the  claim  had  to  be
        considered in accordance with the guidance to be found in the cases
        of MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ  1192,  the  High  Court  in  Nagre
        [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and by the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan [2013]
        UKUT 640, as confirmed by Shahzad (Art 8:  legitimate  aim)  [2014]
        UKUT 00085 (IAC).  These judgments have  made  it  clear  that  the
        question of proportionality must be looked at in the context of the
             Immigration Rules  with  no  need  to  go  on  to  a  specific
        assessment under Article 8 if it is clear from the facts that there
        are no particular compelling or exceptional circumstances requiring
        that course to be  taken. This approach has been further  confirmed
        by the Court of Appeal in the more recent case  of  Haleemundeen  v
        SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558.


    12. The Judge clearly failed to consider the merits of the case in this
        way  despite  acknowledging  that  Mr  Khan  could  not  meet   the
        requirements of the relevant rules.  She  merely  launched  into  a
        freestanding Article 8 ECHR assessment. I find  this  to  be  legal
        error. Even if the Judge was entitled to proceed in this way it  is
        incumbent upon her, when considering proportionality, to ensure she
        undertakes a properly reasoned proportionality  balancing  exercise
        by examining both  parties'  cases  and  making  adequate  findings
        supporting the eventual findings. In this case there appears to  be
        little examination of the Secretary of States case  and  inadequate
        reasoning  given  for  how  the  legitimate  aim  relied  upon   is
        overridden on the evidence. In MF (Nigeria)  the  Court  of  Appeal
        make the comment that the results of a  proportionality  assessment
        undertaken within the Rules or outside  the  Rules  should  be  the
        same, but if one of those assessments has not  been  undertaken  it
        cannot be said that this  is  a  result  that  has  been  achieved,
        especially as in this case under the Rules Mr Khan  appears  to  be
        unable to succeed whereas the Judge found under Article 8  ECHR  he
        was entitled to succeed.   When  combined  with  the  other  issues
        referred to in the grounds and above I find the Judge  has  made  a
        legal error material to her decision to allow the appeal.


    13. I set the determination aside although the  findings  regarding  Mr
        Khan's immigration history, his academic achievements, work record,
        family and domestic ties to the UK and Pakistan shall be  preserved
        findings.


Discussion



    14. The section 47 direction was withdrawn  by  Mrs  Rackstraw  at  the
        start of the hearing to re-make the decision.


    15. It was accepted that  Mr  Khan  is  unable  to  succeed  under  the
        Immigration Rules relating to family and private life in the United
        Kingdom.  Miss McCrae was therefore asked to address  the  Tribunal
        regarding the basis on which she asserts Article  8  can/should  be
        assessed outside the Rules in light of  the  guidance  provided  in
        Gulshan and other cases making it clear there was no need to go  on
        to a specific assessment under Article 8 if it is  clear  from  the
        facts that there are  no  particularly  compelling  or  exceptional
        circumstances requiring that course to be taken.


    16. It was submitted that the exceptional circumstances present in this
        appeal relate to the impact upon Mr Khan of his having to return to
        Pakistan which include loss of opportunity for  him,  loss  to  the
        United  Kingdom  economy  of  what  he  is  able   to   contribute,
        difficulties in readjusting if he had  to  live  in  Pakistan,  and
        difficulties regarding his obtaining employment in Pakistan.


    17. Article 8 does not guarantee an individual the right to live  where
        they choose or employment and the fact the Secretary of  State  has
        refused the application and seeks to  remove  Mr  Khan  is  clearly
        indicative of the fact that any positive contribution he is able to
        make to  the  United  Kingdom  economy  is  not  considered  to  be
        determinative. It was also submitted the fact he came to the United
        Kingdom at 16  as  a  student,  due  to  his  emotional  state  and
        difficulties with family at that time, makes  this  case  different
        from the normal cases and means  the  issue  should  be  considered
        outside the Immigration Rules. It was also  submitted  that  having
        done so, where the issue is one of  proportionality,  the  decision
        must be found to be disproportionate.


    18. I accept that Mr Khan came to the United Kingdom and into the  care
        of his uncle as a result of family and emotional problems  when  he
        was an adolescent 16 year old, but it  is  clear  that  he  is  now
        recovered, that he is successful, and that he is an adult. I accept
        that there may be advantages to him  in  remaining  in  the  United
        Kingdom but it is clear that he has preserved ties to  Pakistan  as
        evidenced by the frequency and duration of visits and that although
        he may find it difficult to readjust to a country that he does  not
        himself view as one that  he  wishes  to  remain  in,  he  has  not
        established on the evidence that any problems or difficulties  that
        may be encountered are such as to make  the  Secretary  of  State's
        decision disproportionate or one that will result  in  particularly
        compelling or exceptional circumstances. There is  no  evidence  of
        any  psychological/emotional/behavioural  relapses  if  he  has  to
        return and re-establish himself such  as  to  demonstrate  that  it
        would be disproportionate, or that such  circumstances  require  an
        Article 8 ECHR assessment to  be  undertaken.   The  fact  Mr  Khan
        wishes to remain and the fact he may want  a  better  life  in  the
        United Kingdom is not a reason for allowing him to remain.


    19. I accept Mr Khan was in the UK lawfully and did return to  Pakistan
        and therefore honour the requirements of the immigration laws,  for
        which he is given due credit, but he is  not  entitled  to  greater
        reward for doing what the law requires him to do.


    20. I also accept that Mr Khan has had a great  deal  of  support  from
        family members in the United Kingdom and credit must also be  given
        to them for assisting this young man to re-establish itself and  to
        move on with his life, but it has not been shown  on  the  evidence
        that there is any continuing need for such support and nor  has  it
        been established that if he returns to Pakistan he will not be able
        to maintain contact with  Dr  Anjum  by  mutual  visits,  telephone
        calls, or other means of communication.


    21. In conclusion, I find that Mr Khan cannot satisfy any provision  of
        the Immigration Rules relating to duration of time  in  the  United
        Kingdom, family or private life. I find he  is  unable  to  succeed
        under any near miss argument as  there  is  no  such  principle  in
        English law. I find he has failed to discharge the burden of  proof
        upon him to the required  standard  to  show  that  there  are  any
        particular  compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances  that  would
        require an assessment under Article 8 outside the Rules but even if
        there were, based upon the submissions made,  evidence  considered,
        and preserved findings, the Secretary of State  will  be  found  to
        have discharged the burden  of  proof  upon  her  to  the  required
        standard to show that the decision is proportionate.


Decision

    22. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    23. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as it is not warranted on the
        facts.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 28th May 2014












