
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08936/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 6 November 2013                            |On 27 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                             Mr Simranjit Singh

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India born on 1 February 1993.   He  came
    to the UK on 6 October 2006 with a valid leave to enter until 28  April
    2008 as a dependant of Mr Hadial Singh who had  leave  as  Minister  of
    Religion.  On 1 May 2008 the appellant along  with  his  mother  (Kanta
    Kanta) and sister (Prabhjot  Kaur),  who  had  also  entered  with  the
    appellant on 6 October 2006, submitted applications  as  dependants  of
    Hadial Singh.  Their respective applications were refused on the  basis
    that the sponsor's earlier leave was curtailed on 25 January 2008.   On
    10 February 2012 the appellant's mother and  sister  were  granted  one
    year discretionary leave to remain to allow the appellant's  sister  to
    complete her GCSE examinations.

2.   The appellant's application was  refused  on  10  February  2012.   The
    appellant was excluded from the grant of discretionary leave because he
    was over 18 and deemed not to be a dependant on his mother  unlike  his
    sister.  His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Maxwell  who
    allowed the appeal on the ground that the Appellant  was  part  of  the
    family unit and ought to be allowed to  remain  in  the  UK  until  his
    sister's leave expired.  He was therefore also granted leave to  remain
    in line with his mother and sister.

3.   When the grants of discretionary  leave  expired,  the  appellant,  his
    sister and mother applied for further leave together but  were  refused
    at different times.  The appellant was refused on 6  March  2013.   His
    mother and sister were refused on 27 June 2013.

4.   The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Seelhoff
    on 29 July 2013, who dismissed  the  appeal  which  was  brought  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  It is against this judge's  decision  that  the
    appellant has been granted permission to appeal.

5.   The grounds of  application  raised  two  issues.   The  first  was  in
    relation to the request made by the appellant's representative below to
    adjourn the hearing in order to link the appellant's appeal with  those
    of his mother and sister.  Prior requests had been refused on paper due
    to a lack of information.   The  adjournment  request  was  again  made
    before the judge, who said he would normally consider it appropriate to
    adjourn however he had concerns on the facts of the case.

6.   The judge said as follows:

         "7.  These concerns were highlighted when Counsel submitted that if
             I adjourned the case to be linked to those of the  appellant's
             family then the current listing patterns by the time the cases
             come to be heard the appellant's sister  will  have  completed
             seven years in the UK and will be eligible for leave under the
             Immigration Rules relating to private life.  I indicated  that
             this seemed to me to be an attempt to abuse the current delays
             and backlog in the system to give the various  applications  a
             strength they did not have at the date of the  application  or
             of the hearing before me.  In these  circumstances  I  refused
             the adjournment request."




7.   Following his findings on the appellant's appeal,  the  judge  returned
    to the application to adjourn towards the end of his determination.  He
    said at paragraph 27 that  he  was  troubled  by  the  application  and
    particularly by the argument advanced by Counsel to the effect that  if
    he had adjourned the appeal to be linked with that of  the  appellant's
    sister and mother, the sister  would  accrue  seven  years  before  the
    appeal was determined.  The judge found that the  application  and  the
    submissions made in support of it amounted to an abuse of  process  and
    as such was a breach of Counsel and instructing solicitors'  duties  to
    the court as set out under their respective codes of conduct.  While he
    noted that they have a duty to act in the  best  interests  of  clients
    that duty is secondary to their duty to the court.  The judge relied on
    a decision by Sir John Thomas who, in B & Another,  R  (on  application
    of) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  &  Another  (Rev  1)
    [2012] EWHC 3770, endorsed Lord Denning's assessment of these duties.

8.   Following arguments by the parties, we found that the  judge  erred  in
    law.  We give our reasons why.

9.   The judge did not specify the respective codes of  conduct  which  were
    breached by the appellant's legal representative. In the case relied on
    by the judge, Lord Denning had said that the duty of the  Advocate  "is
    the cause of truth and justice.  He must not consciously  misstate  the
    facts.  He must not knowingly conceal the truth".  The  judge  did  not
    specify if this was the code of conduct that had been breached.  Having
    acknowledged that those representing the appellant  are  competent,  he
    merely said that he encouraged them to  consider  their  approach  more
    carefully in the future.  Their approach was not tantamount to a breach
    of conduct.  In fact the representative was setting out the appellant's
    case in detail in addition to which the judge was  himself  aware  that
    the appeals of the appellant's sister and mother were in the process of
    being listed.

10.  We also find that the judge failed properly  to  consider  the  reasons
    for the adjournment choosing instead to concentrate on his concern that
    somehow this was an attempt to abuse the court process  to  enable  the
    appellant's sister to gain a material advantage.

11.  The judge then went on to criticise the appellant's choice not to  call
    his mother to give evidence, stating that any evidence relevant to  the
    applications of the appellant's mother  and  sister  could  and  indeed
    should have been put before him when he heard the appeal.  We find that
    an unreasonable criticism.  The appeals of the appellant's  sister  and
    mother were not before the judge.  Their appeals were to be heard on  a
    different date.  The appellant was not required to call his  mother  to
    give evidence on his behalf.   The  judge  went  beyond  his  remit  in
    seeking to hear evidence from the mother so  that  he  could  determine
    their appeals in advance of their hearing date.  That  was  clearly  an
    error of law.

12.  We find on the  second  ground  that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's appeal under Article  8  was  fundamentally  flawed  as  it
    proceeded on the basis that the appellant, his sister and mother should
    never have applied for extensions and were restricted to the period  of
    leave already granted.   His finding that the  whole  family  would  be
    leaving together was irrational and perverse since the appeals  of  the
    mother and sister had yet to be determined.

13.  We find for the above reasons that the judge's decision  cannot  stand.
    We set it aside.  We order that the appeal of the appellant be  reheard
    with the appeals of his mother and sister which  are  scheduled  to  be
    heard on 24 February 2014 at Taylor House.

14.  None of the judge's findings shall stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun





