
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA088772015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2016                             |On 23 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr LEON COMPTON MINGO

                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:       Ms I Hussain of Counsel instructed by IHC UK
Legal


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio dated 29 December 2015.   The
    appeal relates  to  a  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  A  J  Parker
    promulgated on 28 August 2015. The Judge had allowed the  appeal  based
    on Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. The  Secretary
    of State appealed but to ease following this decision I shall  continue
    to refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.    The background to the appeal was that the Appellant had  been  granted
    various extensions to his  original  leave  to  enter,  including  most
    recently on 9th November 2011 when he had  been  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain based on his marriage to Rochalla  Mingo.   The  couple
    have had a child born to them in January 2011. Both the child  and  Mrs
    Mingo are British. Mrs Mingo had to leave the family home in  Stoke-on-
    Trent to go to live in Grimsby to look after  three  children  she  has
    from a previous relationship.

3.    The  Judge  said  that  he  had  not  been  provided  with  sufficient
    information to come to a conclusion in respect of whether  or  not  the
    financial requirements were met so he  concluded  that  the  provisions
    were not met.

4.    The Judge considered relevant case law including the  Supreme  Court's
    decision in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2011] UKSC 4, Azmi-Moayed and others  (decisions  affecting  children:
    onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) and EV (Philippines) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

5.    At the hearing before me Mr Harrison was brief and said he  relied  on
    the grounds of appeal.

6.    Those grounds contended that there was a material misdirection in  law
    because the Judge had concluded that the Immigration Rules could not be
    met but he had not considered whether there were compelling reasons for
    consideration of the case outside of the Rules. The grounds also  refer
    to the Upper Tribunal's decision in R (on the application  of)  Chen  v
    Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  (Appendix  FM-Chikwamba-
    temporary separation-proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189.

7.    It was submitted in the grounds that the Judge had failed  to  conduct
    a proper balancing exercise by weighing the factors in  favour  of  the
    public interest against the factors in favour of the Appellant.

8.    Ms Hussain in her submissions said that she  relied  on  the  Rule  24
    Reply. The Judge had noted  the  subsisting  relationship.  The  public
    interest was considered. Paragraphs 15 and  17  showed  why  the  Rules
    could not be met. Those  were  natural  normal  steps  which  had  been
    undertaken.  I then heard further submissions from  Mr  Harrison.  Both
    parties said that if I had found that there was an error of law then it
    was appropriate for  the  matter  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

9.     I had reserved my decision.

10.   In my judgment there is a material error of  law.  It  is  not  easily
    identifiable with clarity  which  aspects  the  Judge  found  were  the
    compelling  reasons  to  enable  him  to  conclude  that  this  was  an
    appropriate case to consider outside of the Immigration Rules  and  nor
    is it easy to decipher precisely what the compelling  reasons  were.  I
    have  sought  to  use  the  cumulative  references  from  the   various
    paragraphs from within the Judge's decision, but I conclude that  there
    is indeed a gap in the findings. It may well be that the Judge  had  in
    mind the great weight that  needed  to  be  given  to  the  Appellant's
    British wife who had to remain in the United  Kingdom  because  of  her
    other children. It is also likely that the  Judge  also  had  mind  the
    duties which arise by virtue of  section  55  Borders  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 in respect of the  Appellant's  British  son,  but
    there was also great weight to  be  attached  to  the  public  interest
    factors too. If, as the Judge noted, the  Immigration  Rules  were  not
    met, then that too was a factor which attracted great  weight  in  that
    balancing exercise.

11.    Ultimately  I  conclude  that  the  findings   of   the   Judge   are
    insufficient. There has to be a rehearing.  That  rehearing  will  take
    place at the First-tier Tribunal. None of the  Judge's  findings  shall
    stand.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal  Judge  involved  the  making  of  a
material error of law.

The Appellant's  appeal  is  remitted  to  be  reheard  at  the  First  Tier
Tribunal.

An anonymity direction is not made.





Signed                                       Date: 11 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


