
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/08758/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 11 November 2014                           |On 12th Nov 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 ASHRAF ALI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co.,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 1 September  1983.   He
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal against a  determination  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J  C  Grant-Hutchison,  promulgated  on  18  July  2012,
    dismissing his appeal which had been argued  under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR, outwith the Immigration Rules, on the basis of his son's  medical
    condition and the treatment available to  the  child  in  the  UK.   By
    determination promulgated on 6 June 2013 Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Wood TD dismissed the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. For reasons explained in her opinion dated 15 April 2014, Lady Clark of
    Carlton granted permission to appeal to  the  Court  of  Session.   The
    judge thought that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  not  come  to  a
    conclusion  about  the  best  interests  of  the  child  as  a  primary
    consideration in a structured way and that there were decisions  to  be
    made about the weight to be given  to  the  various  circumstances  and
    about whether the child's best interests lie in the UK or not.

 3. In terms of a joint minute, a copy of which  is  now  on  the  Tribunal
    file, parties agreed that neither the First-tier Tribunal nor the Upper
    Tribunal had given reasons making plain that the best interests of  the
    child had been recorded primacy; that the appeal to the court should be
    allowed; that the Upper Tribunal determination of 6 June 2013 should be
    set aside; and that the case should be remitted back "for consideration
    anew by a differently constituted Tribunal".  Effect was given to  this
    by interlocutor of the Inner House dated 16 September 2014.

 4. On 11 November 2014 parties concurred that the appropriate  course  was
    for the Upper Tribunal to hold that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    law; to set aside its determination promulgated on  18  July  2012;  to
    order that none of its  findings  were  to  stand;  and  under  section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement  7.2  to  remit  the
    case to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  member(s)  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case are not to  include  Judge  J  C
    Grant-Hutchison.

 5. While relisting is  a  matter  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  parties
    suggested that there should be a case management review  on  Monday  12
    January 2015 and a full hearing on Monday 26 January 2015, or the  next
    available dates thereafter.  At the CMR hearing  parties  will  clarify
    the evidence to be canvassed, the likely  extent  of  cross-examination
    (if any), the extent to which the facts can be agreed, and  whether  an
    interpreter is needed.  Compliance with Practice Directions  7  and  8,
    including outline submissions in writing, and  proper  presentation  of
    documents, is required.

 6. No anonymity order has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            12 November 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




