
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08955/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 February 2016                            |On 12 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Shahnaz Tanveer
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahmed, Equity Law Chambers Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent Shahnaz Tanveer, was born on 5 February 1973  and  is  a
    female citizen of Pakistan.   She  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor on 13 June 2013.  On 12 December 2013 she applied  for  further
    leave to remain.  On 29 January 2014, her application was  refused  and
    the respondent appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  late  Judge
    Upson) which, in a determination promulgated on 17 June 2014  dismissed
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules but allowed it on Article 8 ECHR
    grounds.  The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  I shall  hereafter  refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
    respondent and the  respondent  as  the  appellant  (as  they  appeared
    respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. I find that the appeal succeeds and that the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside.  I have reached  that  decision  for  the
    following reasons.  Judge Upson worked his  way  through  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules and found that the appellant  could  not  meet  their
    requirements [31].  Inter alia, the judge was not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant could accommodate and maintain herself  without  recourse  to
    public funds [19].  The appellant had entered as a  visitor  and  could
    not avail herself of the provisions of EX1.   She  did  not  have  sole
    responsibility for her two children  who  are  British  citizens  [16].
    Having dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules, the judge went
    on to consider Article 8.  At [23], he stated that,

         In this case the appellant is the mother of two young children  who
         are British citizens.  In that respect I also have  had  regard  to
         Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  I
         am satisfied the best interests of the children have to  take  some
         prominence in this case [sic].

    Then, somewhat puzzlingly, the judge wrote,

         I find therefore [the children's] existence provides arguably  good
         grounds  for  granting  leave  to   remain   outside   the   Rules.
         Additionally, I am satisfied that their presence in the UK  in  the
         circumstances of this case amounts to a compelling circumstance not
         sufficiently recognised under the Rules.

 3. It would appear that the first part of the passage which I have  quoted
    above relates to the judge's  application  of  Gulshan  (Article  8-new
    rules-correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) , an authority  to  which
    he had referred at [22].  However, the existence of the  children  fell
    to be considered under the Immigration Rules as did their "presence  in
    the UK", the very circumstance  which  the  judge  identifies  as  "not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules".  It  is  not  clear  what  he
    means by that statement.  Indeed, the existence of the children in  the
    United Kingdom had been a circumstance recognised under the Immigration
    Rules as the judge himself acknowledged in his  earlier  analysis.   He
    does not  explain  why  he  considers  that  their  presence  was  "not
    sufficiently recognised".  The obvious implication is  that  the  judge
    believed that he was dealing with a "near miss" case  which  failed  to
    satisfy the Immigration Rules but, which he believed for reasons  which
    are unclear, should be allowed under Article 8.   At  [29],  the  judge
    simply observes that the interference with the lives  of  the  children
    would be disproportionate.  He writes that, "I am  satisfied  that  the
    best interests of the children dictates that the  appellant  remains  a
    constant and regular feature of their lives".  Again, the  judge  gives
    no proper reasoning to support that statement.

 4. Having regard to these observations, I find that the judge has erred in
    law such that this determination falls to be set aside.  There may need
    to be a further updating fact-finding and for that reason, I return the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision following a hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  17  June
2014 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall  stand.   The  appeal
is returned to the First-tier Tribunal  for  that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
decision.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 20 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

