
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/08329/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court Birmingham               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12th September 2013                          |On 2nd October 2013        |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     N D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mahmood, Counsel instructed by Asylum Aid
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal W L Grant and Mr J H Eames  (the  Panel)  promulgated  on
    15th August 2012.  The Panel dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision dated 28th March 2012 to refuse to  revoke  a
    deportation order which had been made on 25th June 2008.

Immigration History

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
    (DRC) who was born in  1964.   The  Appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom from Calais  on  1st  March  1997  and  claimed  asylum.   This
    application was refused on 3rd March 1997 and the  Appellant  submitted
    an application for judicial review.  On 7th March 1997 he  was  granted
    temporary admission and on 29th November  2000  his  asylum  claim  was
    substantively refused, and he lodged an appeal against that decision.

 3. Although he had an outstanding appeal, the  Appellant  lodged  a  fresh
    claim for asylum on 11th February 2002.  His appeal was dismissed in  a
    determination promulgated on 8th October 2002.  His  fresh  claims  for
    asylum were  refused  on  3rd  April  2003  and  29th  May  2003.   His
    subsequent appeal was refused in a  determination  promulgated  on  8th
    December 2003.  This was his second appeal hearing.

 4. On 13th January 2004 the Appellant applied for leave to remain  outside
    the Rules which application was refused on 8th March 2004 with no right
    of appeal.  He then made a further application on 6th April 2006  which
    was refused on 25th May 2006.

 5. On 29th November 2007 the Appellant  was  convicted  for  possessing  a
    false identity with intent to commit fraud and  was  sentenced  to  ten
    months' imprisonment and recommended for deportation.   He  was  served
    with a notice of intention to make a deportation order on 19th February
    2008.  His appeal against the decision to make a deportation order  was
    dismissed in a determination promulgated on 19th May 2008 which was his
    third appeal hearing.

 6. The deportation order was served on 27th June 2008  and  the  Appellant
    made further representations on 16th July and 9th September 2008  which
    were treated as an application to revoke the deportation order.   These
    applications were refused on  14th  November  2008  with  no  right  of
    appeal.   Prior  to  this   refusal,   the   Appellant   made   further
    representations on  26th  August  2008,  which  were  refused  on  18th
    September 2008.

 7. On 8th June 2009  the  Appellant  lodged  judicial  review  proceedings
    against the refusal decision of 14th November 2008.  These  proceedings
    were treated as a further application to revoke the  deportation  order
    and were refused on 7th July  2009,  and  the  appeal  certified  under
    section 94(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 8. The Appellant then submitted further representations on  14th  February
    2011 on asylum and human rights grounds, and made  an  application  for
    revocation of the deportation order.  The Respondent made a decision to
    refuse to revoke the deportation order on 28th March 2012 and issued  a
    letter of that date giving reasons.   The  Appellant's  appeal  against
    that decision was heard by the Panel on 3rd August 2012, which was  the
    Appellant's fourth appeal hearing.

 9. The Appellant's case initially was that in the DRC he had been a member
    of the Union for Democracy and Social  Progress  (UDPS)  having  joined
    this organisation in 1980.  He led a strike of sugar workers opposed to
    the management of the sugar company for whom they  were  employed,  and
    this took place between 12th and 14th October 1996.  He claimed that he
    was arrested on 14th October 1996 and accused of organising an  illegal
    strike.  He was detained and ill-treated.  He escaped from  prison  and
    travelled to Kinshasa and subsequently travelled to France, from  where
    he travelled to the United Kingdom arriving on 1st March 1997.

10. The Appellant subsequently claimed that his wife and children had  been
    murdered because of adverse interest in him  by  the  authorities.   In
    2007 while in the United Kingdom  the  Appellant  joined  the  Patriots
    Alliance for the Re-foundation of the Congo (APARECO).  He claimed that
    he would be persecuted if returned to the DRC because of his membership
    of UDPS and APARECO, and he should therefore be granted asylum.  In the
    alternative he claimed humanitarian protection, and that to remove  him
    would breach Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the  1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

11. The Panel noted that the Appellant's account had not been  believed  in
    three  previous  appeals,  and  none  of  those  decisions   had   been
    successfully appealed.  The Panel applied the principles in  Devaseelan
    [2002] UKAIT 00702.  The issues before the Panel related to the risk to
    the Appellant in view of his political activities in the United Kingdom
    against the government in the DRC, and/or as a result of his claim  for
    asylum in this country, and whether his deportation was contrary to his
    rights under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

12. The Panel dismissed  the  appeal  on  all  grounds,  finding  that  the
    Appellant had no political profile, and that he would not be at risk if
    returned to the DRC.  The Panel concluded that the  Appellant  had  not
    been of adverse interest to the authorities before leaving the DRC, and
    had not undertaken any activities in  the  United  Kingdom  that  would
    bring him to the adverse interest of the authorities in the DRC.

13. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    He did not appeal against the finding  that  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom would not breach Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

14. The Appellant relied upon four grounds.  Firstly it was contended  that
    the Panel had gone behind concessions in relation  to  the  Appellant's
    involvement in APARECO.

15. Secondly it was contended that  the  Panel  had  made  no  findings  on
    relevant evidence  as  to  the  risk  to  unsuccessful  asylum  seekers
    returned to the DRC.

16. Thirdly the Panel wrongly treated the Respondent's Operational Guidance
    Note as if it constituted evidence.

17.  Fourthly  the  Panel  reached  unsustainable  conclusions  as  to  the
    Appellant's involvement in demonstrations.

18. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  J
    M Holmes on 31st August 2012, who found all the grounds to be arguable.



19. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.

Error of Law

20. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Robertson heard the appeal on 20th May 2013
    and found no error of law in relation to grounds 1, 3 and 4.

21. In relation to ground 2 it was  argued  that  the  Panel  had  made  no
    findings upon a report entitled Unsafe  Return  compiled  by  Catherine
    Ramos and dated 24th November 2011 and this  therefore  amounted  to  a
    material error of law.  The Panel also had a letter from  Mary  Glindon
    MP dated 11th July 2012, in which she stated that the DRC Ambassador to
    the United Kingdom had announced to an  All-Party  Parliamentary  Group
    that DRC asylum seekers had all been members of the  former  oppressive
    regime in the DRC,  and  "having  committed  terrible  crimes  in  this
    country have to be suitably punished when they return".  The Panel  did
    not attach weight to this letter, finding this was a view expressed  in
    relation to those who came from the DRC, gave  a  false  story  in  the
    United Kingdom in order to seek benefits, and  then  committed  crimes,
    and because the view was inconsistent with the Respondent's Operational
    Guidance Note (OGN).

22. Judge Robertson found that there was nothing  within  the  letter  that
    confirmed that a failed asylum seeker would be punished  on  the  basis
    that he was a member of the former repressive regime, and  that  at  no
    point had the Appellant been able to establish in his  previous  appeal
    hearings that he was involved in any political activities  in  the  DRC
    such that he would be known to the authorities on  his  return.   Judge
    Robertson observed that the Panel were correct to note that  whilst  Mr
    Justice Collins had granted an injunction to prevent a removal  to  the
    DRC  on  the  basis  that  the   Ambassador's   statement   should   be
    investigated, this was on 11 July 2012 and at  the  appeal  hearing  in
    August 2013, no  further  evidence  had  been  adduced,  to  alter  the
    position as set out in the country guidance decision BK (Failed  asylum
    seekers) DRC CG [2007] UKAIT 00098.

23. However Judge Robertson found that the Panel's failure to  analyse  the
    Unsafe Return report was a material error.  The Panel did not refer  to
    the report or consider if, taken with the letter from Mary Glindon  MP,
    there was sufficient  evidence  before  them  to  depart  from  BK,  in
    relation  to  whether  asylum  seekers  who  were  not  known  to   the
    authorities in the DRC would be at risk  on  return.   Furthermore  the
    Panel had not given reasons for preferring the background material  set
    out in the OGN as to the treatment of  failed  asylum  seekers,  rather
    than the material contained within the Unsafe Return report.

24. The determination of  the  Panel  was  therefore  found  to  contain  a
    material error of law in relation to the assessment of risk  on  return
    and was set aside.  Directions were  issued  that  there  should  be  a
    further hearing before the Upper Tribunal in relation to the assessment
    of risk on return, but it was not open to either party to  re-open  any
    of the other issues considered and concluded by the Panel  as  recorded
    in paragraphs 14-24 and 26-30 of the determination.

Re-Making the Decision

25. At the hearing before us Mr  Mahmood  renewed  an  application  for  an
    adjournment which had previously been made on the papers  and  refused.
    This was on the basis that  there  was  to  be  a  hearing  before  the
    Administrative Court dealing with an appeal with similar issues, and it
    had been anticipated that there would be a hearing in October 2013, but
    Mr Mahmood understood that it was now  more  likely  that  the  hearing
    would not take place until 2014.  It was suggested that it would be  of
    assistance to the Upper Tribunal, if some guidance on these issues  was
    given by the Administrative Court.

26. Mr Mills did not oppose the application.

27. We refused the application for an adjournment,  deciding  that  we  had
    sufficient information before us to justly determine the  appeal.   One
    of the issues raised in the adjournment application was the letter from
    Mary Glindon MP, and we noted that the Respondent  had  considered  and
    responded to this letter in  section  14  of  the  DRC  Country  Policy
    Bulletin issued by the Respondent in November 2012.  We  had  not  been
    made aware of any specific evidence that was to be  considered  by  the
    Administrative Court that would assist us in our deliberations, and  we
    were concerned that there would be a further unwarranted delay  in  the
    hearing of this appeal.  In our view, on the  information  provided  to
    us, it appeared unlikely that any  decision  would  be  issued  by  the
    Administrative Court within six months, and we therefore  decided  that
    it was appropriate to proceed with the appeal hearing.

28. The Appellant attended the appeal hearing, and we ascertained  that  he
    understood  the  interpreter.   We  were  however  informed  that   the
    Appellant would not be called to give evidence.

29. We received from Mr Mills the Country Policy Bulletin of November  2012
    referred to earlier, and another Country of Origin Information Bulletin
    prepared in February 2013.  Mr Mahmood had been given copies  of  these
    documents, and we received from Mr Mahmood his skeleton argument  dated
    12th September 2013.

The Appellant's Submissions

30. Mr Mahmood relied upon his  skeleton  argument  in  which  reliance  is
    placed upon the letter from Mary Glindon MP dated  11th  July  2012,  a
    Guardian newspaper report of  16th  January  2012,  the  Unsafe  Return
    report dated 24th November 2011, and  evidence  that  there  remains  a
    suspension of removals to the DRC until 19th February 2004.

31. Mr Mahmood then addressed us upon the Policy Bulletins provided  by  Mr
    Mills.  In relation to the November 2012 Bulletin we were  referred  to
    section 10.1 which indicates that returning Congolese are likely to  be
    interviewed and subjected to systemic searches and extortion  of  their
    private belongings.  Section 10.4 referred to the Unsafe Returns report
    which confirmed that of fifteen returnees, one had ransom paid from the
    UK, three had ransom paid by family and friends in the  DRC,  two  paid
    bribes before removal, two had money stolen while in prison,  four  had
    money or belongings stolen from them at the airport, and one was  given
    money in the UK to assist passage through the airport.

32. Section 10.6 concluded that extortion and bribery of all returnees from
    Western Europe takes place within the DRC by  officials,  although  the
    comment is made that there is no evidence that this constitutes serious
    mistreatment.  Mr Mahmood submitted that the comment in  paragraph  323
    of BK that this did not amount to serious harm or treatment contrary to
    Article 3 of the 1950 Convention was wrong.

33. Mr Mahmood went on to submit that BK was out of date and that there had
    been relevant case law  decided  by  the  Supreme  Court,  such  as  RT
    (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 which indicated that an individual  would  be
    entitled to asylum if, whatever his views, he felt compelled to lie  in
    order to avoid persecution.  We were asked to accept that the only  way
    that the Appellant would be  able  to  travel  through  and  leave  the
    airport would be if he lied about his opposition to the DRC government.



34. Mr Mahmood submitted that the Policy Bulletin confirmed that  extortion
    occurred, and therefore we had to consider why that  occurred,  and  it
    was submitted  that  this  extortion  amounted  to  persecution  or  to
    treatment that breached Article 3.

35. We were then referred to section 11 of the November 2012 Bulletin which
    indicated that detention occurs only under certain  circumstances,  one
    of which is if the returnee has committed a crime in the  country  from
    which they are returned.  Our attention was drawn to section  11.4  and
    the comment that "the conditions of prison need attention."

36. Section 14 of the Bulletin dealt with  the  remarks  made  by  the  DRC
    Ambassador, referred to in the letter  from  Mary  Glindon  MP  and  in
    section 14.5, the Ambassador was reported  to  have  said  that  people
    deported for having committed crimes in the UK are held in custody  for
    a period of time to allow the Congolese Justice System to clarify their
    situation.

37. Section 15 of the Bulletin dealt  with  the  Respondent's  response  to
    recommendations made in the Unsafe Return report.  Mr Mahmood made  the
    point that the evidence provided by the Appellant, such as  the  Unsafe
    Return report, and the letter from Mary Glindon MP, should be preferred
    to comments made in the Policy Bulletin, which were not evidence.





The Respondent's Submissions

38. Mr Mills submitted that the Unsafe Return report did not prove that the
    guidance given in BK was no longer appropriate.  We were reminded  that
    BK had been upheld by the Court of Appeal.  Mr Mills pointed  out  that
    the Unsafe Return report   indicated  that  fifteen  out  of  seventeen
    individuals who had been returned to the DRC between  August  2006  and
    June 2011 had been ill-treated, although it had not  been  possible  to
    investigate these claims as the individuals had  been  anonymised,  and
    although the Respondent had requested their details, this  request  had
    been refused.  We were asked to accept that this undermined the  weight
    to be attached to the report.   Mr  Mills  pointed  out  that  the  COI
    Bulletin of February 2013 at section  1.01  indicated  that  the  total
    enforced removals between 2006 and 2011 amounted to 354.

39. Section 14 of the 2012 Bulletin  considered  the  remarks  of  the  DRC
    Ambassador referred to in the letter written by Mary Glindon MP, and it
    was submitted that the Ambassador had written to Mrs  Glindon  on  16th
    August 2012 to clarify the position, and in  that  letter  stated  that
    failed asylum seekers are not at risk of arrest and torture  on  return
    and are reunited with  their  families.   The  Ambassador  stated  that
    people deported for having committed crimes in the United  Kingdom  are
    held in custody for a period of time to  allow  the  Congolese  Justice
    System to clarify their situation.

40. Turning to the February 2003 Bulletin, at section 1.03 we were asked to
    note that the Intergovernmental Consultations on Migration, Asylum  and
    Refugees (IGC) had forwarded a survey to participating states and  that
    of eleven  participating  states  that  provided  answers,  (Australia,
    Belgium, Canada, Germany, Ireland, Netherlands,  New  Zealand,  Norway,
    Sweden, Switzerland and the  United  Kingdom),  nine  had  carried  out
    enforced returns to the DRC between 2009 and 2012.

41. Section 2.02 of the February 2013 Bulletin indicated that none  of  the
    eleven participating states that provided answers to the questionnaire,
    were aware of any returnees facing mistreatment upon return to the DRC.

42. Mr Mills referred to sections 3 and 4 of the Bulletin, which considered
    the  position  of  Human  Rights  Watch,  and   Amnesty   International
    respectively, as at June 2012.  We were asked  to  note  that  HRW  had
    indicated that returns is  not  an  issue  that  the  organisation  had
    considered because they had been overwhelmed by other issues in  Congo.
    Amnesty International had stated that they had not been in  a  position
    to collect  specific  information  on  the  issue  due  to  a  lack  of
    resources, although this did not mean that there was  no  concern,  but
    simply that the organisation did not have the resources to research the
    issue of returns.

43. Mr Mills submitted that if a risk to returnees  existed,  Human  Rights
    Watch and Amnesty International would have commented upon it.

44. In relation to the point made by Mr Mahmood on RT  Zimbabwe,  Mr  Mills
    contended that there was no indication in the background  evidence,  to
    support  the  submission  that  the  Appellant  would  be  stopped  and
    questioned about his allegiance to the  DRC  government  and  he  would
    therefore not be forced to lie,  and  RT  Zimbabwe  did  not  have  any
    applicability to this appeal.

The Appellant's Response

45. Mr Mahmood referred us to page 10 of the  February  2013  Bulletin,  in
    which it was stated that Amnesty  International  had  commentated  that
    failed asylum seekers  "may  be  perceived  to  favour  the  opposition
    because they claimed asylum and because the  diaspora  abroad  is  very
    strongly against the current regime".

46. We were asked  to  accept  that  there  would  be  extortion  when  the
    Appellant was returned, as indicated by the  background  evidence,  and
    the DRC  Ambassador  had  confirmed  the  people  deported  for  having
    committed crimes in the United Kingdom would be held in custody  for  a
    period of time.  Mr Mahmood  repeated  his  submission  that  extortion
    amounts to either persecution, or treatment prohibited  by  Article  3,
    which is treatment that amounts to  torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment or punishment.

47. At the conclusion of oral submissions we reserved our decision.

Our Reasons and Conclusions

48. In re-making this decision we bear in mind that the burden of proof  is
    on the Appellant and  can  be  described  as  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood, which is a lower standard than the normal civil standard of
    the balance of probabilities.  We must look at the circumstances as  at
    the date of hearing.

49. The Appellant would be entitled to asylum if he is outside his  country
    of nationality and recognised as a refugee, as defined in Regulation  2
    of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 as a person who falls  within  Article
    1A of the 1951 Geneva Convention.  The onus is on him to prove that  he
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason  (race,
    religion, nationality, membership  of  a  particular  social  group  or
    political opinion), and is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling  to
    avail himself of the protection of the country of his nationality.

50. If  not  entitled  to  asylum  the  Appellant  would  be  eligible  for
    humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of the Immigration  Rules,
    if he establishes substantial grounds for  believing  that  if  he  was
    removed from the United Kingdom he would face a real risk of  suffering
    serious harm, and is unable or, owing to such risk, unwilling to  avail
    himself of the protection of the country of return.

51. In relation to Articles 2 and 3 of the 1950 Convention, it is  for  the
    Appellant to establish that if removed from the United Kingdom there is
    a real risk of him being killed, or subjected to torture or inhuman  or
    degrading treatment or punishment.

52. Although the Appellant raised Article 8 of the 1950  Convention  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, he did not seek to appeal against dismissal of
    his claim on that basis, and therefore Article 8 is not before us.

53. BK, although decided in 2007, has not been replaced or superseded as  a
    country  guidance  decision  and   therefore   must   be   treated   as
    authoritative, based upon the evidence that was  before  the  Tribunal.
    The country guidance given is therefore authoritative in any subsequent
    appeal, so far as that appeal relates to the country guidance issue  in
    question, and depends upon the same or similar evidence.

54. We are asked, on behalf of the Appellant, to conclude that evidence has
    been placed before  us,  to  indicate  that  BK  should  no  longer  be
    followed.

55. We will summarise the findings of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal
    as set out in BK.  It was  put  to  the  Tribunal  that  failed  asylum
    seekers on return to the DRC are perceived as traitors  or  as  persons
    who have dishonoured the country and therefore are  deserving  of  ill-
    treatment.  The Tribunal rejected this contention in paragraphs 191  to
    195 and found that not to be the case.

56. It was put to the Tribunal that failed asylum seekers from  the  United
    Kingdom  faced  an  additional  risk  to  those  returned  from   other
    countries, because the ruling group in Kinshasa perceives the Congolese
    community in the  United  Kingdom  as  aggressively  anti-regime.   The
    Tribunal found that this was not the case  and  stated  inter  alia  in
    paragraph 197;

         "Furthermore we come back  to  the  point  that  elsewhere  in  his
         evidence E1 (like E2) emphasises  that  the  Kabila  regime  has  a
         number of agents in the UK who pay particularly close attention  to
         the political activities of DRC nationals in the  UK  and  who  are
         said  to  have   photographs   of   everyone   who   has   attended
         demonstrations or other anti-Kabila events.   Viewed  against  this
         background,  we  consider  it  na�ve  to  suggest  that   the   DRC
         authorities are unable to differentiate between those  in  the  DRC
         diaspora who are anti-regime and those  who  are  either  loyal  or
         apolitical."

57. The Tribunal also considered the issue of extortion and bribery at  the
    airport to which returnees are returned in the DRC.  The Tribunal found
    that the evidence did not demonstrate that  the  bribe  asking  at  the
    airport is generally accompanied by threats of violence or  the  actual
    use of violence.  The Tribunal stated inter alia in paragraph 320;

         "In our view the main body  of  reliable  evidence  indicates  that
         normally failed asylum seekers (and  ordinary  travellers)  do  not
         have their money and jewellery or other personal effects taken from
         them on arrival and also indicates that normally they are  able  to
         negotiate passing through airport controls by  paying  a  bribe  in
         circumstances which are generally not oppressive."

    In paragraph 323 the Tribunal stated;

         "Accordingly we are not persuaded  that  for  deportees  or  failed
         asylum  seekers  the  difficulties  they  commonly  face  in  being
         expected and required to pay a bribe amounts to treatment  contrary
         to Article 3 ECHR or to serious harm."

58. The Tribunal concluded in paragraph 385;

         "Despite concerted efforts by a  significant  number  of  people  -
         lawyers, NGOs and others - and despite there  having  been  a  long
         lead-in period to the hearing and conclusion of  this  case  during
         which members of the UK's DRC  diaspora  have  been  encouraged  by
         leaflets and public meetings in over six  cities  to  come  forward
         with cases, we have found no evidence  to  substantiate  the  claim
         that returned failed asylum seekers to the DRC as such face a  real
         risk of persecution or serious harm or ill-treatment."

59. The findings of the Panel, which are preserved, are that the  Appellant
    would be returned to the DRC with no  political  profile  as  a  person
    opposed to the regime there.  He would  therefore  be  returned  as  an
    individual who has been resident in the United Kingdom since 1997,  and
    whose asylum claim has not been believed, and who has  been  forced  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

60. We do not accept the submission made  in  the  skeleton  argument  that
    there has been a general suspension of removals to the DRC  until  19th
    February 2014.  We do accept that following  the  remarks  of  the  DRC
    Ambassador which was reported by Mary Glindon MP,  Mr  Justice  Collins
    ordered that a DRC claimant should not be returned until those  remarks
    had been investigated.  That order was made on 5th July 2012.  We  have
    not however been presented with evidence to prove that there has been a
    general suspension of returns, and section  12  of  the  November  2012
    Bulletin indicates that returns are made to Kinshasa, and in section 15
    of  that  Bulletin  which  deals  with  the  Respondent's  response  to
    recommendations made in the Unsafe Return report, it is indicated  that
    the Respondent does not consider that any change in the returns  policy
    to DRC is warranted.

61. Dealing with the RT (Zimbabwe) point which  was  not  mentioned  in  Mr
    Mahmood's skeleton argument of  12th  September  2013,  but  which  was
    referred to in oral submissions, we do not  find  that  the  background
    evidence indicates that this Appellant would be forced to lie about his
    political beliefs if returned to the DRC.  He would not be returned  as
    an individual with a known anti-regime profile.  Mr Mahmood relied upon
    the February 2013 Bulletin at page 10 in which  the  comment  was  made
    that Amnesty International believed there was some evidence that failed
    asylum seekers may be perceived to favour the opposition  because  they
    claimed asylum, but we do not find that evidence has been  produced  to
    prove that this is reasonably  likely.   Background  information  about
    Amnesty International confirmed that the organisation had not been in a
    position to collect specific information about returnees, and  had  not
    had the resources to research this issue.

62. We conclude that the DRC Ambassador to the United Kingdom has clarified
    his position, which is not as was initially believed to be the case  by
    Mary Glindon MP.  We have no reason to doubt what is stated in  section
    14.5 of the November 2012 Bulletin, (and we accept that  the  Bulletins
    themselves are  not  evidence)  in  which  it  is  confirmed  that  the
    Ambassador wrote a letter on 16th August 2012 to clarify his  comments,
    and he expressed the view that failed asylum seekers are not at risk of
    arrest and torture on return and are reunited with  their  families  in
    Kinshasa.  He indicated  that  people  deported  for  having  committed
    crimes in the United Kingdom are held in custody for a period  of  time
    to allow their situation to be investigated.

63. This issue was examined by the Tribunal in BK and it was  stated  inter
    alia at paragraph 188;

         "It  was  common  ground   between   the   parties   that   persons
         involuntarily returned or expelled from the UK to the DRC will  not
         be seen as normal returnees.  They will be questioned with  a  view
         to establishing what type of expellee they are; and  in  particular
         whether they are either a failed asylum seeker or a deportee."

64. The Tribunal did  not  find  that  this  questioning  would  amount  to
    persecution or ill-treatment.

65. We have considered at length the  Unsafe  Return  report,  compiled  by
    Catherine Ramos, who also wrote the article for the Guardian  newspaper
    on 16th January 2012  raising  concerns  that  refused  asylum  seekers
    returned from the UK to the  DRC  were  being  tortured.   We  have  to
    consider whether sufficient weight should be attached to  this  report,
    to enable us to disregard the guidance given in BK.  The report relates
    to seventeen returnees, and contends that fifteen of the seventeen were
    ill-treated on return.  This was because the returnees were  viewed  as
    perceived or actual political opponents of the current DRC regime.

66. We note that the Respondent requested details of the returnees so  that
    the claims could be investigated.  The details  were  not  forthcoming,
    and the returnees have all been anonymised.

67. We note what was stated by the Tribunal in paragraph 386 of BK;

         "In the event of  any  future  investigations  being  conducted  of
         returned failed DRC asylum seekers,  those  concerned  should  take
         steps to ensure that basic relevant particulars are sought.  Public
         funds, not to mention valuable judicial resources, are involved and
         must not be expended uselessly.  In particular,  we  consider  that
         where someone is known to have been a failed asylum seeker  in  the
         UK,  initial  efforts  should  be  directed  to   obtaining   (with
         authorisation) details  of  that  person's  asylum  claim  and  the
         outcome of any appeal.  As vividly illustrated by the case  of  WY,
         that would at least  ensure  that  the  investigations  into  their
         claims about abuse on return have some external reference point for
         gauging the truth of what is now claimed."

68. We conclude that the fact that the individuals  in  the  Unsafe  Return
    report have been anonymised (which of course  is  their  right),  means
    that it has not been possible to consider the details of  their  asylum
    claims, and what findings were made in relation  to  their  claims,  if
    they had appeal hearings.  This undermines the weight to be attached to
    the report.

69. We also found that the report had  to  attract  less  weight  where  it
    described only 17 of the 354 returns that were  effected  between  2006
    and 2011.

70. We have compared the evidence considered in the Unsafe  Return  report,
    with the evidence considered by the  Tribunal  in  BK,  which  included
    expert evidence, and it is our view for the reasons set out above  that
    the Unsafe Return report does not carry sufficient weight such that the
    conclusions in BK should not be followed.

71. Therefore applying country guidance, and background information to  the
    Appellant's case, we do not find that he would be of  adverse  interest
    to the DRC authorities on return, because he does not have a profile in
    opposition to the regime in the  DRC.   We  accept  that  he  would  be
    questioned, but we do not find  that  as  a  deportee,  he  would  face
    treatment that would amount to persecution, or treatment prohibited  by
    Articles 2 and 3 of the 1950 Convention.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.  We substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  direction  pursuant  to  Rule
45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.   We
continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date  23rd September 2013


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or is payable.  The appeal is dismissed.  There  is  no  fee
award.


Signed                              Date  23rd September 2013


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
