
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08515/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd January 2014                            |On 27th January 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                              jafar thottungal
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Islam, Legal Representative, London Law
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge M  A  Khan
    made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 1st August 2013.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 2nd  April  1988.   He  was
    granted leave to enter the UK on 13th December 2010 as a Tier 4 Student
    until 30th October 2012 and made an in time  application  for  combined
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the points-
    based system.  He was refused on 7th March 2013 on the grounds that  he
    had not provided an English language test certificate from an  improved
    English language test provider nor bank statements which showed that he
    met the required level of funds.

 3. The Appellant appealed.  His case was that he had sent  a  letter  with
    his English language certificate and bank statements to the  Respondent
    on 17th January 2013 i.e before the decision was made.

 4. The judge found the Appellant's evidence in relation to the postage  of
    the certificate and the bank statements to be vague and  evasive.   The
    documents were not in the Respondent's file and there was no record  of
    them being received.  The Appellant initially maintained that he sent a
    covering letter with the documents but then said  he  did  not  send  a
    letter which the judge found to be inconsistent.  He concluded that the
    Appellant had failed to show that he had sent the documents as  claimed
    and dismissed the appeal.

The grounds of application

 5. The Appellant appealed on the grounds that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    appreciate the factual scenario of  the  case,  the  determination  was
    against the concept of common law fairness and was irrational.  He  had
    failed to take into account that the Appellant had provided proof  that
    the documents were sent, that the judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Rodriguez (flexibility policy) [2013]
    UKUT 00042, failed  to  consider  that  the  principle  of  common  law
    fairness had been breached as  in  Thakur  (PBS  decision,  common  law
    fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT  00151  and  failed  to  consider  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights.

 6. The application was considered by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davidge.
    The heading on the decision is a refusal of permission to appeal but in
    the penultimate paragraph she stated that the original judge had failed
    to deal with Article 8 and, although on the facts the claim  was  weak,
    the judge should have dealt with all of the Grounds  of  Appeal  unless
    they were not pursued.  She said in the body of the decision  that  the
    grounds revealed an arguable error in respect of Article 8 and although
    she saw no merit in the other grounds she  granted  permission  on  all
    grounds.

 7. The matter was renewed before an Upper Tribunal Judge.  On 2nd December
    2013 Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy stated that  the  application  could
    not succeed under the Rules but it was arguable that the  judge  should
    have considered the Appellant's Article 8 rights and on that  basis  he
    granted permission to appeal.

 8. On 15th December 2013  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  opposing  the
    appeal.

Submissions

 9. It was agreed between all parties that in  view  of  the  confusion  in
    relation to the grant of application all grounds could be argued.

10. Mr Islam submitted that the judge had erred in finding  that  the  bank
    statements and the English language certificate had not been sent.   He
    pointed to the evidence in  the  Appellant's  bundle  as  to  proof  of
    postage and receipt.  In any event the Appellant was  not  required  to
    file an English language certificate because the CAS  referred  to  his
    having supplied one to the college.

11. So far as Article 8 was concerned, the Appellant had come to the UK and
    completed his Masters course and wished to be an  accountant.   He  had
    invested a large amount of money in his course  and  his  private  life
    would be destroyed if this application was to be refused.  He  had  the
    requisite funds and fairness dictated that the  appeal  ought  to  have
    been allowed.

12. Mr Duffy submitted that there was no error of law in the decision,  the
    judge having made findings open  to  him.   The  policy  of  evidential
    flexibility was not applicable to the Appellant because there were  two
    grounds of refusal; the Secretary of  State  would  not  write  to  the
    Appellant in relation to missing documents in these circumstances.   So
    far as Article 8 was concerned he relied on the Supreme Court  decision
    in Patel and Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 which held that Article 8 was
    not a general  dispensing  power  and  to  be  distinguished  from  the
    Respondent's decision to allow  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules.
    Article 8 was concerned with private or family life and  not  education
    as such and the opportunity for a promising  student  to  complete  his
    course in the UK was not in itself a right protected under Article 8.

Findings and Conclusions

13. There is no error of law in this decision.  The judge was  entitled  to
    consider the oral evidence of the Appellant and to  find  that  it  was
    contradictory and to conclude that he had not sent all of the documents
    to the  Respondent  as  he  claimed.   The  proof  of  postage  in  the
    Appellant's bundle does not identify what documents were sent and  does
    not establish, as the Appellant  claims,  that  he  included  the  bank
    statements and the English language certificate with the CAS.   In  any
    event the bank statements did not establish that he  had  the  required
    level of funds for the required period.

14. There is no unfairness on the part of the  Respondent.   The  Appellant
    was required to provide evidence to show that he met  the  requirements
    of the Rules and he did not do so.

15. Neither is there any breach of the Respondent's  policy  on  evidential
    flexibility.  In SSHD v Rodriguez and Others  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  2  the
    Court of Appeal held that there was no obligation on the  Secretary  of
    State to conduct a check of all applications to consider  whether  they
    are accompanied by the specified documents and  to  contact  applicants
    where this is not the case.

16. The original judge did not deal with Article 8, which was raised  as  a
    Ground of Appeal, but there was nothing in the grounds  particularising
    any consequences of the Appellant's removal in respect of  his  private
    or family life and no reference to Article 8 in the witness  statement.
    The judge could only have dealt with the matter on the basis  that  the
    Appellant had not put forward any evidence to show that there would  be
    a breach of Article 8 by his removal.  As the  Supreme  Court  said  in
    Patel the Appellant's right to continue his education in the UK is  not
    in itself one protected under Article 8.

Decision

17. There is no error of law in the original decision  which  shall  stand.
    The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


