
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA081332014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 24 April 2017                                |On 5 May 2017              |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                   Between

                                KAMRUL HASSAN
                        [No anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     In person
For the respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Walker promulgated 5.5.16, dismissing on all grounds his
    appeal against the decisions of the Secretary of State,  dated  22.1.14
    and 22.3.16, to refuse his application made for LTR.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 26.4.16.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin refused  permission  to  appeal,  but
    when the application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal, Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McWilliam granted permission to appeal on 8.3.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 24.4.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. For the reasons summarised below, I found no error of law in the making
    of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to  require  the
    decision of Judge Walker to be set aside.

 6.  The  appellant  was  originally  a  dependent  on  his  wife's  appeal
    (IA/08126/2014). He had separated from his wife in September  2014  and
    was the subject of an order from the Magistrates Court, dated 23.10.14,
    restraining him from contacting her. The original refusal decision  was
    dated 22.1.14. However,  when  the  Home  Office  learnt  that  he  had
    separated from his wife, a separate decision was made,  dated  22.3.16,
    refusing his LTR claim. He states that this was sent to his solicitors,
    but the letter itself has his address of 30 [ ] Close. He was living at
    a separate  address  and  his  grounds  admit  that  he  kept  changing
    addresses. He claims he never received this decision.

 7. The appellant asserts that he was not  notified  of  the  date  of  the
    appeal  hearing  before  Judge  Walker.  The  grounds  claim  that  his
    representatives stopped trading without notifying him of that  fact  or
    the date of the appeal hearing. When  he  telephoned  the  Tribunal  to
    enquire himself about the progress of the appeal in August 2016, he was
    informed that it had already been dismissed in his absence. He did  not
    receive a copy of the appeal decision until 2.9.16. He claims  that  as
    he was not heard, he is the victim of injustice.

 8. In granting permission to appeal, Judge  McWilliam  found  it  arguable
    that he was not sent the second decision letter from the  Secretary  of
    State, dated 22.3.16, following the separation from his spouse and  the
    restraining order. However, she also stated, "Whilst I appreciate  that
    the appellant is unrepresented, it is  expected  that  he  is  able  to
    inform the Tribunal of the date his solicitors ceased to trade and  the
    date when he moved out of 30 [ ] Close. It is also  expected  that  the
    respondent informs the Tribunal about the appellant's wife's appeal."

 9. The appellant has not provided any evidence that his former  solicitors
    ceased trading. When I pursued this issue, he admitted he doesn't  know
    if they have ceased trading or not. He said that he telephoned them  on
    one occasion and no one answered the phone. He  did  not  go  round  to
    check,  checked  online  whether  they  were  still  trading,  or  made
    enquiries of the Law Society, and didn't even write  to  them.  He  has
    simply speculated that  they  had  ceased  trading.  That  is  entirely
    unsatisfactory, particularly in light of Judge McWilliam's comments  in
    the grant of permission.

10. The appellant told me that he moved from 30 [ ] Close in January  2015.
    He  also  admitted  that  he  had  done  this  without  notifying   his
    solicitors, so that if they had written  to  him,  he  would  not  have
    received the correspondence.

11. In his submissions, Mr Armstrong pointed out that it was  the  duty  of
    the appellant to keep in contact with his solicitors and the  Tribunal,
    and to notify them of any change of address: this he had failed to do.

12. The appellant's attitude to the proceedings appears to have  been  that
    as he was a dependant on his wife's claim it was down to  her  to  make
    the running on the appeal. He was unable to tell me anything about  his
    claim or provide any further justification for  me  to  set  aside  the
    decision of Judge Walker.

13. In the circumstances, I find that there was no unfairness or  injustice
    in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision to decide the appeal in the
    appellant's absence. It is hardly surprising that he  did  not  receive
    notice of the hearing, given that he had moved from  the  only  address
    given for correspondence over a year earlier, without notifying  either
    the Tribunal or his solicitors. I find that it was entirely  his  fault
    that he was not present. In the circumstances I can find  no  error  of
    law in the decision of the Tribunal.

Conclusions:

14. For the reasons set out herein, I find that the making of the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

