
[pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08584/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 October 2014                               |On 21 October 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE clive lane


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                shamin akhtar
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Logan, instructed by J R Jones Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Shamin Akhtar, is a citizen of Pakistan and was born on
    6 April 1950.  The respondent arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  with  a
    visit visa on 2 June 2013.  On 20 August 2013,  she  sought  indefinite
    leave to remain "due to her  compassionate  compelling  circumstances."
    The appellant refused that application by a decision dated  13  January
    2014.  A decision was also  taken  on  the  same  date  to  remove  the
    respondent from the United Kingdom by way of directions  under  Section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The respondent
    appealed against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Robson) which, in a decision promulgated on 3  July  2014  allowed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.  The relevant Rule is 276ADE.

 2. The judge concluded that the respondent satisfied the  requirements  of
    sub-paragraph (i) and, being over the age of 18 years  and  having  not
    lived in the United Kingdom continuously for  more  than  twenty  years
    satisfied the Rule because she had "no ties (including social, cultural
    or family) with the country (Pakistan) to which she would have to go if
    required to leave the UK.

 3. Mr McVeety, for the appellant, submitted that the issue  of  "no  ties"
    was the sole issue upon which the appeal turned; whilst accepting  that
    the respondent suffers from poor health, he did not  accept  [51]  that
    the respondent's health had deteriorated as  rapidly  as  it  had  been
    claimed (between her arrival in the United Kingdom on a visit visa  and
    her application for the leave to remain).  The  judge  had  also  taken
    "the view that the visit to the United Kingdom was for [the respondent]
    to remain in the United Kingdom and receive  treatment  but  not  on  a
    private paying basis [52]."  The judge was not satisfied [53] that  the
    immigration decision would breach the respondent's right  to  a  family
    life in the  United  Kingdom  "as  a  relationship  between  the  adult
    [respondent] and her children does not to my mind amount  to  a  family
    life without evidence of further evidence of  dependency."   Ms  Logan,
    for the respondent, did not take issue with the  submissions  that  the
    appeal did turn on the issue of "no ties" only.

 4. The judge addressed that aspect of the appeal relatively briefly at [58-
    60]:

         58.  However,  albeit  that  there  are  a  significant  number  of
             immediate family members in the United Kingdom as Mr Ali  [the
             nephew of the respondent] said in his evidence he had tried to
             contact some friends and relatives in Pakistan although he had
             been unsuccessful.  This does however suggest that  there  are
             other relatives in Pakistan although  equally  I  accept  that
             these will not be close relatives since the  majority  of  the
             family live now in the United Kingdom.

         59.  Given the loss of her home and the village in which  the  home
             was based I find that she will have lost the  social  cultural
             ties that she had with her home area.

         60.  Although I have expressed my doubts about the  motives  behind
             the visit to the United Kingdom it is a  fact  of  the  matter
             that she does undoubtedly suffer from poor  health  for  which
             she will require medical treatment and family support."

 5. Granting permission to appeal, Judge N J Bennett observed:

         However, the second ground is arguable because it is arguable  that
         it was not open to the judge to find that a 64 year old  widow  who
         had only left her country of origin a year previously had  no  ties
         to her country of origin, even though her house had been destroyed,
         and that the judge thereby arguably erred in law.

 6. The destruction of the appellant's house had occurred as  a  result  of
    the construction of a dam which had led to her village being flooded.

 7. Mr Logan submitted that the requirement to have ties with one's country
    of origin was a  "presently  existing"  requirement  as  opposed  to  a
    historical fact.  She submitted that the respondent could not have ties
    to Pakistan because she no longer had the home there in which  she  had
    lived.  She referred also to the medical evidence which  indicated  (as
    the judge found at [50]) that the respondent needs "some care" with her
    mobility and  daily  household  activities.   She  submitted  that  the
    appellant could not function in Pakistan on her  own  and  without  the
    help of close family members.

 8.  The  Upper  Tribunal  discussed  the  "no  ties"  provisions  of   the
    Immigration Rules in Ogundimu (Article 8 - new  Rules)  Nigeria  [2013]
    UKUT 00060 (IAC) at [119-126]:


119.  Mr Allan seeks to persuade us that the meaning of the words 'no  ties
    (social, cultural or family)' in  paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules is such that the rule precludes reliance on it by  those  persons
    with even the most minimal of links to the country of proposed removal.



120.    In approaching our consideration of the  meaning  of  this  rule  we
    remind ourselves of the guidance given by Lord Hoffmann  in  Odelola  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] 1 WLR 1230:


           "[4] Like any other question of construction,  this  [whether  a
           rule change applies to all undetermined applications or only  to
           subsequent applications] depends upon the language of the  rule,
           construed against  the  relevant  background.  That  involves  a
           consideration of the  immigration  rules  as  a  whole  and  the
           function which they serve in the administration  of  immigration
           policy."


121.    In Mahad v ECO [2009] UKSC 16,  Lord  Brown,  when  considering  the
    question of construction of  the Immigration Rules, said as follows:

           "[10] The rules are not to be construed with all the  strictness
           applicable to the construction  of  a  statute  or  a  statutory
           instrument but, instead,  sensibly  according  the  natural  and
           ordinary meaning of the words used, recognising  that  they  are
           statements of the Secretary of  State's  administrative  policy.
           The respondent's counsel readily accepted that what she meant in
           her  written  case  by  the   proposition   "the   question   of
           interpretation is...what the Secretary  of  State  intended  his
           policy to be" was that the court's  task  is  to  discover  from
           words used in the Rules what the  Secretary  of  State  must  be
           taken to have  intended...that  intention  is  to  be  discerned
           objectively from the language used, not divined by reference  to
           supposed policy considerations. Still less is the  Secretary  of
           State's  intention  to  be  discovered  from   the   Immigration
           Directorates Instructions"


122.    We take note of the fact  that  the  use  of  the  phrase  "no  ties
    (including social, cultural or family) with the  country  to  which  he
    would have to go if required to leave  the  UK"  is  not  exclusive  to
    paragraph 399A of the Rules; it is also used in paragraph 276  ADE,  in
    the context of the requirements to met by an  applicant  for  leave  to
    remain based on private life in the United Kingdom when such person has
    lived in the United Kingdom for less than 20 years.


123.    The natural and ordinary meaning of  the  word  'ties'  imports,  we
    think, a concept  involving  something  more  than  merely  remote  and
    abstract links to the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.  It
    involves there being a continued connection to life  in  that  country;
    something that ties a claimant to his or her country of origin. If this
    were not the case then it would appear that a person's  nationality  of
    the country of proposed deportation could of itself lead to  a  failure
    to meet the requirements of the rule. This would render the application
    of the rule, given the  context  within  which  it  operates,  entirely
    meaningless.

124.    We recognise that the text under  the  rules  is  an  exacting  one.
    Consideration of whether a person has 'no ties' to  such  country  must
    involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances  and  is
    not to be limited  to  'social,  cultural  and  family'  circumstances.
    Nevertheless, we are satisfied that the  appellant  has  no  ties  with
    Nigeria. He is a stranger to the country, the people, and  the  way  of
    life. His father may have ties but they are not ties of  the  appellant
    or any ties that could result in support to the appellant in the  event
    of  his  return  there.  Unsurprisingly,  given  the  length   of   the
    appellant's residence here,  all  of  his  ties  are  with  the  United
    Kingdom. Consequently the  appellant  has  so  little  connection  with
    Nigeria so as to mean that the consequences  for  him  in  establishing
    private life there at the age of 28, after 22 years  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom, would be 'unjustifiably harsh'.

125.    Whilst each case turns on its own facts, circumstances  relevant  to
    the assessment of whether a person has ties to  the  country  to  which
    they would have to go if they were required to leave the United Kingdom
    must include, but are not limited to: the length of time a  person  has
    spent in the country to which he would have to go if he  were  required
    to leave the United Kingdom, the age that the person left that country,
    the exposure that person has had to the cultural norms of that country,
    whether that person speaks the language of the country, the  extent  of
    the  family and friends that person has in the country to which  he  is
    being deported or removed and the quality  of  the  relationships  that
    person has with those friends and family members.

126.    Thus, for the reasons we have given above, if we were deciding  this
    appeal solely in accordance with the provisions of the new rules, as we
    were invited to do by Mr Allen, we would allow the appeal  on  the  two
    bases we have indicated




 9. The same provision was also considered by Andrews J  in  Bailey  [2014]
    EWHC 1078 (Admin) at [13-17]:
   1. Mr Najib submitted, by reference to Ogundimu, that sub-rule (vi) is in
      the nature of a true  exception.  It  applies  to  someone  who  would
      otherwise be subject to the 20 year residence requirement but is  able
      to demonstrate that he or she has no ties with the country with  which
      he or she is to be  returned.  In  such  circumstances,  it  would  be
      considered "unjustly harsh" to expect such an individual to  establish
      private life in a country with which he or she has  no  ties,  i.e.  a
      country in which he or she would be a stranger. However, Blake J  said
      in paragraph 125:
      "Whilst each case turns on its own facts,  circumstances  relevant  to
      the assessment of whether a person has ties to the  country  to  which
      they would have to go if  they  were  required  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom must include, but are not limited to: the  length  of  time  a
      person has spent in the country to which he would have  to  go  if  he
      were required to leave the United Kingdom, the  age  that  the  person
      left that country, the exposure that person has had  to  the  cultural
      norms of that country, whether that person speaks the language of  the
      country, the extent of the family and friends that person has  in  the
      country to which he is being deported or removed and  the  quality  of
      the relationships that  person  has  with  those  friends  and  family
      members."
   1. The court had already made it clear that consideration  of  whether  a
      person has "no ties" to such other  country  must  involve  a  rounded
      assessment of all the relevant circumstances and is not to be  limited
      to social, cultural and family circumstances. It  follows  from  that,
      that no single one of those factors can have a decisive bearing on the
      determination of whether there are "no ties" and thus  the  mere  fact
      that an applicant has no family or friends in the country will not  in
      and of itself lead inextricably to the conclusion that  there  are  no
      ties. I agree with those submissions.
   1. In the present case, the decision maker  was  entitled  to  take  into
      account the fact that Mrs Bailey had spent most of her formative years
      in Uganda, that  she  had  only  come  to  this  jurisdiction  in  her
      twenties, that she had only been within this jurisdiction for  some  8
      years, that she had clearly had an exposure to the cultural  norms  of
      her country of origin,  and  that  she  spoke  the  language  of  that
      country. In the light of all those factors,  in  my  judgment,  it  is
      impossible to say that the decision that she did not qualify under the
      relevant sub-rule of paragraph 276ADE was irrational, or unlawful,  or
      Wednesbury unreasonable, even if one were to assume in her favour that
      she has no friends or relatives in Uganda. It plainly is not the  sort
      of case with which the Upper Tribunal was  concerned  in  Ogundimu  or
      indeed in Green. Both of those were cases  involving  people  who  had
      come to this country as very young children and been granted leave  to
      remain in the jurisdiction, who had  no  ties  whatsoever  with  their
      country of origin, but who had then committed  criminal  offences  and
      therefore appeared to be subject to  compulsory  deportation  to  that
      country, subject only to Article 8 considerations. But this is  not  a
      case in which it could possibly be concluded that Mrs Bailey would  be
      a complete stranger to Uganda, however strong the ties  that  she  has
      formed in the UK since coming to  this  country  and  overstaying  her
      visa.
   1. In those circumstances, the main ground of challenge simply  does  not
      get off the ground, regardless of any further information relied  upon
      by the Secretary of State in relation to  family  members  in  Uganda.
      That information, on the face of it, appears to be credible and  there
      is no information before me to suggest that it is not. But, as I  have
      said, it would be unfair to Mrs Bailey to take into account  something
      that it is not clear was before the decision maker. So the decision  I
      have made is on the assumption in her favour that the  decision  maker
      was referring purely to her half siblings. Even if one assumes in  her
      favour that there is no real connection with them, there are more than
      enough remaining factors to say there are ties with Uganda, such  that
      she does not qualify under the rules.
   1. That really leaves the question  of  the  consideration  of  her  case
      outside the rules, bearing in mind that  the  balancing  exercise  has
      largely been carried out already in considering her  case  within  the
      rules. However, the decision maker has gone into  considerable  detail
      in looking both at Article 3 and at Article 8 outside  the  rules,  in
      the second of the two decisions made in September  2013.  The  highest
      that the claim can be put in relation to the consideration of  whether
      a discretion should have been exercised outside  the  rules,  is  that
      insufficient account was taken of the ties that Mrs Bailey had  formed
      in this country with members of her  deceased  husband's  family  (his
      late mother, and her sister-in-law, who wrote a letter in  support  of
      her application). But it is clear from her sister-in-law's letter that
      the nature of their ties is not one of any dependency. Rather, it is a
      social relationship which  largely  consists  of  written  and  verbal
      communications by telephone, by e-mail and text,  with  two  or  three
      social visits in the course of a year. That falls a long way short  of
      the kind of ties whose strength means that a refusal  of  leave  or  a
      decision to deport would be disproportionate interference with private
      or family life. In fact, the nature of the relationship is  such  that
      it would not readily qualify as "family life" under Article 8 at  all,
      but rather as private life. In my judgment,  the  decision  maker  was
      entitled to come to the view that it was open to Mrs Bailey to  retain
      those ties with her  sister-in-law  and  other  members  of  her  late
      husband's family from Uganda, using modern methods of communication.



10. It is clear from Ogundimu that, for example, the mere possession  of  a
    particular nationality does not indicate that an individual has ties to
    the country of that nationality.  However, I  observe  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Ogundimu found that the proper analysis of a decision maker
    must involve an assessment of all relevant circumstances;  one  of  the
    difficulties in the instant case is that the judge may have had  regard
    to irrelevant circumstances.   The  fact  that  the  appellant's  close
    family members may live in the United Kingdom, that she is happy living
    with them here and  is  receiving  medical  treatment  is  not,  in  my
    opinion, a circumstance relevant to determining the  "no  ties"  issue.
    The focus of  the  analysis  should  instead  be  very  much  upon  the
    appellant's relationship (or, as the case may be, lack of relationship)
    with her country of origin.  Little weight should be  attached  to  her
    circumstances in the United Kingdom.  It is  for  that  reason  that  I
    reject Ms Logan's submissions that the judge was right to have attached
    weight to the respondent's "medical treatment and family support"

11. I  find  that  the  judge  also  erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the
    respondent's ties to Pakistan had been  entirely  severed  because  the
    particular property in which he lived had been demolished  or  flooded.
    The Immigration Rule speaks of the country to which an  appellant  will
    return, not the specific property, town or village which he or she left
    to travel to the United Kingdom.  It is simply not the  case  that  the
    appellant's ties to Pakistan (her home for the  vast  majority  of  her
    life) had been severed  because  she  may  upon  return  have  to  live
    elsewhere than in her previous home. Using the expression  employed  in
    Bailey, the appellant would not be a complete stranger upon her  return
    to Pakistan.

12. In the light of my observations, I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law such that its determination falls to be set aside.  I have
    remade the decision.  The appeal is  dismissed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  I note that the grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    included reference to Article 8 ECHR.   As  I  have  noted  above,  the
    respondent does not dispute the judge's findings that she has no  right
    to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of her family  life.   The
    public interest concerned with the respondent's  removal  is  a  strong
    one; the judge has found that the respondent has sought and obtained  a
    visit visa but that she had no  intention  of  returning  to  Pakistan;
    indeed, within the matter of a few weeks, she had applied to remain  in
    the United Kingdom indefinitely.  The maintenance of proper immigration
    controls must require that individuals who abuse the visit visa  system
    in such a manner should be  strongly  discouraged.   I  find  that  the
    removal  of  the  respondent  would  not  lead  to  a  disproportionate
    interference with her private life.

DECISION

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 3
    July 2014 is set aside.  I  have  remade  the  decision.   The  appeals
    against the immigration decision dated 13 January  2014  are  dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules  and  on  human  rights  (Article  8  ECHR)
    grounds.






Signed                              Date 20 October 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


