

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/08749/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 23 February 2016                   |            On 29 February 2016      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                A M TABASSUM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer
 For the Respondent:   Mr M Khan, of Nationwide Law Associates, London


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 20 October 1985.  On 21
    January 2015 he sought leave to remain as a spouse.  The  SSHD  refused
    that application by letter dated 19 February 2015,  for  reasons  fully
    set out therein, and rehearsed in the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Balloch, promulgated on 14 August 2015, at paragraphs 9-22.

 3. This is one of a large number of cases arising following the  detection
    of widespread fraud in the obtaining  of  Educational  Testing  Service
    (ETS) certificates.  The SSHD considered  that  on  18  July  2012  the
    appellant had obtained such a certificate through the use  of  a  proxy
    test taker.  The usual forms of evidence to that effect were  provided,
    which are on file and which are described  and  discussed  in  the  FtT
    determination, principally at paragraphs 35-61.  At  paragraph  62  the
    judge said that notwithstanding that evidence she was  "not  satisfied"
    that the SSHD had been "able to demonstrate, to the civil  standard  of
    proof, deception ... in the obtaining of the [certificate]".

 4. The appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal refused  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 6. The SSHD sought permission to appeal from the Upper  Tribunal.   On  15
    January 2016 UT Judge Kekic granted permission.  This was issued to the
    parties on 21 January 2016.  The accompanying  notice  advises  parties
    inter alia that "... subject to any  direction  to  the  contrary,  the
    application stands as the notice of appeal to the Upper Tribunal."

 7. In response to the grant of permission, the appellant did not file  any
    notice under Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, and did not communicate in any other way with the  respondent  or
    with the Upper Tribunal.  He did not take this opportunity to make  any
    observations on the grounds, or to suggest that he might  rely  on  any
    grounds which were not resolved in the FtT's decision.

 8. On 19 February 2016 the respondent wrote to the Upper Tribunal  stating
    that the application for permission made  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  had
    mistakenly been accompanied by grounds relating to  another  case,  and
    that it had been sought to rectify this error by  email  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 29 January 2016, with the "correct" grounds  attached.   In
    response, and as instructed by an Upper Tribunal Judge, a clerk of  the
    Upper  Tribunal  advised  the  respondent  that  the  application   for
    permission did not remain outstanding, but had been considered  on  the
    grounds put forward, and it was a matter for the SSHD if she wished  to
    apply to amend such grounds.

 9. The "incorrect" grounds relate also to an ETS case.  Paragraphs 1-12 of
    those grounds are generally in terms applicable to most if not all such
    appeals.  Paragraph 13 makes a point regarding a college which was  the
    subject of criminal enquiry, a matter which has nothing to do with  the
    present case.

10. At the outset of the hearing Mr Kingham sought to amend the grounds  of
    appeal so as to read in the form originally intended, as follows:

        1. The determination finds that the SSHD  has  not  discharged  the
           burden  of  proof  in  demonstrating  that  the  appellant  used
           deception  ...  the  FtT's  reasoning  for  this   is   entirely
           inadequate.

        2. The FtT indicates ... that the witness statements  and  extracts
           from the spreadsheet do not assess the  SSHD's  case.   This  is
           incorrect.  The witness statements, read in conjunction with one
           another, detail extensively the investigation undertaken by  ETS
           on  this  appellant's  case,  along  with  thousands  of   other
           applicants, and the process of identifying those tests found  to
           be  "invalid".   It  is  clear  from  the  statements  that  ETS
           identified  this  appellant  after  a  lengthy  and   systematic
           investigation.

        3. The SSHD asserts that the FtT should have had due  consideration
           to the specific evidence which identifies this appellant  as  an
           individual who exercised deception, together  with  the  witness
           statement outlining the investigation process.

        4. The  SSHD  maintains  that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
           suitability requirements  of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
           Rules.

        5. In failing to provide adequate reasons for rejecting the  SSHD's
           evidence ... the FtT's entire findings are undeniably flawed.

11. I observe here that there is nothing in the above grounds of which  the
    appellant was not on fair notice, as their substance is all within  the
    other set of grounds, used by mistake.

12.  Mr  Kingham  sought  to  add  a  further  point.   He  said  that  the
    determination was incomplete.  Having  found  as  she  did,  the  judge
    should have gone on to decide on suitability in terms of the Rules, and
    in  particular  to  consider  whether  paragraph  EX1  applied  in  the
    appellant's favour.  He  said  that  the  determination  "fizzled  out"
    without resolving this point.

13. I invited Mr Khan to respond to the application to amend the grounds.

14. Mr Khan said that he refused to argue the case.  He had never seen such
    an appalling blunder by the SSHD in 20 years of practice.  The  grounds
    on which permission had been granted were about another case  entirely.
    He had not seen the new grounds until this morning.

15. I asked Mr Khan to clarify his  position  on  how  the  Upper  Tribunal
    should proceed.  I pointed out that the matter firstly before me was an
    application to amend the grounds  of  appeal,  to  which  I  wished  to
    ascertain the appellant's answer.

16. Mr Khan said that the  appellant  should  be  awarded  his  costs.   No
    permission had been granted.  The case should  be  "thrown  out".   The
    Upper Tribunal could not proceed to  decide  it,  because  he  and  the
    appellant had attended for his case, not for some other case.

17. I did not find these submissions from Mr Khan of  much  assistance.   I
    enquired why, if there was thought to be prejudice to the appellant  by
    the grant of permission being made on another set of grounds, there had
    been no response to the grant.

18. Mr Khan said that the case had been listed for hearing in the UT  while
    he was out of the country.  He had returned from abroad  especially  in
    order to undertake this appeal.  He had been able to read  the  grounds
    only this morning.  However, he next said  that  he  had  informed  the
    appellant and his father a week ago  of  the  possible  difficulty.   I
    asked Mr Khan to clarify when it was that  he  became  aware  that  the
    grounds on which permission was granted related to another  case.   His
    reply was unclear, but I understood him to say that it was only on  the
    morning of 23 February.

19. I decided to allow the grounds to be amended.

20.  I  saw  nothing  in  the  amendment  which  bore  on  the  appellant's
    preparation or on his knowledge of the case he had to meet, other  than
    removal of a confusing reference which has  nothing  to  do  with  this
    case.  There was nothing in Mr Khan's observations which suggested that
    it was inequitable to the appellant to permit amendment of the grounds,
    or that the erroneous reference at  paragraph  13  of  the  "incorrect"
    grounds had been noticed before the SSHD drew attention to the point.

21. Mr Khan had said nothing which suggested that  the  hearing  might  not
    fairly proceed upon the amended grounds.  Neither at this stage, nor at
    any other stage, did he request any adjournment.

22. I explained my decision on the point, and invited Mr Kingham to proceed
    to make his submissions on the amended grounds.

23. Very shortly after Mr Kingham had begun, Mr Khan  sought  to  interrupt
    with further remarks.  I found those rather incoherent, but  they  were
    along the lines of those recorded above.  I advised him that I had made
    my ruling on the matter of amendment, which was binding  at  least  for
    purposes of the hearing, and that he should now permit  the  Presenting
    Officer to make his submissions, and be ready to make his reply.    The
    demeanour of Mr Khan did not convey that he was content  to  follow  my
    advice.

24. Mr Kingham referred to the judge's description of the  SSHD's  evidence
    in the main body of the determination, and suggested that flowing  from
    that a reader might logically have  expected  the  decision  to  go  in
    favour of the Secretary of State.

25. Mr Khan again interrupted the proceedings  and  said  that  unless  the
    Upper Tribunal was immediately to  put  its  "grant  of  permission  to
    appeal" in writing, he would walk out of  the  court,  along  with  his
    appellant.  I told him again that the issue of the grant of permission,
    and on which grounds, had been resolved and that he should reserve  any
    further submissions until it came to his turn, according to  the  usual
    formalities of Tribunal hearings.

26. Mr Khan then left the hearing  room,  along  with  the  appellant.   Mr
    Khan's final remark as he exited was, "Go ahead  and  decide,  you  are
    going to anyway."

27. I asked Mr Kingham for his view on whether the  Upper  Tribunal  should
    proceed  with  the  hearing  in  absence  of  the  appellant  and   his
    representative.  Mr Kingham submitted that the hearing  should  go  on.
    He observed that the appellant and his representative had been happy to
    attend on the basis of the grounds on  which  permission  was  granted;
    that  there  had  been  no  submission  about  any  difficulty  in  the
    presentation of the case which might arise from the  amendment  of  the
    grounds; and that  Mr  Khan  had,  while  leaving,  invited  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to make its decision.

28. I considered that in terms of Rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 it was in the interests of justice to proceed.

29. Mr Kingham resumed his submission that everything in the  determination
    up to paragraph 61 went towards a finding in favour  of  the  SSHD  and
    against the appellant.  The only two points  in  the  determination  in
    favour of the appellant to explain the result  were  at  paragraph  63,
    that there was "room for error" in ETS processes, and at paragraph  64,
    that the appellant had shown fluency  in  English  by  obtaining  other
    certificates at a later date,  and  had  been  sufficiently  fluent  in
    English to understand the proceedings in the FtT and to give  evidence.
    The judge herself noted that the ability to pass a later exam  did  not
    demonstrate proficiency at the relevant time or that a  proxy  had  not
    been used.  There was scope for error in ETS processes as in all  other
    processes, but that observation did not  suffice  to  explain  why  the
    Secretary  of  State  had  not  proved  her  case  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  ETS processes might be outweighed  by  other  evidence,
    but there was no such evidence in this case.  The indications were  all
    the other way.  At paragraph 56 the judge recorded that there had  been
    little evidence from the appellant  regarding  the  test  he  allegedly
    took, that his witness statement provided no details, and that in cross-
    examination he could not remember the date he took the test or at which
    college.

30. Finally, Mr Kingham submitted that the FtT decision should be set aside
    and that on the evidence which had been before the FtT a finding should
    be reached that the appellant  used  deception  in  obtaining  his  ETS
    certificate.  On such  a  finding,  there  would  be  no  basis  for  a
    conclusion in the appellant's favour under the Immigration Rules.  That
    would leave only the matter of Article 8, outwith the Rules, but  there
    was nothing before the Upper Tribunal to  justify  an  outcome  in  the
    appellant's favour on that basis.

31. I formally reserved my determination.

32. It does not  appear  to  me  that  the  conduct  of  the  case  by  the
    appellant's representative was consistent with the  obligation  on  all
    parties under Rule 2(4) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules to help the Upper Tribunal to further its overriding objective of
    dealing with cases fairly and justly, and to co-operate with the  Upper
    Tribunal generally.  If the appellant, through his representative,  had
    complied with that duty, he would have pointed out  the  error  in  the
    grounds at the time of the grant of permission.  Even more importantly,
    he would have been well prepared to meet the  substance  of  the  case,
    which was not altered through the amendment permitted.   He  would  not
    have sought to raise unnecessary difficulties.  There was no reason why
    the appellant's submissions regarding the findings  on  the  ETS  might
    have had to change in any substantial way in light of the amendment  of
    the grounds.

33. Points might also have been made for the appellant about  the  remaking
    of the decision, if that stage were reached, both in  and  out  of  the
    Immigration   Rules.    The   appellant   having   unfortunately   been
    unrepresented and absent in relation  to  those  issues,  I  have  been
    careful to consider whether there is anything which should count in his
    favour.  Having done so, however, I have come to prefer the position of
    the respondent, largely for the reasons given, outlined above.

34. The processes used by the respondent and by ETS to detect deception are
    not infallible, nor are they claimed  to  be.   However,  the  evidence
    provided generally, and in this case in particular, is  plainly  enough
    to make out a prima facie case  on  the  balance  of  probability  that
    deception has been used.  The documentary evidence provided here is not
    only generic.  It is specific to this  appellant.   It  is  a  recorded
    documentary trail to establish that he did not in fact take the test he
    claimed to have passed.

35. The judge's decision is based in essence only on the  proposition  that
    there is room for error in the ETS procedures.  That  is  correct,  but
    the room for error is not such as to displace generally the possibility
    of proving use of deception by such evidence and methods.

36. There are of course cases in which the evidence as a whole may  justify
    the  conclusion  that  deception  was  not  used,  notwithstanding  the
    documentary trail from ETS.  This is not such a  case.   There  was  no
    meaningful evidence at  all  on  the  appellant's  side.   Rather,  his
    inability to give any useful information about the  test  he  allegedly
    took was a strong feature against him.  He might forget the exact date,
    but it is telling that he could not even say where  he  allegedly  took
    the test.

37.  The  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  for
    inadequacy of reasoning.

38. In remaking the decision, I am satisfied, for the reasons above, and on
    all the evidence, that the allegation of deception  is  established  by
    the SSHD to the necessary standard.  The  appellant  has  put  no  case
    against the outcome that on such a finding, his appeal fails  in  terms
    of the Immigration Rules.

39. Although the appellant did not advance  at  any  stage  in  the  UT  an
    alternative case that his appeal should be  allowed  on  the  basis  of
    family life, I consider the issue.

40. The structure of the SSHD's decision is that the appellant is found not
    to meet the suitability or eligibility requirements of the  rules,  but
    that "for completeness" his case is considered under appendix FM on the
    basis of family life (page 3 of 9).  This leads to consideration  under
    paragraphs EX1 and EX2 (page 5).   There  are  not  found  to  be  very
    significant difficulties which could not be  overcome  in  relation  to
    family life outside the UK, or which would entail very serious hardship
    for the appellant or his wife.  Finally, no circumstances are found  to
    justify leave outside the Rules (page 7).

41. On these aspects, the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal were
    a bare insistence that the  obstacles  were  insurmountable,  that  the
    appellant's wife had not lived in any other culture, and  the  decision
    was "not proportionate to immigration rules".

42. The evidence in the FtT was that the appellant's wife is a  UK  citizen
    who has not been to Pakistan. She has  health  issues  including  heart
    problems, asthma, diabetes, and anxiety and depression.  She said  that
    she would not go to Pakistan because of her health problems, as well as
    not knowing the culture and not previously being out of  the  UK.   She
    was aware that the appellant had no permanent leave when they met.

43. The test of insurmountable obstacles is (as recognised in case law  and
    in paragraph EX2)  not  to  be  taken  literally.   The  objections  to
    relocation  by  the  appellant's  wife  are   readily   understandable.
    However, there was no evidence that her  needs  could  not  be  met  in
    Pakistan.  Her objections do not reach the level  of  very  significant
    difficulties or  very  serious  hardship.   The  requirement  that  the
    appellant should leave the UK has not been shown to be disproportionate
    in the light of his and his  wife's  rights  to  family  life,  whether
    considered in or out of the Immigration Rules.

44. The following decision is substituted: the appeal, as  brought  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal by the appellant, is  dismissed  on  all  available
    grounds.

45. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            24 February 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




