

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/08570/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Determination Promulgated     |
|On 6 April 2018                            | On 9 April 2018               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                RAYHAN AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr A Ashraf instructed by JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:        Mr Tufan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is the resumed hearing of  the  appellants  challenge  to  the
        respondent's refusal of his application for further leave as a Tier
        4 (General) Student  Migrant.   The  date  of  the  decision  under
        challenge is 11 February 2015. Error of law has been found to  have
        been made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  a  decision  dated  13
        September 2017.




Discussion



     2. The error of law finding identified a number of problems  with  the
        respondent's  decision.  Attempts  to  shed  light  upon  what  has
        occurred in relation  to  this  matter,  since  the  error  of  law
        finding, have not proved successful and the Tribunal is grateful to
        Mr Tufan for enquiries he has undertaken and his contribution.  The
        key matter arising is that the Secretary of State  has  no  further
        evidence to prove that the curtailment decision was lawfully served
        upon the appellant. The appellant's evidence that he was not served
        with the curtailment letter dated 21 September  2013  is  therefore
        taken as the unchallenged position representing what has  occurred,
        and therefore the basis on which merits of this matter need  to  be
        assessed.
     3. Although the curtailment letter was eventually sent by  first-class
        post to the appellant's residential address, on 10  December  2013,
        it was found that the service was invalid.
     4.  As  the  appellant  was  granted  leave  to  31  October  2014  an
        application made on 12 March 2014, which led to the  refusal  under
        challenge of the  February  2015,  must  have  been  an  'in  time'
        application which entitled the appellant to a right of  appeal.  In
        that respect  the  impugned  decision  is  legally  incorrect  when
        asserting the appellant did not have a right of appeal.
     5. The appellant's case is that he  should  also  have  been  given  a
        further sixty days to enable him to find another college  in  light
        of the fact that the CAS issued by the London Guildhall College was
        not accepted by the decision-maker on the basis  that  the  College
        was no longer on the sponsorship register at the date the  register
        was checked. The appellant asserts the  respondent's  actions  have
        been procedurally unfair as his leave was not and  has  never  been
        lawfully curtailed.
     6. This position was not disputed by either advocate and the  question
        of how the Upper Tribunal should deal with this matter, in light of
        the Immigration Act 2014  amendments  to  the  grounds  of  appeal,
        occupied most of the hearing. Pre- Immigration Act  2014  where  an
        error has been made by the  Secretary  State  of  this  nature  the
        finding would be that the decision is 'not in accordance  with  the
        law' but as found in Charles (human rights  appeal:  scope)  [2018]
        UKUT 00089 (IAC), following the amendments to ss.82, 85 and  86  of
        2002 Act by the Immigration Act 2014 it is no longer  possible  for
        the Tribunal to allow an appeal on the ground that  a  decision  is
        'not in accordance with the law'.
     7. The answer lies in the chronology.  The Immigration  Act  2014  had
        with it saving provisions to protect certain persons who had rights
        of appeal at the time they applied for leave to  enter  or  remain,
        see Immigration Act 2014  (Commencement  No.  4,  Transitional  and
        Saving Provisions and Amendments) Order 2015.  These  provide  that
        appeal rights continue to exist for decisions made on  or  after  6
        April 2015 where an application was made before 20 October 2014 for
        leave to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant or their family. In this appeal
        the application for further leave as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
        Migrant was made on 12 March 2014. The decision under challenge  is
        dated 11 February 2015 and the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        lodged on 2 March 2015; prior  to  the  commencement  date  of  the
        revised rights of appeal introduced by the Immigration Act 2014.
     8. The previous grounds of appeal included a finding that the decision
        was not in accordance with the law. It was accepted  that  if  this
        ground remained it was an appropriate ground on  which  the  appeal
        should  be  allowed  and,  in  accordance  with  the   transitional
        provisions, I allow  the  appeal  to  the  extent  the  respondents
        decision is not in accordance  with  the  law  and  that  a  lawful
        decision is awaited.
     9. In the alternative, if the appellant had  been  restricted  to  the
        more limited grounds introduced by  the  Immigration  Act  2014  it
        would have been necessary  to  consider  whether  he  was  able  to
        succeed on the basis the decision  was  unlawful  under  section  6
        Human Rights Act 1998. In this case there is no  removal  direction
        and so the  issue  would  be  whether  a  hypothetical  removal  or
        requirement to leave would be contrary to Article  8  (private  and
        family life). On the basis of the flawed decision and  impact  upon
        the appellants private life it is arguable it  is  until  a  proper
        decision on the application has been made.


Decision

    10. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.




   Anonymity.


    11. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 6 April 2018












