
IAC-FH-NL-V4
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08313/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 February 2015                           |On 10 March 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                              sherif el gazzaz
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Ward, instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Egypt.  He appealed to a  judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision of 25 March  2012
    refusing to revoke  the  deportation  order  made  against  him  on  29
    September 2010.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  his  appeal,  but
    subsequently Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy found there to  be  material
    errors  of  law  in  that  determination,   and   directed   that   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal be set aside and the matter be
    heard afresh.

2.   The appellant was born on 20 December 1986.   He  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom with his family in June 1999 and was granted  indefinite  leave
    to remain in March 2003.  In August 2005 he was  convicted  of  violent
    disorder and was sentenced to three and a half years' imprisonment.   A
    decision to make a deportation order was made and he  appealed  against
    that decision.  His appeal was dismissed in a determination promulgated
    in June 2006.  The deportation order was signed on 21 November 2006.

3.   On 14 January 2008 the  appellant  was  given  a  two  month  sentence,
    having been convicted of criminal damage during the Harmondsworth riots
    in November 2006.

4.   On 29 October  2009  the  appellant  was  seen  by  a  Mr  Sulliman,  a
    registered mental health nurse, who assessed him as having  a  probable
    diagnosis  of  schizoaffective  disorder.   He  gave   clear   symptoms
    consistent with a diagnosis of psychosis.  He was subsequently seen  by
    Professor Freeman in December 2009,  and  Professor  Freeman  explained
    that the reference to psychosis  should  not  be  regarded  as  a  firm
    diagnosis but regarded the case as difficult  to  assess.   He  neither
    ruled out nor affirmed the diagnosis of schizophrenia.

5.   The application to revoke the  deportation  order  was  based  on  that
    medical evidence and refused in a  decision  of  25  March  2010  which
    certified  the  application  to  revoke  the  order  as  being  clearly
    unfounded.  That certificate was in due course quashed by  consent  and
    hence the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   Prior to that hearing the appellant's  condition  deteriorated.   On  1
    April 2011 he was transferred from immigration  detention  to  hospital
    under Section 28 of the Mental Health  Act  1983,  and  remained  there
    until 1 August 2011 when he was released on bail and went to live  with
    his family.  There he received care from  the  local  community  mental
    health team led by Dr Mehrotra, a consultant psychiatrist.

7.   In his first report, dated 30  May  2012,  Dr  Mehrotra  diagnosed  the
    appellant  as  suffering  from  Post  Traumatic  Stress  Disorder   and
    schizoaffective disorder, a  "serious  enduring  mental  illness"  with
    psychotic symptoms.  He advised  that  the  appellant  was  then  in  a
    "relapsed state" and that any prospect of recovery would  be  inhibited
    by increases in stress.  He  considered  that  the  appellant  required
    support throughout the day to meet the activities of daily  living  and
    required prompting from  his  family  to  maintain  personal  care  and
    hygiene and feed him.  He was socially isolated and required input from
    his family for companionship and could not leave the  property  without
    support from his family.

8.   Dr Mehrotra went on to say that he would  think  that  the  appellant's
    family remained important in his rehabilitation at that time  and  that
    without their input he believed the appellant would  have  deteriorated
    further in psychological health, jeopardising his self care, sustenance
    and compliance with the treatment plan.  He had little structure in his
    day, given his present level of disability and was actively avoidant of
    social contact.

9.   On 12 June 2012 Dr Mehrotra  advised  that  contrary  to  his  previous
    view, owing to a further relapse in the appellant's condition,  he  was
    no longer capable of making a statement for the purposes of the appeal,
    and it continues to be the view of his treating doctors that he is  not
    fit to attend court.

10.  In a further report of 7 November 2012 Dr  Mehrotra  advised  that  the
    appellant's illnesses had left him feeling inadequate, without a  clear
    sense of identity, and he was occupying passive roles in  interpersonal
    relationships.  His  mental  health  treatment  was  to  focus  on  him
    developing  more  autonomy  and  an  improved  attitude.   It  was   Dr
    Mehrotra's view that the appellant would be less able,  compared  to  a
    normal person, to withstand pressure and suggestions from others and he
    believed he would be vulnerable to follow the instructions of others he
    trusted and with whom he had a relationship.  Dr Mehrotra also  advised
    that the appellant was unfit to plead and stand trial  in  relation  to
    criminal proceedings, which arose as a consequence of him  having  been
    remanded in custody following his arrest for possession  of  a  firearm
    and ammunition.  On 7 November 2013 the appellant  was  found  to  have
    committed the offences with which he was charged, although he  was  not
    fit to stand trial for them.

11.  Dr Mehrotra has provided two further reports, as well  as  giving  oral
    evidence  today.   In  the  first  report,  of  30  November  2013,  he
    considered that even if the appellant were to leave prison,  the  level
    of functional dependency on  his  family  would  remain  as  previously
    described in his reports, given his need for  security  and  affection.
    He would require prompting for self-care  and  reminding  to  take  his
    medication.  He would be unable to leave the family home  unaccompanied
    and would strongly prefer  to  be  socially  isolated.   He  could  not
    maintain his  sustenance  without  assistance.   He  would  not  attend
    appointments with healthcare  professionals  unless  supported  by  the
    presence of his  family  members  and  any  positive  changes  to  this
    clinical picture would be likely to take several  years  to  come  into
    effect.

12.  Following that report the appellant was transferred from prison to  the
    Three Bridges Medium Secure Unit at Ealing Hospital under section 38 of
    the Mental Health Act 1983.  In a subsequent report of 4 July  2014  Dr
    Mehrotra reported that  there  had  been  some  improvement  since  the
    transfer, but that the appellant's illness had a relapsing  nature  and
    he needed to be subject to recall to hospital in  the  future.   On  18
    July 2014 a Hospital Order was duly made at Isleworth Crown Court under
    section 37 of the Mental  Health  Act  1983,  with  restrictions  under
    section 41 of the Act.

13.  In his oral evidence Dr Mehrotra said that in  2013  he  had  seen  the
    appellant in connection with a criminal matter and felt he was unfit to
    plead, and Dr Kamal had agreed.  There had a  trial  and  he  had  been
    convicted and went to Belmarsh Prison.  Dr Kamal and  Dr  Mehrotra  had
    felt that a hospital order was appropriate and the  court  had  invited
    their opinion and hence the subsequent  recommendation  in  respect  of
    Section 37 and 41.  In some sense he now had an indeterminate sentence.



14.  As to how the events leading to conviction  came  about,  he  had  been
    arrested in July 2012  initially  in  connection  with  possessing  and
    smoking cannabis, and his room at his mother's house had been  searched
    and a firearm and ammunition were found.   Dr  Mehrotra  had  been  the
    appellant's treating doctor at the time.

15.  He considered  that  the  appellant  was  vulnerable  to  influence  by
    others.  He had had a number of personality tests, mainly in 2011,  and
    was found to have  a  dependent  personality  with  a  tendency  to  be
    submissive.  In 2012 he had been found  to  be  significantly  socially
    disabled and not assertive and  prone  to  being  influenced  by  those
    around him.  As regards the circumstances of these events  Dr  Mehrotra
    had not been able to explore with the appellant  nor  had  an  in-depth
    account been obtained by his treating team.  Dr Mehrotra thought  there
    had been a barrier.  The appellant had had  quite  a  florid  psychotic
    illness and it was hard to get access to his thoughts and feelings.  As
    regards Dr Arya's report, they had discussed it and he agreed with  the
    contents of  her  report  and  it  fitted  in  with  his  view  of  the
    appellant's mental illness and the challenges in treating him.

16.  As regards how long he might require  in-patient  treatment,  the  view
    from the team was that it would be at least one to two  years  security
    treatment and thereafter there might be an application to step down his
    treatment but it would remain in a secure context and  again  would  be
    for a year or two and it was hard to give a prognosis of where he would
    go then though there was a possibility of staying in a hostel  with  24
    hour supervision.

17.  As to how relevant to any decision to remove  him  through  the  system
    the family support would be, he had a lot of security and help from the
    family and also visits.  They had helped him comply with his treatment.
     When the appellant had been under  Dr  Mehrotra's  care  in  2012  the
    family had prompted him with self care and it could be  that  he  would
    need that  again  if  he  returned  to  the  family  home.   Under  the
    restriction order the Secretary of State retained the power  to  impose
    conditions on the appellant.  As to the likelihood that he  would  ever
    be absolutely  discharged,  Dr  Mehrotra's  experience  of  Section  41
    patients was that the Secretary of State/Ministry  of  Justice  took  a
    very risk averse attitude to them and there was a very small likelihood
    of such a discharge in the next few years.

18.  If the appellant were conditionally discharged into  the  community  he
    could be required to co-operate with a range of conditions which  would
    be set out by  his  treating  team  and  agreed  by  the  Secretary  of
    State/Ministry of Justice.  If he had no access  to  family  or  mental
    health support then it was less likely he would recover and there would
    be a more robust delivery of  appropriate  care  if  there  was  family
    support.  Their input was helping his recovery.   The  literature  also
    supported the likelihood of this being the case.

19.  When cross-examined by Ms Everett Dr Mehrotra was asked  how  important
    medication was as a factor in the appellant's treatment and he said  it
    was perhaps the most important aspect  of  his  treatment.   His  needs
    would change and he would move  from  medication  to  a  more  holistic
    treatment including such matters as psychotherapy.  He agreed  that  it
    was fair to say that at the moment medication was the most  significant
    part of the appellant's treatment.  It was likely that he would  always
    require medication.  He had quite a significant  history  of  relapses.
    He was asked whether the  appellant's  mother  telephoned  as  well  as
    providing other support and said yes but he did not know how often.  He
    had been staying with his mother at  the  time  when  the  most  recent
    offence had been committed.  It was the case that he was vulnerable  to
    the influence of others.  He was asked why then he had  still  been  so
    influenced when he was staying with the family, and  Dr  Mehrotra  said
    the appellant had given him a view and  an  account  and  said  that  a
    number of his acquaintances told him to  stop  his  medication  in  the
    weeks leading to the offence and that this was an  insidious  influence
    in some respects.  As  regards  the  question  whether  more  than  the
    medication was required, he said that he did not think  the  medication
    would provide the only way to manage the risk.  It enabled a number  of
    interventions to take place and he had medication for better  awareness
    of the consequences of his actions.

20.  By way of initial submissions Ms Ward relied on her skeleton  argument.



21.  In her submissions Ms Everett relied on  the  refusal  letter  and  the
    supplementary decision of 17 March 2012 and the  judge's  determination
    in 2006.  The appellant's mother and other family members were not here
    today and the Tribunal was asked to  draw  a  negative  inference  from
    their absence.  It would have been possible  to  ask  about  levels  of
    support they would be able to give the  appellant  on  return  such  as
    telephone calls and visits.

22.  The main argument about revocation was his  illness  in  recent  years.
    It was a significant component of  his  private  life,  and  there  was
    little evidence otherwise of private life.  It was the case that he had
    significant contact with his family also.  His leave had been curtailed
    since 2006.  He was detained under sections 37 and  41  of  the  Mental
    Health Act so he was under the Secretary of State's  control,  but  the
    Secretary of State had not taken responsibility for his case in respect
    of the deportation.  It should be found that the Section 117 exceptions
    did not apply.  The appellant had not been in the United  Kingdom  with
    immigration leave since 2006.  There was  evidence  that  he  needed  a
    significant level of support to comply with his treatment.  It had  not
    been  shown  that  the  drugs  and/or  the  other  treatment  were  not
    accessible if he were returned to Egypt.  There was evidence about  the
    stigma of seeking mental health treatment and there had been the recent
    disruption in Egypt, but that did not show that  he  could  not  access
    medication.  He had been assessed as a risk to the community  at  large
    and it was a relevant and significant factor as to whether or  not  the
    order should be revoked.

23.  On the question of the relationship between what had been said  by  the
    Court of Appeal in MJ (Angola) [2010]  1WLR  2699  that  "very  serious
    reasons" were required to justify deportation in  comparison  with  the
    requirement under section 117C of the 2002 Act, as amended, that unless
    one of the exceptions listed in that  section  applied  or  there  were
    "very  compelling  circumstances"  the  public  interest  required  the
    deportation of a foreign criminal, it must be right  that  the  statute
    applied.  It did not  trump  the  case  law  that  the  proportionality
    exercise might have been different if  those  had  been  the  statutory
    considerations in force at the time of MJ.

24.  In her submissions Ms Ward argued that on that point it  was  necessary
    to consider section 117C initially and whether the section applied  and
    then the court was directed by the statute and the  High  Court  as  to
    whether there was a breach  of  Article  8  and  in  doing  so  it  was
    necessary to take into account  the  respondent's  policy  and  section
    117C.  One example of very compelling circumstances would be  a  person
    such as the appellant, and the appellant in MJ,  where  all  the  facts
    were similar and that was how they fitted together.  Also  the  statute
    and  the  Immigration  Rules  were  intended  to  give  effect  to  the
    jurisprudence on Article 8 and indeed the terminology in the Rules  and
    the Act had been taken from that case law.  It could not be  said  that
    MJ was no longer good law.  There would be exceptional cases under  the
    Rules and under statute.  MJ and Maslov were still good law in a proper
    approach to the question of proportionality of deportation of a  person
    who had spent a large part of their youth in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    that could amount to very compelling circumstances.   Part  5A  of  the
    Rules applied in respect of Article 8 and not just deportation.

25.  Ms Ward relied  on  the  points  made  in  her  skeleton  argument  and
    amplified certain of them.  As regards  the  section  117C  issue,  and
    whether or not the appellant was lawfully resident,  otherwise  he  had
    been in the United Kingdom for considerably more than half of his life.
     As regards the effect of the order curtailing his indefinite leave  to
    remain, he had not evaded attempts to remove him and  had  remained  in
    detention.  He was an in-patient now and would be for  the  foreseeable
    future.  He was not here lawfully as  being  a  person  with  leave  to
    remain but he could not be said to be here unlawfully either as he  had
    had no choice in the matter.  In any event, if the Tribunal was against
    Ms Ward on the exception point, that to be seen in light  of  the  fact
    that he had not remained when he should not have remained and  had  not
    evaded or overstayed, and also his young age when he arrived should  be
    borne in mind and  the  difficult  family  life  which  could  be  seen
    evidenced in the witness statements.  Also  there  was  of  course  the
    serious mental illness from which he now  suffered.   These  were  very
    compelling circumstances.

26.  The  Tribunal  was  referred  to  the  evidence  as  to  his  level  of
    functioning in June 2012.  He had been unable to walk  50  metres  down
    the road without needing calming.   The  question  of  his  ability  to
    return to Egypt and fend for himself and access treatment was fanciful.
     As regards the possibility of the family returning to provide support,
    his younger brother was a minor and  studying  for  A  levels  and  his
    mother was a carer for that younger brother and of his two sisters, one
    had a family and the other was studying.  To say they could  or  should
    uproot and leave was not made out on the evidence.

27.  The evidence did not show there was no treatment in Egypt  but  it  did
    show it was patchy and difficult to access.  The Tribunal was  referred
    to C25, C28 and C29 of the more recent  bundle.   The  appellant  would
    therefore have to seek out treatment himself which the evidence  showed
    he was unlikely to be able to do.  C44 was of relevance to this.   Such
    treatment was difficult  to  access  especially  for  someone  who  was
    suffering from a psychotic  illness  and  PTSD,  especially  given  the
    current circumstances in Egypt.  That would be likely to exacerbate his
    PTSD.

28.  As regards the question of him being a  danger  in  the  community,  of
    course he was not in the community  and  would  not  be  until  it  was
    decided he was  safe  to  be  there  and  even  then  the  overwhelming
    likelihood was that he would be subject to a conditional  discharge  as
    long as it was thought to be appropriate and he would  have  to  comply
    with conditions to prevent the risk  of  a  relapse  and  he  could  be
    recalled if it was thought  there  was  a  risk  of  relapse.   It  was
    therefore not a case of risk of  re-offending.   There  had  been  past
    offending and it weighed heavily in the balance against him, but on the
    other side of the balance were all the factors such as  the  length  of
    time in the United Kingdom, the need for family support to  enable  him
    to benefit from treatment, the  need  for  the  treatment  itself,  his
    complete inability to fend for himself on return and the need to ensure
    he did not become a danger to himself or others  which  amounted  to  a
    stark prospect on return and  likely  relapse,  and  coming  under  the
    influence of others, strong matters on the other side of  the  balance.
    The appeal should be allowed.

29.  I reserved my determination.

Discussion

30.  The issue  in  this  appeal  concerns  the  Article  8  rights  of  the
    appellant, bearing in mind that under section 32 of the UK Borders  Act
    2007 the respondent is required to make a deportation order

         "(5) ....in respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section  33),
             and the relevant exceptions in section 33 are


             (2)  ...where removal of a foreign criminal  in  pursuance  of
                  the deportation order would breach -


                  (a)  a person's [European] Convention  [on  Human  Rights]
                      rights."


31.  In the decision letter of 17 March 2012 the  respondent  accepted  that
    the appellant had established family ties in the  United  Kingdom,  but
    did not accept, given that he was now an adult, that this could be said
    to be family life without further elements of dependence beyond  normal
    emotional ties.  There was not considered to be any such evidence.   It
    was accepted that he had lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  just  over
    thirteen years, although it was noted that a substantial  part  of  his
    life in the United Kingdom had been  spent  in  custody.   It  was  not
    accepted that he was not in contact with his father, who  according  to
    Home  Office  records  had  visited  the  appellant  on  at  least  two
    occasions, in December 2010 and January 2011.  The appellant's criminal
    record was noted, and his deportation was considered with reference  to
    the decision of the Court of Human Rights in Maslov.  It was noted that
    the appeal determination in 2006 said that  his  family  made  frequent
    trips to Egypt to see family members as well as the fact of his  father
    being in Egypt.

32.  There  was  reference  to  the  medical  issues  including  a  previous
    consideration in a decision letter  of  25  March  2010.   It  was  not
    considered that the United Kingdom  was  bound  by  any  duty  of  care
    towards him in respect of his health problems, and  his  case  did  not
    engage the test set out in D v United Kingdom or N  v  United  Kingdom,
    and the fact that similar medical treatment might not be  available  in
    Egypt was not regarded as a significant factor.  It was noted that  the
    medication currently prescribed to him, according to the medical report
    submitted, was available in Egypt either in the same format or  in  one
    of the many generic variants  commonly  found  in  nations  with  lower
    incomes.  Although any treatment available in Egypt might not be of the
    standard as of that provided by the National Health Service  there  was
    nothing to show that it would engage Articles 2, 3 or 8 of the ECHR.

33.  In essence Ms Ward's argument is that section 117C of the 2002 Act,  as
    amended, applies, on the basis, she argues, that  the  appellant  falls
    within Exception 1 in section 117C(4), the criteria for which are that:



         "(a) the appellant has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom
             for most of his life:


         (b)  the appellant has socially and culturally  integrated  in  the
             United Kingdom, and


         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
             into the country to which it is proposed that he be deported."


34.  The effect of section 117C is that the  public  interest  requires  the
    deportation of the appellant as a foreign criminal  who  has  not  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  four  years  or  more  unless
    Exception 1 (or Exception 2,  which  is  not  relevant  in  this  case)
    applies.  However the particular difficulty with this argument is  with
    respect to section 117C(4)(a) which requires him to have been  lawfully
    resident in the United Kingdom for  most  of  his  life.   As  Ms  Ward
    accepts in her skeleton, the effect of the deportation  order  made  in
    November 2006 was to curtail the leave to remain  which  the  appellant
    was granted, initially as a dependant of his parents on 14  June  1999,
    and on the basis of the grant of indefinite leave to remain on 21 March
    2003.  I note Ms Ward's argument that it was, as she  put  it,  outside
    his control that he was detained and whereas he could not be said to be
    here lawfully he was not here unlawfully.  However he  cannot  properly
    be said to have been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  for  most
    of his life given that he has only been lawfully resident here  between
    June 1999 and 2006.  He has now been in the  United  Kingdom  for  some
    fifteen and a  half  years  (nearly  thirteen  years  at  the  date  of
    decision) and he is now aged 28 (25 at date of  decision).   The  three
    criteria set out in exception 1 are all required to be made out, and in
    my judgment the appellant falls at the first hurdle in this regard.

35.  Ms Ward has argued that weight should be attached to what was  said  by
    the Court of Appeal in MJ (Angola) referring at  paragraph  40  to  the
    need for there to be very serious reasons to justify the deportation of
    the appellant in that case,  bearing  in  mind  that  he  had  lawfully
    entered the United Kingdom when he was 12 years of age, had  spent  his
    adolescence and the whole of his adult life in the United  Kingdom  and
    much of his offending having been committed when he was under  the  age
    of 21.

36.  In this regard it is relevant to note what was said by Sales LJ  in  AJ
    (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636, as endorsed subsequently by the Court of
    Appeal in MA (Somalia) [2015] EWCA  Civ  48.   There  it  was  said  at
    paragraph 25(iii) that where the Tribunal in the case  of  AJ  (Gambia)
    (one of the appellants in AJ (Angola)) said that  there  needed  to  be
    very serious reasons to justify expulsion, it had  treated  that  as  a
    freestanding matter of assessment rather than integrating it within the
    framework of the new Rules and asking itself whether  there  were  very
    compelling reasons to outweigh the public interest in deportation.   MJ
    has to be seen in that light.

37.   As  regards  the  issue  of  whether   there   are   very   compelling
    circumstances in this case, these were  essentially  summarised  by  Ms
    Ward in her submissions referring to the age of the appellant  when  he
    came to the United Kingdom, his age when he committed the most  serious
    offence, the amount of time he has been in the United Kingdom, the need
    for family support to enable him to benefit from  treatment,  the  need
    for the treatment itself, his inability to fend for himself  on  return
    and the need to ensure he does not become a danger to himself or others
    and the likelihood of a relapse should be come under the  influence  of
    others.

38.  I should say that in this regard that I  accept  in  its  entirety  the
    evidence of Dr Mehrotra and the other medical evidence  that  has  been
    put  in.   I  also  note  the  background   evidence   concerning   the
    difficulties the appellant would experience on return to Egypt in terms
    of such matters as his vulnerability, the need  for  support  from  his
    family in accessing and taking medication and lack of the same level of
    medical and other support that he would have there, albeit  bearing  in
    mind that it  does  appear  that  the  necessary  medication  would  be
    available to him.  On the other side of the line is of course the  very
    serious offence of  which  he  was  convicted  and  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to three and a half years in  prison,  and  the  more  recent
    offence of possession of a firearm  and  ammunition,  as  well  as  the
    criminal damage offence.  I bear in mind also the point made by Ms Ward
    that the appellant does not pose a risk of harm to the community  given
    that he will remain hospitalised until such time as it is decided  that
    he is safe to go into the  community  and  then  would  be  subject  to
    significant  conditions.   There  are  significant  obstacles  to   the
    appellant's integration into Egypt, but I am not  persuaded  that  they
    would be very significant, and nor do I accept that  the  circumstances
    that he would face on return, problematic for  him  though  they  would
    undoubtedly be, are such as to meet the very  high  threshold  of  very
    compelling circumstances.  His appeal  under  Article  8  is  therefore
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

39.  The appeal under Article 8 is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 9 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 9 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
