
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08178/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2016                            |On 3 January 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                              Fahad Jamal KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Pakistan born on  5  January
    1981.  The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
    decision of the respondent dated 9 February 2015 to refuse to vary  the
    appellant's leave and to give directions for removal under  Section  47
    of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.   In  a  decision
    dated 20 April  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  A  M  Black
    dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  immigration  and  human  rights
    grounds.

Upper Tribunal

 2. The appellant appealed on the grounds that he had difficulties with his
    previous agents.  In the course of his  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal the appeal was adjourned.  The appellant contended that he had
    continued to wait for a hearing date but then received the decision and
    reasons promulgated on 4 May 2016 dismissing  his  appeal  without  his
    attendance.  The appellant indicated that he  approached  his  previous
    agents who told him that they had  received  a  hearing  date  and  had
    lodged documents on 22  April  2016  to  which  the  appellant  stated,
    through his new agents, that he had no knowledge nor had given approval
    for.  The appellant claimed that his previous agents had failed to  him
    a reasonable explanation as to why he was not informed  by  them  about
    his hearing on 20 April 2016.  The grounds  for  permission  to  appeal
    from the appellant's  new  representatives,  Burney  Legal  Solicitors,
    contended  that  they  had  written  to  the  previous  agents  without
    response.

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that it was an arguable error of law that had the appellant  been  able
    to attend, the evidence he could have lodged, together  with  his  oral
    evidence, may have made a material difference to the outcome or to  the
    fairness of the proceedings.

Hearing

 4. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.  I considered
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,  including  Rule  2
    the overriding objective and Rule 38,  hearing  in  a  party's  absence
    which provides as follows:

         "If a party fails to attend  a  hearing,  the  Upper  Tribunal  may
         proceed with the hearing if the Upper Tribunal -

         (a)  is satisfied that the party has been notified of  the  hearing
             or that reasonable steps have been taken to notify  the  party
             of the hearing; and

         (b)  considers that it is in the interests of  justice  to  proceed
             with the hearing."

 5. I considered the notice of hearing which was issued to the  appellant's
    solicitors Burney Legal Solicitors on  18  November  2016  and  to  the
    appellant at 127 Upney Lane.  It was noted in the Tribunal  file  on  9
    November that  the  respondent  confirmed  to  the  Tribunal  that  the
    appellant was no longer detained and that his address was now 127 Upney
    Lane, Barking, Essex IG11 9LE.

 6. I was satisfied therefore that the notice of the Upper Tribunal hearing
    had been properly served  on  the  appellant  and  his  representatives
    and/or that reasonable steps had been taken to so notify  them.   There
    was no adequate  explanation  for  the  non-appearance  of  either  the
    appellant or his current representatives and I was  satisfied  that  it
    was in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing.

Decision on Error of Law

 7. For the reasons set out below I am not  satisfied  that  there  is  any
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. The grounds for permission to appeal from Burney Legal, the appellant's
    current representatives, are not  without  difficulties.   The  grounds
    indicate that the First-tier Tribunal provided  the  appellant  with  a
    hearing date for 8 September 2015.  The Tribunal file contains a notice
    of hearing dated 10 April 2015  confirming  a  substantive  hearing  on
    Tuesday 8 September 2015 and this was issued to the appellant  care  of
    his then representatives, Lawgate Solicitors.

 9. The grounds for permission to appeal  indicated  that  the  appellant's
    appeal was thereafter adjourned and "the Tribunal communicate  as  much
    to him by way of directions dated 5 May 2015.  A copy was also sent  to
    his previous legal representatives".  As indicated by the  grounds  for
    permission there is indeed  a  notice  of  adjourned  hearing  dated  6
    (rather than 5) May 2015 to the appellant  at  42  York  Road,  Leyton,
    London, E10 5QG and also copied to Lawgate Solicitors  confirming  that
    his hearing would be heard on Monday 16 November  2015.   That  hearing
    was then adjourned again by notice of adjourned  hearing  issued  on  9
    November 2015.  A further notice of adjourned hearing was issued on  26
    November 2015, again to the appellant at his Leyton address  in  London
    also issued to Lawgate Solicitors confirming that his appeal  would  be
    heard on Wednesday 20 April 2016.  The  next  correspondence  from  the
    Tribunal, following no appearance from  either  the  appellant  or  his
    representatives, was issued on 4 May 2016 again to the appellant at his
    Leyton address in London and also to Lawgate Solicitors with a copy  of
    a decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal.

10. However the grounds for permission state that the  appellant  continued
    to wait for a  hearing  date  and  go  on  to  indicate  that  "without
    receiving any prior knowledge of a replacement hearing date from either
    the Tribunal or his previous legal representative, he instead  received
    a determination promulgated on 4 May 2016 dismissing his appeal."   The
    grounds for permission go on to state that:

         "The appellant was somewhat  surprised  to  have  received  such  a
         decision and approached his previous legal representatives who then
         rather negligently informed him that they had  received  a  hearing
         date and that they had filed a bundle of documents to the  Tribunal
         without his prior knowledge, instructions and approval".

11. The  fundamental  problem  with  those  grounds  is  that  the  grounds
    acknowledge that the Tribunal communicated to the appellant by  way  of
    directions dated 5 May 2015,  with  a  copy  also  sent  to  his  legal
    representatives, that  the  hearing  date  for  8  September  2015  was
    adjourned.  As indicated in the timeline that I have set out above this
    adjournment was communicated to the appellant  at  his  Leyton,  London
    address which continued to  be  his  address  through  the  adjournment
    notices which were issued, and which I have recorded above,  until  the
    promulgation of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  on  4  May  2016.
    There has been  no  change  in  the  address  either  notified  by  the
    appellant  or  used  by  the  Tribunal.   The  grounds  for  permission
    acknowledge that the appellant received both  the  first  communication
    adjourning his 8 September 2015 hearing (dated May 2015)  and  that  he
    received  the  promulgation  of  the  decision  dismissing  his  appeal
    promulgated on 4 May 2016.  If that is the case I do not accept that he
    would not also have received the communications to the same address, on
    26 November 2015, with the new date for his appeal on 20 April 2016.  I
    do not therefore accept the  contention,  by  Burney  Legal,  that  the
    appellant had no prior knowledge of his appeal date.

12. Therefore there can be no merit in the appellant's  grounds  of  appeal
    which are predicated on, at best, a mistake on the part of Burney Legal
    that the appellant did not receive the notice of  hearing  which  I  am
    satisfied was properly issued.

13. In addition, and connected to that issue, the appellant and his current
    representative   sought   to   apportion   blame   to   his    previous
    representatives Lawgate Solicitors.  However, relying on BT Nepal 00311
    UKUT [2004] the Upper Tribunal held that:

         "If an appeal is based in whole or in part on allegations about the
         conduct of former representatives,  there  must  be  evidence  that
         those allegations have been put to the former representatives,  and
         the Tribunal must be shown either the  response  or  correspondence
         indicating that there has been no response".

14. Although the appellant's current representatives, at  paragraph  10  of
    the grounds for permission, indicated that they wrote to  the  previous
    representatives on 4 October 2016 and set out the information that they
    requested, no copy  of  that  correspondence  has  been  provided.   In
    addition although it was stated that  the  appellant's  previous  legal
    representatives confirmed verbally that they had no other documents and
    would not be responding to their letter of 4 October 2016, again  there
    was no information or evidence that might confirm that  allegation  for
    example an attendance note from the legal representative who took  such
    a call.

15. In the absence of such information I am not  satisfied  that  there  is
    adequate evidence that the allegations have  been  put  to  the  former
    representative.  Therefore it is not possible to make a finding of fact
    based on such allegations.  This, combined with the difficulties in the
    appellant's claimed timeline (as set out above) which  is  inconsistent
    with the Tribunal records which show that  the  appellant  was  clearly
    issued with notices of hearing, indicates that there was  no  issue  of
    unfairness in this case.

16. Analogous with the facts in BT the judge in  the  case  before  me  was
    faced with a case  with  no  appearance  from  the  appellant  and  the
    respondent consented to the hearing proceeding without  representation.
    The judge properly directed  herself  in  line  with  Rule  28  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 and was satisfied that it was in the  interests  of
    justice to proceed with the hearing.  In those circumstances the  judge
    was correct to, in effect,  conclude  that  there  was  no  substantive
    challenge to the conclusions or arguments of the Secretary of State  in
    the refusal letter.

17. Although I accept that, in addition to the issue of  non-attendance  of
    the appellant, there was an issue of a claimed bundle of documents that
    the previous representatives indicated that they had submitted although
    none were received  by  the  Tribunal,  again  there  was  no  adequate
    evidence that the allegations in relation to the non-service  of  these
    documents  (and  the  adequacy  of  them)  was  put   to   the   former
    representatives and that  they  had  an  opportunity  to  respond.   As
    indicated above this also does not provide an adequate explanation  for
    the appellant's own failure to attend the hearing before the First-tier
    Tribunal where at the  very  least  he  could  have  sought  a  further
    adjournment if he was at  that  stage  not  satisfied  with  his  legal
    representation.

18. In considering my approach I have applied the relevant jurisprudence in
    relation to fairness in the Tribunal  including  Nwaigwe  (Adjournment:
    Fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) and that I must consider not  whether
    it was reasonable for the judge not to adjourn but whether it was fair.
     In all the circumstances,  in  the  light  of  the  lack  of  adequate
    explanation from the appellant either in the grounds of appeal which as
    noted above are inconsistent with the Tribunal record, nor  before  the
    Upper Tribunal where there was no appearance from either the  appellant
    or his new representative, I am satisfied that it has  not  been  shown
    that the appellant appearing together with any evidence he  could  have
    lodged (and again no adequate evidence has been  produced  as  to  what
    that information might have been) would have made a material difference
    to the outcome or to the fairness of the proceedings.

Conclusion

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.  The appeal by the appellant is dismissed.

No anonymity direction was sought or is appropriate in this case.


Signed                                  Date:  30 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date:  30 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
