
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/08176/2013
     IA/08273/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29th October 2013                            |On 5th November 2013       |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 tooba jawed
                                 shuja jawed
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondents:   Mr P Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Talat Naveed
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Amin made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 26th July 2013.



Background

 2. The claimants are nationals of Pakistan born on 21st April 1989 and 5th
    June 1991.  They were first granted leave to enter the UK as dependants
    of their father on 30th November 2005 and subsequently granted leave on
    five occasions to 21st November 2010.  They made a late application for
    leave to remain as children of a Tier 1 Migrant under the  points-based
    system on 9th December 2010 and were  refused  but,  following  appeal,
    were granted discretionary leave to remain until 26th November 2012.

 3. On 23rd November 2012 the claimants applied as  Tier  1  dependants  of
    their father for further leave to remain but were refused on the  basis
    that they could not meet the requirement that their last grant of leave
    was as the child of the relevant points-based system migrant.

 4. The judge allowed the appeals on the basis that he was  satisfied  that
    both claimants were totally dependent on their father for their day-to-
    day expenses and needs.  The father is paying for  their  college  fees
    and they live with their parents as a close  family  along  with  their
    other younger siblings.  Both  had  established  a  strong  network  of
    family and friends since their arrival in the UK in 2005.  He said that
    their removal would be an interference with their  private  and  family
    life and was disproportionate.

 5. The second Appellant was also refused under paragraph 322(1A).  In  his
    application form he had answered 'no' to the question of whether he had
    previous convictions but in fact on 26 October 2011 he was convicted at
    Great Yarmouth Magistrates' Court for possession of drugs and  received
    a twelve months' conditional discharge.  His explanation was  that  the
    conviction was not mentioned in the form because he did  not  want  his
    parents to know about it and he had sought advice and was told that the
    offence was spent and he did not have to disclose it.

 6. The judge wrote as follows:

         "Dealing with the issue of deception alleged to have been committed
         by the second Appellant, having heard the evidence in this  case  I
         find that the Appellant did not deliberately set out to deceive the
         SSHD.  It was a foolish decision on the second Appellant's part  to
         withhold this information from the SSHD because he did not wish his
         parents to know about the conviction.  Even if he was dishonest  in
         not disclosing his  conviction  I  do  not  find  that  the  second
         Appellant has contrived in  a  significant  way  to  frustrate  the
         intentions of the Immigration  Rules.   I  do  not  find  that  the
         Respondent has shown to the higher level that the second  Appellant
         was dishonest in the sense described in Mumu."

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  on  three  grounds.
    First, the judge had  materially  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  give
    adequate reasons why it was  disproportionate  for  the  Appellants  to
    leave the UK.  Second, he had erred  by  misapplying  the  standard  of
    proof when he referred to a higher level.  Third, he had misapplied the
    case of Mumu and not given proper reasons for finding that Rule 322(1A)
    does not apply.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  Brunnen  for  the  reasons
    stated in the grounds on 23rd August 2013.

Submissions

 9. Mrs Horsley submitted that the decision in respect  of  proportionality
    was woefully inadequate.  There was no consideration in  that  decision
    that the Appellants do not meet the requirements  of  the  Rules  since
    they were not permitted to switch from the  category  of  discretionary
    leave to dependants under the points-based system.  They are in the  UK
    in a temporary capacity with no legitimate expectation that they  would
    be able to stay.  They cannot meet the  requirements  with  respect  to
    private life as set out in Rule 276ADE nor EX1  of  Appendix  FM  since
    that applies to partners and children only.

10. Secondly the judge had erred in referring to a higher standard of proof
    when the own correct standard was that of the balance of probabilities.
     She said that in fact the judge had applied a higher standard  on  the
    Secretary of State.  The second Appellant had stated that  he  did  not
    have a  criminal  conviction  when  this  was  not  the  case  and  his
    explanation for having filled in the form as he did was  discrepant  as
    between the Grounds of Appeal and his  witness  statement.   The  judge
    appears to have accepted that the Appellant knew what he was doing  and
    that was sufficient for the Secretary of State to show that  there  had
    been deception.  Furthermore the judge had plainly  been  referring  to
    the wrong Rule in his reference to the case of Mumu which was referring
    to paragraph 320(11).

11. She asked that the decision be set aside and re-made on  the  basis  of
    the evidence as it was at the hearing.

12. Mr Ahmed submitted that this was an adequate determination in which the
    relevant factual findings had been made.  The judge had said  in  terms
    that the claimant had not deliberately set out to deceive having  taken
    account of all of the evidence before him.  He had  accepted  that  the
    claimant had been honest when he ticked 'no' because it was his genuine
    belief on the basis of advice which he had taken that he did  not  need
    to disclose the conviction.  He was a young man at  the  time  who  had
    made mistakes.

13. Secondly he submitted that the judge's Article 8 findings were open  to
    him and that the judge had had the Secretary  of  State's  position  in
    mind when reaching  his  decision.   The  claimants  had  been  granted
    Article 8 leave in the past and nothing had changed since the  previous
    determination except that their ties with the UK had become stronger.





Consideration of whether there is an error of law

14. The Secretary of State's grounds are made out.  The judge's analysis of
    Article 8 makes no reference at all to the  Respondent's  position  and
    the fact that the claimants cannot meet the requirements of the  Rules.



15. With respect to the mandatory refusal under paragraph 322(1A) the judge
    seems to have been acting under the misapprehension that  there  was  a
    higher burden on the Secretary of State to show dishonesty than that of
    the balance of probabilities and in any event referred to  a  different
    rule than that under consideration.

16. Accordingly the decision is set aside.

Further Hearing

17. The second Appellant gave oral evidence.   He  was  asked  why  he  had
    ticked 'no' on the form when he knew that he had a  conviction  and  he
    said that he had spoken to an old friend who had told him that  because
    the conviction was over a year old it was spent and he did not have  to
    declare it.  He had known the lady for three to four years and she  had
    lived in the UK for a long time.  He accepted that he  had  filled  out
    the form and he was aware of what the section on  criminal  convictions
    said.  When asked why the form did not refer to convictions being spent
    he said that he trusted his friend because he had known her for a while
    and she was the best person to take advice from.  He  did  not  contact
    either the Home Office or his  solicitor  and  was  anxious  about  his
    father finding out about the conviction because he had given  the  form
    to a family member who would have read  it  before  giving  it  to  the
    solicitor and then would have told his father.

Further Submissions

18. Ms Horsley submitted that the second Appellant  had  been  vague  about
    what had happened after he had filled in the  form  and  had  not  been
    frank with the Tribunal.  He was an adult who  would  have  been  aware
    that the information should have been disclosed.  She accepted that  he
    may have been attempting to conceal the information from his father but
    in doing so he had deceived the Secretary of State  which  attracted  a
    mandatory refusal.  She said that his attitude had been cavalier.

19. With respect to Article 8 she said  that  it  should  not  be  used  to
    circumvent the Rules which the Appellants could not meet  because  they
    were not allowed to switch from discretionary leave to leave under  the
    points-based system.  Neither  could  they  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph  276ADE.   The  Rules   and   the   Immigration   Directorate
    Instructions were a complete code and she relied  on  the  decision  in
    Nagre (R) on the application of v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720.

20. Mr Ahmed submitted that the explanation by the second  Appellant  ought
    to  be  accepted.   He  had  panicked  about  the  possibility  of  the
    information reaching his father  and  turned  to  an  older  adult  for
    advice.  He asked the Tribunal to find  that  the  claimant  had  acted
    honestly.

21. With respect to Article 8 the evidence showed that the claimants  lived
    at home with their parents and younger siblings  and  that  the  family
    were entirely inter-dependent.  The rights of all members of the family
    ought to be considered.  They had been together  in  the  UK  for  some
    eight years and removal would be disproportionate.

Findings and Conclusions

The 322(1A) Issue

22. In order for the refusal under paragraph 322(1A) to be  maintained  the
    Secretary of State has the burden of showing that  the  claimant  acted
    dishonestly.   He  has  given  two  reasons  for  not  mentioning   the
    conviction in his application form.  One is that he did  not  want  his
    parents to know about the conviction and the second is that he was told
    that the conviction was spent and he did not have to disclose it.   The
    Secretary of State relies on the first reason and the claimant  on  the
    second.

23. I bear in mind that the claimant was a young adult when  he  filled  in
    the form. He would naturally seek guidance  from  an  older  person.  I
    suspect that he was looking for a reason not to  have  to  declare  the
    conviction because he did not want his father to  know  of  it  but  am
    satisfied that he did seek advice and was happy to act on it and not to
    declare the conviction.  He probably  did  not  want  to  make  further
    enquiry because he was pleased with the advice that  he  had  received.
    His  actions  in  my  view  fall  short  of  the  Secretary  of   State
    establishing that he acted dishonestly.

24. With respect to Article 8 it is not argued by the Appellants that  they
    can meet the requirements of Rule 276ADE and nor do  they  fall  within
    EX1 or the exceptional circumstances set out in paragraph 3.2.8 of  the
    IDIs.  That is not the end of the matter because, although  Ms  Horsley
    relied on the decision of MF for the proposition that the Rules and the
    IDIs taken together are a complete code,  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    Nagre (R) accepted that:

         "The consideration of possible Article 8 claims arising outside the
         new Rules involves broader consideration of cases by  reference  to
         the general factors and approach set out in the new guidance on her
         residual discretion set out above."

25. It was not argued that the new Rules fully accommodate the requirements
    of Article 8 in all cases.  It was accepted that a foreign national may
    have a good claim for leave to remain under Article 8 when in  relation
    to both Section EX1 (family life) and paragraph 276ADE  (private  life)
    it was possible to envisage cases where they would not.

26.  However  clearly  the  fact  that  the  claimants  do  not  meet   the
    requirements of the Rules is  a  weighty  argument  in  favour  of  the
    proportionality of removal.

27. The claimants are at college and no  argument  has  been  made  by  the
    Secretary of State that they are not dependent on their parents.   They
    all live together as a family and I accept that family life exists even
    though the claimants are both young adults.

28. They have been in the UK since  2005  and  removal  would  be  a  clear
    interference with their rights to family and private life  in  the  UK.
    It would however be lawful since they do not meet the  requirements  of
    the Rules and in pursuit of  a  legitimate  aim,  namely  that  of  the
    maintenance of immigration control.

29. On the claimant's behalf it is argued that they have been in the UK for
    a lengthy period of time, with their family,  that  they  were  granted
    discretionary  leave  in  the  past  and  their  ties  here  have  only
    strengthened since then and they have family life not only  with  their
    parents but with their younger siblings.  The  Respondent  argues  that
    they are young adults who could reasonably be expected to  return  home
    given that they cannot meet the requirements of the Rules.

30. The crucial factor here is that the rest of the family are not settled.
     The father only has leave until February 2016.  Any separation of  the
    family would therefore be  temporary  until  the  parents  and  younger
    siblings go back to  Pakistan,  where  no  doubt  there  is  a  support
    structure from the wider family and where, with the benefits which they
    have accrued in the UK, they could reasonably be  expected  to  support
    themselves. In the meantime they could keep in contact with the  family
    in the UK through visits and other means.

Decision

31. The judge erred in law and his decision has been set aside.  It is  re-
    made as follows.   The  appeal  in  respect  of  paragraph  322(1A)  is
    allowed.

32. The appeals are dismissed on Article 8 grounds.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

