
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08787/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 5th January 2017                    |On 25th January 2017          |
|Prepared on 18th January 2017                |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                         MR AASHIK HUSSAIN MOHAMMED
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitworth, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Proceedings

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 30th of  August  1989.
      He appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Onoufriou sitting at Hatton Cross on 23rd of February  2016  in  which
      the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a decision  of  the
      Respondent dated 14th of February 2015. That decision was to refuse to
      issue the Appellant with a residence card as  the  confirmation  of  a
      right of residence under European Community law as the extended family
      member of an EEA national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
      Kingdom  pursuant  to  regulation  8  (2)  of  the  immigration  (EEA)
      regulations 2006 ("the 2006 regulations").

   2. The application was  based  on  the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  was
      dependent upon his uncle,  a  German  national  ("the  sponsor").  The
      biological relationship was accepted by the Judge but the  appeal  was
      dismissed because the Judge was not satisfied that the  Appellant  was
      dependent on the sponsor whilst in Sri Lanka nor  that  the  Appellant
      was of the same household and/or dependent on his  sponsor  whilst  in
      the United Kingdom.

   3. The Appellant appealed against that decision arguing  that  the  Judge
      had fallen into error in his decision on the question  of  dependency.
      Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier on 21 October  2016
      but on renewal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Plimmer on 28 November 2016 who found it arguable that the First-
      tier had failed to make adequate findings regarding the credibility of
      the oral evidence.

   4. The Judge's decision was dated 2 March 2016. On 7 June 2016 the  Upper
      Tribunal completed its consideration in the case of Sala  [2016]  UKUT
      411. The Upper Tribunal decided that there  was  no  right  of  appeal
      against a  Respondent's  decision  under  Regulation  8  of  the  2006
      Regulations to refuse to issue a residence  card  to  extended  family
      members. There continued to be a right  of  appeal  against  decisions
      under Regulation 7 (refusal  to  issue  a  residence  card  to  family
      members).

   5. By letter dated 15 December 2016 the Respondent replied to  the  grant
      of permission to appeal citing Sala. The Upper Tribunal was invited to
      strike out the proceedings and the permission to appeal  for  want  of
      jurisdiction. When the  matter  came  before  me  counsel  made  brief
      submissions as to whether there was a right of appeal indicating  that
      there was presently outstanding an appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  on
      the Sala point. I indicated however that I was bound by  the  decision
      in Sala which applied to the facts in this case. I noted that once the
      decision of the First-tier in this case was declared to be invalid  it
      meant that none of the findings of the First-tier could  be  preserved
      in the event for example that  the  Appellant  were  to  make  another
      application under the 2006 Regulations.

Findings

   6. At the time the First-tier Judge heard the case there was  thought  to
      be a right of appeal against decisions  taken  by  the  Respondent  to
      refuse Regulation 8 applications for extended family members.  By  the
      time the matter came before the Upper Tribunal on the renewal  of  the
      permission to appeal and certainly by the time the matter came  before
      me it was known that there was not in fact a right of appeal and  thus
      there had never been a  valid  appeal  before  Judge  Onoufriou.  This
      meant, because of the retrospective application  of  the  common  law,
      that the First-tier decision contained a material error of  law  since
      the Judge had had no jurisdiction to hear  the  appeal  in  the  first
      place. One must of course have  some  considerable  sympathy  for  the
      position of the First-tier Judge in this case whose  decision  was  in
      accordance with the law at the time it was taken but is no  longer  in
      accordance with the law following the decision in  Sala.  Nevertheless
      the decision of the first-tier did contain a material error of law and
      I set it aside. I remake the decision in this  case  by  finding  that
      there is no valid right of appeal against the Respondent's decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law and I have set it aside. I remake the  decision  in  this  case  by
    finding that there is no valid  appeal  before  the  Tribunal  and  the
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed for want of jurisdiction.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 24th January 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although I have set aside the decision at first instance,  since  there  was
no valid right of appeal there can be no fee award in this case.


Signed this 24th January 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



