
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/08399/2014
     IA/08404/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Sent to parties on:           |
|On 30 January 2015                            |On 12 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE GOSS
                  Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              MRS SABA MAHBOOB
                          MASTER TAHA BASHIR AHMAD
                          (no anonymity order made)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola,  Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Jones, Counsel, instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Monson,  allowing  the
    claimants' appeals under paragraph 319E(v) of the Immigration Rules  HC
    395 (as amended).  The claimants sought leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse and child of a person present and settled here.

 2. The claimants are a mother and her  3  year  old  son,  both  Pakistani
    citizens.  The principal claimant entered the United Kingdom as a  Tier
    4 dependant partner on 23 March 2010; the second claimant was born here
    in April 2011.  The first claimant had leave to remain until 25 October
    2013, ending as a Tier 1 dependant because the status  of  the  sponsor
    had changed.   The sponsor then  had  an  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    application pending on long residence grounds under the old Rule  276B,
    and was granted indefinite leave to remain on 13 December 2013.

 3. The claimants' settlement application was made in  September  2013  but
    determined by the Secretary of State on 27 January 2014.   The  sponsor
    by then had  indefinite  leave  to  remain.   The  Secretary  of  State
    determined the application under paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM  (the
    new rules) and refused it.  It is common ground that the pre-2012 Rules
    apply to these appeals and that the Secretary of State's  decision  was
    therefore taken on an incorrect basis.

 4. The error was unfortunately compounded since  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    proceeded to consider the application under paragraph  319E,  the  rule
    which would have applied had the sponsor still been a Tier  1  Migrant.
    For claimants whose sponsor is  settled  or  has  indefinite  leave  to
    remain, the correct Rules at that  time  were  paragraph  284  for  the
    principal claimant and paragraph 301 for the second claimant.

 5. Having regard to the evidence which was produced  at  the  hearing,  Mr
    Kandola for the Secretary of State accepts that the claimants were able
    to meet the requirements of rules 284 and 301 at the date  of  decision
    and that therefore they were entitled to succeed in their appeals.   We
    agree: although there is indeed an  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision, we are satisfied that had these appeals been
    considered under the correct Rules, they would still have been allowed.



Conclusion

 6. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of  law.   We  therefore  set  aside  the
    decision and remake it by allowing the claimants' appeals.



Signed:



Upper                 Tribunal                 Judge                 Gleeson
Date:
