
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08822/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23rd May 2014                                |On 11th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                GABRIEL BERNETTA ELAINE DOBBS (NEE CAMPBELl)
                        (no anonymity direction made)


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Osadebe of Zuriel Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 2. The Claimant is a Jamaican citizen, born 8th June 1983 who  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom as a visitor on 9th  August  2011.   Her  leave  was
    subsequently extended until 1st September 2012, and on 26th August 2012
    she married a British citizen, Sam Dobbs, who I will refer  to  as  the
    Sponsor.

 3. On 29th August 2012 the Claimant applied for further leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom as the spouse of a British citizen.

 4. The application was refused on 5th March 2013, the Respondent making  a
    combined decision to refuse to vary leave to remain, and to remove  the
    Appellant from the United Kingdom.  It  would  seem  that  the  removal
    decision is unlawful as it was made simultaneously with the decision to
    refuse to vary leave and was made before 8th May 2013 when  section  51
    of the Crime and Courts Act  2013  made  it  lawful  to  take  the  two
    decisions at the same time and serve them in the same  document.   This
    however was not a point taken on appeal by the Claimant.

 5. The reasons for refusal are set out in a Home Office letter  dated  5th
    March 2013.  In summary the application was refused for two reasons  in
    relation to Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules  which  relates  to
    family life.  Firstly the Claimant could not succeed because she was in
    the United Kingdom as a visitor, and  secondly  because  the  specified
    evidence required had not been provided, to prove that the Sponsor  had
    an annual income of at least �18,600.

 6. The application was also considered with reference to paragraph  276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules, in relation to the Claimant's  private  life,
    and the Secretary of State decided that the Claimant could not  satisfy
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE, and therefore the application was
    refused both in relation to family and private life.

 7. The Claimant's appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Rowlands (the judge) on 7th January 2014.  The  judge  found  that  the
    appeal could not succeed under the Immigration Rules, but  allowed  the
    appeal under Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on Human  Rights
    (the 1950 Convention).

 8. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that the  judge  had  materially
    erred, and had failed to  give  reasons  for  findings  on  a  material
    matter.  The grounds contained in the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal may be summarised as follows;

    (1)  The Claimant failed to meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules and the  judge  had  erred  in  finding  that  the  financial
         requirements were  met,  and  had  not  sufficiently  analysed  the
         evidence.

    (2)  The judge had given inadequate  regard  to  the  income  threshold
         requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  disregarded   those
         requirements  in  conducting  a  proportionality  assessment  under
         Article 8.

    (3)  Findings made in relation to Article 8 are unsustainable  and  the
         judge had not followed the guidance given in Gulshan (Article  8  -
         new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC).

 9. Permission to appeal was given by Designated Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal McClure who found it arguable that the judge had erred in  his
    approach to the issues under Article 8, and granted permission  on  all
    grounds.

10. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred
    in law such that the decision should be set aside.

Error of Law

11. The appeal came before me on 28th March 2014 and I heard submissions on
    behalf of both parties before concluding that the judge had  erred  and
    the decision needed to be re-made.

12. The judge had dismissed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules,  and
    there was no challenge to that decision,  which  I  decided  should  be
    preserved.  In my view the judge erred in law in considering Article  8
    for the following reasons.

13. It was  unclear  how  the  judge  concluded  in  paragraph  23  of  the
    determination that the financial requirements of the Immigration  Rules
    were satisfied.  The judge described the evidence submitted in relation
    to the Sponsor's income as "rather patchy", and it is  not  clear  that
    the judge considered the requirements of Appendix FM-SE, which sets out
    the  specified  evidence  that  must  be  provided  if  the   financial
    requirements are to be  satisfied.   For  example,  there  was  no  P60
    submitted on behalf of the Sponsor, no employer's letter, and  no  wage
    slips  covering  a  period  of  at  least  six  months  prior  to   the
    application.

14. The judge did not refer to Gulshan, and although  not  referring  to  a
    decision of the Upper Tribunal is not an error of law, it is  an  error
    to fail to consider and apply the principles.  The proper  approach  to
    considering Article 8 is set out in paragraph 24(b) of Gulshan which is
    set out below;

    (b)  after applying the requirements of the rules, only  if  there  may
         arguably be good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  them
         is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether
         there are  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
         under them: Nagre;

15. In paragraph 26 of Gulshan the Upper Tribunal stated that  even  if  it
    was  accepted  that  an  application  could  not  qualify   under   the
    Immigration Rules,  those  rules  could  not  be  passed  over  without
    analysis, and the rules must be the starting point.

16. In paragraph 27 the Upper Tribunal commented  that  embarking  upon  "a
    freewheeling Article 8 analysis, unencumbered by the rules", is not the
    correct approach.

17. In this case the judge did not apply the principles set out in Gulshan.
     This failure,  taken  together  with  the  error  in  considering  the
    financial requirements, means that the determination must be set  aside
    and re-made.

18. It was suggested by Mr Osadebe that the decision should be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.   Having  considered  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement 7.2 I found no reason to remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Claimant had not  been  deprived  of  a  fair
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal or an  opportunity  to  put  her
    case, and it was not necessary to remit to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    reasons of judicial fact-finding.

19. I indicated that the decision would be re-made by the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and Mr Osadebe applied for an adjournment to obtain  further  evidence.
    The application was not opposed.

20. Although directions had been given that the  parties  should  be  in  a
    position to proceed to re-make the decision if  an  error  of  law  was
    found, I granted the adjournment in the interest of justice.

21. I indicated that in addition to preserving the  judge's  decision  that
    the appeal could not succeed under the  Immigration  Rules,  there  had
    been no challenge to the finding made by the judge that the parties had
    entered into a genuine marriage, and that finding was also preserved.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing - 23rd May 2014

Preliminary Issues

22.  Mr Osadebe confirmed that no further  documentary  evidence  had  been
    submitted following  the  hearing  on  28th  March  2014,  although  he
    produced at this hearing, without objection, a P60 tax certificate  for
    the year ending 5th April 2012 for the Sponsor.

23. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and each party had served the other with  any
    documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.  I  had  before  me
    the Respondent's  bundle  with  Annexes  A-C,  the  Appellant's  bundle
    comprising 40 pages, and  various  bank  statements  belonging  to  the
    Sponsor which were not indexed or paginated.  I have marked one  bundle
    of the bank statements  "A".   The  other  bank  statements  relate  to
    periods 18th September 2013 to 17th October 2013, and 10th October 2013
    to 9th November 2013.

24. Mr Osadebe accepted that the appeal could not  succeed  under  Appendix
    FM, nor under paragraph 276ADE(vi) as it could not  be  contended  that
    the Claimant had no ties to Jamaica.  I was therefore asked to consider
    the appeal in relation to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

25. The Claimant and Sponsor had  attended  the  hearing,  but  Mr  Osadebe
    indicated that he did not intend to call  them  to  give  evidence  and
    wished to proceed by way of submissions only.

The Claimant's Submissions

26. Mr Osadebe stated that the Claimant and Sponsor adopted  their  witness
    statements.  I was asked to note that the Sponsor had been born in  the
    United Kingdom and lived all his life  here,  and  had  never  been  to
    Jamaica.  It would therefore be difficult for him to settle in  Jamaica
    with the Claimant.

27. The Sponsor's family members are in the United Kingdom and  he  has  no
    friends or family in Jamaica.  The Sponsor is in employment  and  could
    financially support the Claimant, and the appeal should be  allowed  in
    reliance upon Article 8 because the Claimant would be unable to  return
    to  Jamaica  with  the  Sponsor,  and  this  amounted  to   exceptional
    circumstances which meant that the Secretary of  State's  decision  was
    disproportionate.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

28. Mr Duffy relied upon Gulshan, and referred me to paragraph 24(b)  which
    gave guidance on the correct approach.  Mr Duffy described this  as  an
    ordinary case with no exceptional or compelling features and  submitted
    that there was no reason why the Claimant could not return  to  Jamaica
    and apply for entry clearance.

29. Mr Duffy submitted that this appeal should not  be  considered  outside
    the Immigration Rules, but even if I considered Article 8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, the decision made by the Secretary of State was  not
    disproportionate.

30. Mr Duffy submitted that this was not a case  where  the  principles  in
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 assisted the Claimant because the  application
    had not been refused simply because the  Claimant  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom as  a  visitor,  but  because  the  financial  requirements  of
    Appendix FM were not satisfied.

The Claimant's Response

31. Mr Osadebe asked that I draw a  distinction  between  this  appeal  and
    Gulshan, in that the Sponsor in Gulshan was not born a British  citizen
    whereas the Sponsor in this case is British born and has spent all  his
    life here.

32. Mr Osadebe submitted that Chikwamba was of assistance to the Appellant,
    in that the Secretary of State proposed to remove her simply to  follow
    policy and for no other reason.

33. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.





My Assessment and Conclusions

34. I have considered all the evidence and submissions presented to me.   I
    find as a fact that the Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor in August 2011, and her leave was subsequently extended.  I  am
    satisfied that the Claimant and Sponsor married in this country on 26th
    August 2012 and they have a genuine and subsisting marriage.

35. I am satisfied that the Appellant and  Sponsor  first  met  in  October
    2011, started seeing each other regularly  by  November  2011  and  the
    Sponsor proposed in July 2012.  I am  satisfied  that  they  have  been
    living together since their marriage.

36. I am satisfied that the Sponsor is currently in employment, and that he
    was born in the United Kingdom and has always lived in this country.  I
    accept that his close family members and friends are in  this  country,
    and he has no links to Jamaica, other than being married to a  Jamaican
    citizen.

37. It was accepted on behalf of the Appellant that she could  not  satisfy
    either Appendix FM in relation to family life, or paragraph  276ADE  in
    relation to private life.

38. The Claimant could not satisfy Appendix FM,  because  she  was  in  the
    United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  and  this  fact  prohibited  her  from
    succeeding under FM.  In  addition  the  specified  financial  evidence
    required by Appendix FM-SE, was not submitted either to the  Respondent
    or to the First-tier Tribunal.

39. As it was accepted that the Claimant still had ties to Jamaica, because
    she has only been in the United Kingdom since August 2011,  she  cannot
    succeed under paragraph 276ADE in relation to her private life.

40. The issue before me related only to Article  8,  and  I  was  asked  to
    consider Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  The correct approach
    is set out in paragraph 24(b) of Gulshan and I have to consider whether
    there are arguably good grounds for granting leave  to  remain  outside
    the rules, and only if there are such  grounds,  is  it  necessary  for
    Article 8 purposes to go on and consider whether there  are  compelling
    circumstances not recognised under the rules.

41. Further guidance was given in paragraph 21 of Gulshan as follows;

    On a thorough review of the Strasbourg guidance, Sales J concluded that
    in a precarious family life  case  only  in  exceptional  circumstances
    would removal of the non-national family member constitute a  violation
    of Article 8.  To show that,  despite  the  absence  of  insurmountable
    obstacles to removal, it  would  nonetheless  be  disproportionate,  it
    would be necessary to show other non-standard and  particular  features
    of the case of a compelling nature demonstrating that removal would  be
    unjustifiably harsh.

42. I have to take into account that the decision in Miah  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013] QB 35, which was approved in Patel
    and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72,
    confirms there is no near miss principle when considering Article 8.

43. As was stated in paragraph 57 of Patel and Others by Lord Carnwath;

    57   It is important to remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power.  It is to be distinguished from the Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right.

44. The approach to be taken with regard to  Article  8  has  been  further
    confirmed by the Court of Appeal in Haleemudeen v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 558 in paragraph 40 in which it
    is stated that the FtT Judge in that case  erred  in  his  approach  to
    Article 8 because he did not consider the basis for  remaining  in  the
    United Kingdom in relation to the Appellant's private and  family  life
    against the Secretary of State's policy as contained in Appendix FM and
    paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules.   The  court  specifically
    stated that the new provisions in the Immigration Rules are  a  central
    part of the legislative and policy context in which  the  interests  of
    immigration control are balanced against the interests  and  rights  of
    people who have come to this country and wish to settle in it.  Overall
    the Secretary of State's policy as to  when  an  interference  with  an
    Article  8  right  will  be  regarded  as  disproportionate   is   more
    particularised in the new rules than it had previously been.   The  new
    rules require stronger bonds with the United Kingdom before leave  will
    be given under them.

45. In my view there are no arguably good grounds  for  granting  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules, but if I am wrong about  that,  I
    will consider  whether  there  are  any  compelling  circumstances  not
    recognised under the rules.

46. I therefore consider the five stage approach advocated in Razgar [2004]
    UKHL 27.  I conclude that the Claimant  and  Sponsor  have  established
    family life with each other, and they have established  private  lives.
    A decision to remove the Claimant would interfere with that family  and
    private life.  I have taken into account the  decision  in  Beoku-Betts
    [2008] UKHL 39, which means that I have to consider the rights of other
    family members affected by the decision, not only the Claimant.

47. The proposed interference with the parties' family and private lives is
    in accordance  with  the  law,  as  the  Claimant  cannot  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules.  The fourth and fifth questions posed in Razgar, are
    whether the interference is  necessary  in  the  interest  of  national
    security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country,  for
    the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of  health  or
    morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others, and
    if the interference is necessary, whether it is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate public end sought to be achieved.

48. In my view, the decision of the Secretary of  State  in  this  case  is
    necessary in the interests of  maintaining  firm,  fair  and  effective
    immigration control, which is needed to  maintain  the  economic  well-
    being of the country.  I  take  into  account  that  the  Claimant  and
    Sponsor wish to remain in the United Kingdom, but that Article  8  does
    not bestow upon the Claimant the automatic right  to  choose  in  which
    country she wishes to live.

49. In my view I have to attach considerable weight to the  fact  that  the
    Immigration Rules cannot be met, and that there is a need  to  maintain
    effective immigration control.  I place considerable  weight  upon  the
    fact that the Sponsor is British born, and has lived  in  this  country
    all his  life,  and  his  family  and  friends  are  here,  as  is  his
    employment.

50. I also have to take into account that the parties married in  the  full
    knowledge that the Claimant was in the United Kingdom as a visitor  and
    that her leave to remain  expired  on  1st  September  2012,  and  they
    married on 26th August 2012.  They therefore married in  the  knowledge
    that the Claimant only had limited leave to remain, and they could have
    no legitimate expectation that the Claimant would be allowed to  remain
    if the Immigration Rules were not satisfied.

51. I do not find that this case can be equated  with  that  of  Chikwamba.
    This is not a case where the Secretary of State takes the view that the
    Claimant should return to Jamaica to  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance simply as a matter of policy.  In my view, the fact that  the
    Claimant was a visitor when she married, is only  one  reason  why  she
    cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, the other reason
    being that the necessary financial evidence was not submitted.

52. The Claimant could return to Jamaica where she has family, friends  and
    accommodation, and make an application for entry clearance to enter the
    United Kingdom as the spouse of a British citizen.  This I accept would
    mean a separation from the Sponsor, if the  Sponsor  did  not  wish  to
    return to Jamaica with her.  However in my view, more weight has to  be
    given to the fact that the Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied,  than
    to the wishes of the parties to remain and live in the United  Kingdom,
    despite the fact that the rules cannot be satisfied.   I  do  not  find
    that there are compelling  circumstances  which  demonstrate  that  the
    Claimant's removal from  the  United  Kingdom  would  be  unjustifiably
    harsh, and therefore I find the Secretary of  State's  decision  to  be
    proportionate.  Having said that, although the decision  to  refuse  to
    vary leave is lawful, it would seem that there would need to be a fresh
    decision to remove, because the removal decision dated 5th  March  2013
    was made simultaneously with the refusal to vary leave.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity and  no  anonymity  order  is  made  by  the  Upper
Tribunal.


Signed                              Dated 5th June 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Dated 5th June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

