
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/08334/2015
                                                               IA/08337/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 January 2016                   |On 9 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                               rajwinder kaur
                                jaswant singh
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are linked appeals against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Anstis promulgated on 10 August 2015 brought with the  permission
    of Upper Tribunal Judge Martin granted on 11 December 2015.

2.   The grant of permission to  appeal  provides  a  helpful  and  succinct
    summary of the issues that now arise.  The grant of  permission  is  in
    these terms:
         "The Appellants seek permission to appeal against a Decision of the
         First-tier Tribunal (Judge Anstis) who, in a Decision  and  Reasons
         promulgated on 10th August 2015, dismissed their  appeals,  against
         the Secretary of State's decision to refuse them leave to remain in
         the UK as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant and her dependant spouse.
         It is arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  proceeding
         with the appeal in the Appellants' absence and  saying  that  there
         had been no application for an adjournment when there  had  been  a
         previous application on the basis that the main Appellant was  ill.
         That application was arguably unfairly refused as  the  reason  for
         the refusal was said to be the absence  of  medical  evidence  when
         there was a letter from the Dr attached."

3.   The Appellants' appeals had initially been listed for 17  August  2015,
    but the hearing had been brought forward to 27 July 2015.  On  22  July
    2015 the Appellants' then  representatives,  Aston  Brooke  Solicitors,
    wrote to the Tribunal requesting an adjournment and enclosing a  letter
    from Dr Murtaza Khanbhai who was said to be the First  Appellant's  GP.
    The letter requesting the adjournment  noted  that  the  Appellant  had
    recently been diagnosed with acute stress and depression and  that  due
    to her medical condition the representatives had been unable to take  a
    substantive witness statement in  order  to  prepare  for  the  appeal.
    Concern is also expressed about the  appeal  being  heard  without  the
    Appellant being medically fit, it being suggested that  this  might  be
    prejudicial to her appeal.  The letter from the GP - also dated 22 July
    2015 - is drafted in these terms:
         "Mrs  Kaur  is  currently  being  treated  for  acute  stress   and
         depressive  symptoms.   She  started  medication  last  week.   Her
         symptoms  are  of  insomnia,  change  in  appetite,  low  mood  and
         anhedonia.  I understand she is due to  attend  an  appeal  hearing
         next week and I feel this should be postponed for a period of  time
         until her treatment has had time  to  take  effect.   She  will  be
         reviewed in 4 weeks."

4.   The request for an adjournment was considered and  refused  and  notice
    of that refusal was sent out by the Tribunal  on  24  July  2015.   The
    refusal was given for the following reasons:
         "1.  No evidence Appellant is unfit to attend court.
         2.   The Appellant has had since February to prepare her statement.
         3.   Overriding objective in PR2."

5.   When the matter came on before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Anstis  there
    was no appearance or representation by the Appellants, or indeed by the
    Respondent.  Judge Anstis says this at paragraph 2 of his decision,  "I
    did not receive any written representations, any  explanation  for  the
    non-attendance or application for an adjournment  from  either  party".
    In those circumstances, and having directed himself  to  the  Procedure
    Rules, the Judge decided to proceed with the appeal in the  absence  of
    the Appellants (and indeed in the absence of a representative from  the
    Respondent), and determined the appeal  for  reasons  set  out  in  his
    decision.

6.   The essence of the Judge's adverse decisions under  the  Rules  and  in
    turn Article 8 is set out in the following terms at paragraphs 7 and 8:
         "7.  The  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  are  that  the
             application  must  have  a  valid  CoS  number.   This  is  an
             essential requirement of the application.  There was no  valid
             CoS number provided in respect of these  applications.   I  do
             not consider that in such a situation references to common law
             fairness  and  public  law   assist   the   Appellants.    The
             application was fundamentally flawed by the absence of a valid
             CoS number.  Where there is no valid CoS number it is bound to
             fail.
         8.   The grounds of appeal make reference to article 8  in  respect
             of both family and private life in general terms, but there is
             nothing in the grounds of appeal or other papers  before  [me]
             to show the extent to which the Appellants have established  a
             family or private life in the United Kingdom, or to show  that
             the decisions made by the Respondent engage article 8 at  all.
             In the absence of any evidence as to how (if at all) article 8
             is engaged in the Appellants' case I cannot go on to  consider
             whether   the   decision   amounts   to   a   disproportionate
             interference with the  Appellants'  rights  under  article  8.
             There is simply no evidence  to  suggest  that  article  8  is
             engaged in the first place, so the Appellants'  appeal  cannot
             succeed by reference to article 8."

7.   As already indicated in the quotation above from the reasons  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Martin in granting permission to appeal, the  Appellants
    complain that they were deprived of a fair hearing  by  reason  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge proceeding to consider their appeals in their
    absence: it is argued in the written grounds that there was an error of
    law in that the Judge appeared to be under the  impression  that  there
    had been no application for an adjournment.

8.   In one sense there was no application for an adjournment  before  Judge
    Anstis in that the application made on 22 July 2015  had  already  been
    made, considered, and refused prior to hearing date.   Be  that  as  it
    may, it seems highly likely that  Judge  Anstis  was  unaware  of  that
    circumstance: it is reasonable to expect that  had  he  been  aware  he
    would  have  made  some  reference  to  the  fact  of  an   adjournment
    application  having  been  made  and  refused  when   considering   the
    circumstances of the non-attendance of the Appellants.

9.   I pause to note, very much parenthetically, that even if  it  were  the
    case that the First Appellant felt unable to attend the  hearing  there
    is absolutely no explanation as to why the  Second  Appellant  did  not
    attend - either to pursue further an application  for  an  adjournment,
    or, in the event of the adjournment being refused  a  second  time,  to
    pursue whatever representations he might have felt able to make.

10.  Be that as it may, on  balance  I  am  persuaded  that  the  Judge  has
    proceeded on a factual misconception  as  to  the  circumstance  of  an
    adjournment application having been made, and also  without  regard  to
    the supporting evidence submitted with that application.  That  is  not
    to say that the Judge would inevitably have been  bound  to  reconsider
    the adjournment application, or if he had done so would have been bound
    to grant an adjournment. In this latter regard it may well be that  the
    fact that the medical evidence does not expressly  support  the  notion
    that the First Appellant was unfit to attend court  is  such  that  the
    basis of the application was not made out. However,  on  balance  I  am
    just persuaded that the most appropriate course of action  here  is  to
    determine that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did indeed err in  law  in
    proceeding on a misconception of fact,  and  that  such  an  error  was
    material in that it related to the  First  Appellant's  opportunity  of
    putting her case to the First-tier Tribunal. The decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is set  aside  accordingly,  and  the  decisions  in  the
    appeals now require to be re-made.

11.  Directions have been issued by  this  Tribunal  in  the  standard  form
    alerting the Appellants to the need to prepare for this hearing on  the
    basis that if the Upper Tribunal decides to set aside the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal any further evidence,  including  supplementary
    oral evidence that the Upper  Tribunal  may  need  to  consider  if  it
    decides to  re-make  the  decision,  should  be  available  before  the
    Tribunal today.  I have already indicated that no supporting  documents
    were filed before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is the case that  as  of
    today no supporting documents have been filed before the Upper Tribunal
    either. Nor have the Appellants attended today: in this  context  I  am
    satisfied that due notice of the hearing has been given  and  that  the
    Appellants have had the opportunity both of attending and of sending to
    the Tribunal any statements or documents upon which they might wish  to
    rely. I am satisfied that it appropriate to proceed with  their  linked
    appeals in their absence.

12.  The Appellants have failed to advance their case by  reference  to  any
    evidence whatsoever.  In those circumstances, although I have set aside
    the decision of Judge Anstis, the Appellants now having had a clear and
    unambiguous opportunity to present their case to the Tribunal - that is
    they have had a fair hearing - I have little hesitation  in  concluding
    in the same terms outlined by First-tier Tribunal Judge Anstis  at  his
    paragraphs 7 and 8 (which I have quoted above). The appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules fail for the reasons given by Judge Anstis,  and  the
    appeals under Article 8 fail for the reasons  given  by  Judge  Anstis:
    such reasons are now to be read as having been incorporated into my own
    independent reasons.

Notice of Decision

13.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of
    law and is set aside.

14.  I remake the decisions in the appeals.

15.  Appeal IA/08334/2015 is dismissed on all grounds.

16.  Appeal IA/08337/2015 is dismissed on all grounds.

17.  No anonymity directions are sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:  Date: 4 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:  Date: 4 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

