

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: IA/08911/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On 11th December 2013                              |On 15th January 2014    |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL Judge Frances


                                  Between:

                             ABIOLA GAFAR YUSUFF
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr S Coward, Coward & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  18th  June  1988.  He
      appeals against the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated
      27th July 2013 dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's decision
      of 8th March 2013 refusing him leave to remain  as  the  spouse  of  a
      person settled in the UK under Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules
      and the decision to remove him to Nigeria  under  section  47  of  the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.    The Appellant was granted a visit visa valid from  24th  October  2011
      to 24th October 2013. He married the Sponsor, a  British  citizen,  in
      September 2012. On 7th November 2012, he applied for leave  to  remain
      as her spouse. They are expecting their first child in December 2013.


First-tier Tribunal Judge's  findings

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mathews found that the removal decision was
      not valid. It was conceded that the Appellant could not succeed  under
      the Immigration Rules because the Appellant  could  not  overcome  the
      switching provision in E-LTRP 2.1. There were no tax records, accounts
      or P60's before the Judge and the payslips  did  not  demonstrate  the
      entire income claimed. The Judge found  that  there  was  insufficient
      evidence upon which to find the precise level of income.

4.    The Judge found that the Appellant and Sponsor were in a genuine  and
      subsisting relationship and were expecting a  baby.  The  Sponsor  was
      experiencing diabetes during her pregnancy,  but  was  still  able  to
      work, as a nanny, full time. She was not  significantly  incapacitated
      beyond being pregnant. The Judge was not satisfied  that  the  Sponsor
      could not be treated for diabetes in Nigeria.

5.    The Judge found that, given  the  Appellant's  education  and  family
      support, he could return to Nigeria without difficulty, as he had done
      in the past. The Sponsor had family and friends to whom she could turn
      for emotional support  during  any  periods  of  separation  from  the
      Appellant. The Sponsor was close to her widowed father but he was  not
      reliant or dependent on her.

6.    The Appellant could not  meet  the  Article  8  requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules. The Appellant was fully aware of the limits of  his
      status and the forthcoming expiry of his visit visa  when  he  married
      the Appellant. The Judge properly directed  himself  following  Razgar
      [2004] UKHL 27 and  Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL  40.  He  found  that  the
      Appellant had established family life in the UK  and  the  refusal  of
      leave would interfere with that right. The decision was in  accordance
      with the law and necessary in a democratic society.

7.    The Judge found that the Appellant had been a law abiding visitor and
      had a pregnant wife and friends in the UK. After he met  the  Sponsor,
      the Appellant had been travelling between the UK and Nigeria.  He  had
      family in  Nigeria  and  was  well  educated.  The  Sponsor  had  been
      separated from the Appellant when  he  returned  to  Nigeria  and  had
      family and friends to who she could turn for support. She  could  join
      the Appellant in Nigeria if she wished and he could support her.

8.    The Judge found that the Appellant had  simply  tried  to  avoid  the
      prohibition on switching categories. He had  been  travelling  to  and
      from Nigeria throughout his relationship with his wife and he could do
      so while he applied for a spouse visa. It was important that he did so
      to ensure  proper  consideration  of  his  claim  and  to  ensure  the
      protection of the  economic  position  of  the  UK,  by  allowing  his
      finances to be considered and to prevent undermining  the  restriction
      on switching categories.

9.    The Judge found that the refusal of leave to remain as a  spouse  was
      not disproportionate in the circumstances and he dismissed the  appeal
      under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

10.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pooler  on  8th
      November 2013 on the grounds that the Judge arguably erred in  law  in
      finding that the removal  decision  was  not  valid  but  subsequently
      dismissing the appeal.


The Hearing

11.   The Appellant did not attend the hearing. Mr Coward submitted that  it
      was  accepted  that  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed   under   the
      Immigration Rules. It was also accepted that the  appeal  should  have
      been allowed in so far as  the  section  47  decision  to  remove  was
      unlawful and therefore this decision was not in  accordance  with  the
      law. However, the Judge's consideration  of  Article  8,  outside  the
      Immigration Rules, was inadequate.

12.   The Judge had failed to follow the approach in Chikwamba  set  out  at
      paragraph 27 of the determination. The Appellant had a strong  Article
      8 claim; he was married to a British citizen and the disruption to his
      family life would be immense if he was required to leave  the  country
      for an unspecified period. The rights of  the  Sponsor  had  not  been
      considered in the appropriate manner. The Judge did not deal with  the
      obstacles  of  permanent  relocation  to  Nigeria.  He   should   have
      considered the effect on the  Sponsor  if  she  was  deprived  of  the
      emotional support provided by the Appellant during her  pregnancy.  It
      was the height of bureaucracy to require the Appellant to leave the UK
      to make an application, which was likely to be successful  at  such  a
      critical time.

13.   Mr Walker submitted that  the  Judge  had  considered  the  effect  of
      separation at paragraphs 22 and 31of the  determination.  The  Sponsor
      had friends to whom she could  turn  for  emotional  support.  It  was
      important that the Appellant made an application  through  the  proper
      channels and the financial aspects of his  application  were  properly
      considered.

14.   Mr Coward submitted that the Article 8 claim  was  a  strong  one  and
      requiring the Appellant to leave the UK to make an  application  would
      be disproportionate.  The  financial  position  need  not  affect  the
      consideration of a powerful Article  8  claim.  The  family  would  be
      separated at a pivotal juncture. The Judge had failed to  give  enough
      consideration to this aspect of the claim.




Decision on error of law

15.   Contrary to the submission made by Mr Coward, the Judge  did  consider
      the effect of separation upon the sponsor, a British citizen, from the
      Appellant. It is plain from  the  determination  that  the  judge  had
      regard to the present circumstances (she was  pregnant  and  suffering
      from diabetes) but on the evidence found that she  had  been  able  to
      work full-time and planned to do so until November 2013 and  that  she
      was not significantly incapacitated beyond being  pregnant  (paragraph
      21). Whilst this was a critical time for the  Appellant  and  Sponsor,
      the Judge balanced this against the fact that the Sponsor had  a  wide
      circle of friends who had previously  given  her  support  during  the
      periods when the Appellant had previously returned to Nigeria and that
      they, and the family members,  were  therefore  available  to  provide
      emotional support during any further period of separation  (paragraphs
      22 and 31).

16.   Further, the Judge placed in the balance the  Appellant's  immigration
      history and that he had been travelling to and from Nigeria throughout
      his relationship with his wife and had ample opportunity  to  make  an
      application for leave to enter as a spouse. He had failed to do so and
      was now trying to circumvent the Immigration Rules (paragraph 33).

17.   In addition, this was not a case where  the  Appellant  satisfied  all
      the requirements of the Rules save for a technicality.  The  financial
      position was unclear and given the Appellant's previous  history,  the
      Judge found that the public interest outweighed the Article  8  rights
      of the Appellant and Sponsor. In coming to this conclusion  the  Judge
      was well aware of the Sponsor's status as a British citizen  and  that
      she could not be required to leave  the  UK.  He  found  that  on  the
      evidence before him the Sponsor could join the Appellant in Nigeria if
      she chose to do so (paragraph 32). He also took into account the  fact
      that the Sponsor was pregnant, she  suffered  from  diabetes  and  she
      would be deprived of her husband's emotional support if he returned to
      Nigeria to make an application.

18.   We find that the Judge's findings were open to  him  on  the  evidence
      before him and he considered all relevant factors. There  were  cogent
      factors justifying the conclusion that Article 8 was not infringed  by
      requiring the Appellant to return to Nigeria. We find that  there  was
      no error of law in the Judge's assessment of proportionality.

19.   The Judge made no error on any point of law which  might  require  the
      determination to be set aside. The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      dismissed.  The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated  7th
      September 2012 shall stand save that the appeal against  the  decision
      to remove is allowed in so far as the  removal  decision  was  not  in
      accordance with the law.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
10th January 2013
