
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia 08284 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 October 2013                            |On 25 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          frederick stephanus dohne
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    The respondent did not appear and was not
represented
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  who  I  will
    call the claimant against, against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State refusing his application for further leave to remain  as  a  civil
    partner.

 2. I had to think very carefully before going ahead with this case  in  the
    claimant's absence.  The hearing took place on a day when there had been
    massive travel disruption because of heavy rain and a  storm  which  had
    been very destructive in some parts of the country.  The claimant has an
    address in the West Country and the Tribunal's most recent communication
    from him was a short note  in  which  he  explained  very  clearly,  and
    appropriately, that he had changed his address to a holiday park and  it
    is that address that has been used for service of the notice of hearing.
     It is right to say that the correspondence suggested that  he  did  not
    understand the significance of the Secretary of State having been  given
    permission to appeal but he should have taken advice  when  he  received
    the notice of hearing.

 3. There was a mobile telephone number  on  that  correspondence  which  my
    clerk tried several times in an effort to make contact with the claimant
    but it proved to be unsuccessful. She informed me that it  was  a  "dead
    number".

 4. I did not hear the appeal until about 12:15 pm. I am satisfied that  the
    claimant would have had sufficient time to have given an explanation for
    his absence if he had been so minded.

 5. For the reasons given below I have set aside the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal and  substituted  a  decision  dismissing  the  claimant's
    appeal.  As far as I can see there was  nothing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to justify a different outcome and I am satisfied that if I had
    adjourned the appeal I would incurred more expense and  probably  raised
    the claimant's hopes unfairly without achieving anything useful.

 6. The Secretary of State refused the application  for  two  reasons.   The
    first is that the claimant had not produced a document showing  that  he
    had competence in the English language in the way required by the  Rules
    and the second is that  he  had  been  untruthful  because  he  had  not
    disclosed details of a criminal conviction.  The point relating  to  the
    criminal conviction fell away in the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary
    of State wholly failed to produce any evidence of any  kind  to  support
    the contention that there was a criminal conviction that ought  to  have
    been disclosed and the First-tier Tribunal Judge found the very  sketchy
    explanation given by the complainant, namely that he had been  convicted
    of a motoring offence and the conviction was now spent,  was  sufficient
    to rebut the assertion that the complainant had failed  to  comply  with
    the Rules relating to disclosure.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal.  It  is  not  entirely
    clear whether it was allowed with reference to Article 8 of the European
    Convention on Human Rights or if it was allowed under the  Rules  but  I
    have to say I cannot work out how the appeal  could  have  been  allowed
    properly for either reason.

 8. The failure to produce the required  certificate  is  fundamental.   The
    appeal could not possibly have been allowed  properly  under  the  Rules
    when the certificate was not  produced.   It  is  conceivable  that  the
    appeal could have been  allowed  properly  under  human  rights  grounds
    although I have to say the determination does not explain how the appeal
    was allowed on that basis if that indeed is what the First-tier Tribunal
    decided to do.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has, I find, taken a  wrong  turn  in  his
    analysis.  He has been concerned about the evidential  flexibility  rule
    but  this  is  not  an  evidential  flexibility  case.   The  evidential
    flexibility rule is an administrative mechanism whereby the Secretary of
    State's officials can  lawfully  apply  a  little  bit  of  leniency  or
    flexibility into the very strict requirements of the Rules  where  there
    is a proper reason to think that a person ought to be  able  to  satisfy
    the requirements of  the  Rules  but  has  not  produced  the  necessary
    documents because of some administrative error.  The paradigm example of
    this is where a person who produces a whole series of documents and  for
    no obvious reason omits one that is needed to complete the  series.   In
    that kind of circumstance there is a duty on the Secretary of  State  to
    raise the point with the claimant to see if it can be  addressed.   This
    is not remotely that kind of case.  This is a case where a  person  does
    not have the necessary qualification.  There  is  no  doubt  about  that
    because the claimant asserts, rather firmly, that he does  not  see  any
    need to have the qualification because he comes from an English-speaking
    country.  He is a citizen of South Africa  and  in  a  colloquial  sense
    which might be described  as  an  English-speaking  country  but  is  so
    categorised under the Rules and it is the Rules that apply.

10. There are findings  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  based  on  the
    material before him which are helpful to the claimant.  Particularly  at
    paragraph 7 it  is  recorded  that  there  is  no  suggestion  that  the
    relationship that forms the basis of  the  application  was  other  than
    genuine  or  subsisting  and  there  was  certainly  evidence  that  the
    claimant, at least at the material time, was in  regular  work.  It  may
    well  be  that  the  financial  requirements  of  the  Rules  were  also
    satisfied.  There is a suggestion in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    that the Secretary of State was somehow remiss in keeping identification
    documents  that  prevented  the   claimant   obtaining   the   necessary
    certification  about  his  competence  in  the  English  language.    Mr
    Parkinson submits, and  I  agree,  that  this  criticism  is  completely
    unexplained.  There is no reason to think that anything retained by  the
    Secretary of State would stop somebody doing a language course  if  that
    is what they wanted to do.  Even if the Secretary of State  has  kept  a
    passport, which seems to be the case. It is out of date and it  is  open
    to  the  claimant  to  get  another  South  African  passport  from  his
    government if he is so minded.  This point really goes nowhere.

11. I cannot follow the First-tier Tribunal Judge's reasoning and  ascertain
    why the appeal has been allowed on human rights grounds if it has.

12. I therefore set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  its
    entirety and on the material before me I re-make the decision dismissing
    the appeal.  I dismiss it under the Rules because the requirements about
    proof of competency in  the  English  language  are  not  satisfied.   I
    dismiss it on human rights grounds because although there is evidence of
    a subsisting and quite long relationship there is nothing before me that
    show that returning to South Africa to make an application in accordance
    with the Rules would be disproportionate and there is  nothing  to  stop
    the claimant making an application outside the  Rules,  which  no  doubt
    would be looked at appropriately, if that is what he chose  to  do.   It
    may that such an application should be allowed on human  rights  grounds
    but I can see nothing before me that would justify such a conclusion.

13. It follows therefore that I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I substitute a decision dismissing  the  claimant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision.
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 November 2013               |


