
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/08030/2014
     IA/80209/2014
     IA/08031/2014
     & IA/08032/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 November 2014                           |On 17 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                        MUSHAMMAT MAMATAJ SULTANA (1)
                       MOHAMMAD MEHEDI HASAN KHAN (2)
                            MAARIJ HASAN KHAN (3)
                            SAFFAT HASAN KHAN (4)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Latif, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Duff promulgated on 26 August 2014  in  which
    he dismissed their appeal against the decision of the respondent of  22
    January 2014 to refuse applications for further leave to remain and  to
    remove them pursuant to Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The first appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  born  on  11  September
    1980.  She is the mother of the second and third appellants born  on  1
    October  2003  and  21  November  2004.   Both  are  also  citizens  of
    Bangladesh. The husband of the first appellant and father of the second
    and third appellants was originally a joint  appellant  (IA/08029/2014)
    but he returned  to  Bangladesh  in  March  2004  and  his  appeal  was
    subsequently deemed to be abandoned.

 3. The appellants first entered the United Kingdom on 12 November 2007  to
    join their husband and father who had leave to remain here as a student
    and had done since 9 October 2006.  They remained here  with  leave  as
    his dependants until he successfully completed  his  PhD  at  Newcastle
    University in December 2010 and after he  had  been  granted  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a post-study worker.  Leave  to  remain
    in that capacity was  granted  until  9  February  2013.   During  that
    period, however, the applicant and the father returned to Bangladesh on
    9 March 2011, returning on 29 April 2012.   Not long after  his  return
    to the United Kingdom the third appellant was  diagnosed  as  suffering
    from  an  aggressive  form  of  cancer,   rhabdomyosarcoma.  That   had
    previously  been  misdiagnosed  in  both   the   United   Kingdom   and
    subsequently in Bangladesh.

 4. The third appellant underwent surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy to
    treat the cancer and is now in complete remission.   The  treatment  he
    received requires substantial continuing management which, it is  said,
    would not be available in Bangladesh.

 5. In the application made on 6 February 2013 on the  appellants'  behalf,
    it was submitted that they should be granted further leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom to allow the third appellant to continue to  receive
    therapy and that it would be in his best interests  to  be  allowed  to
    remain here.  It was  submitted  that  there  would  in  this  case  be
    significant  and  potentially  fatal   consequences   for   the   third
    appellant's physical health and also for his mental wellbeing and  that
    of the second appellant.

 6. The respondent refused the applications pursuant  to  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 7. When the matter came before Judge Duff he heard evidence from the first
    appellant and submissions from both parties.  He also had before him  a
    substantial number of  medical  reports  produced  by  the  appellant's
    doctor  in  the  United  Kingdom,  Dr  Campbell-Hewson;  Karen   Heale,
    paediatric social worker, Michelle Luke, social worker  with  the  CLIC
    Sergeant Organisation, Brigadier General Dr Golam Mohiuddin  Chowdhury,
    specialist maxilo-facial surgeon in Bangladesh, and Dr Laura Coulthard,
    a consultant psychologist at the Royal Victoria  Infirmary,  Newcastle-
    upon- Tyne.

 8. Judge Duff found that:-

      i) the second and third appellants were well integrated and doing well
         in their studies at school [10];

     ii) he third  appellant  is  in  complete  remission  from  the  cancer
         suffered and that it was hoped that he would  not  require  further
         therapy for the cancer [11];

    iii)  the  treatment  he  had  received  for  the  cancer  has   serious
         consequences in that he has had  a  substantial  resection  of  his
         right jaw which had been  reconstructed using a fibula from his leg
         and that as a result as he grows he will require further dental and
         other surgery associated with the reconstruction; that such surgery
         would not be available in Bangladesh;

     iv) the high dose of radio therapy he had  undergone  will  damage  his
         nasal  pharynx   causing   endocrine   dysfunction   and   hormonal
         insufficiency, possibly resulting in cataracts  which  services  in
         Bangladesh would  be  unable  to  manage  and  than  the  endocrine
         deficiency had not yet manifested itself;

      v) the fibula graft has resulted in a fixed  deformity  of  the  right
         foot for which  there  has  been  partial  corrective  surgery  but
         further surgery will be required when  he  is  older,  again  which
         would not be available in Bangladesh;

     vi) the chemotherapy he received has had a number of  long  term  toxic
         effects currently managed  by  the  care  team  including  possible
         severe renal dysfunction and cardiac damage which could be  damaged
         if occurred, but there was  no treatment for  that  in  Bangladesh;
         that there was  evidence  from  Dr  Brigadier  Chowdhury  that  the
         treatment  the  third  appellant  required  is  not   possible   in
         Bangladesh;

    vii) Dr Coulthard had concluded that the return to Bangladesh  would  be
         detrimental to the third appellant physically and psychologically;

   viii) t having had regard to  the  primary  considerations  of  both  and
         second and third appellants the considerations set out  in  Section
         117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  he  was
         driven to the conclusion that the  removal  of  the  appellants  is
         proportionate and that it was not unreasonable to expect the  third
         appellant to return to Bangladesh [15];

     ix) the third appellant's initial  cancer  has  now  been  successfully
         treated and his ongoing problems relate not to  the  cancer  itself
         but to the management of the consequential  difficulties  [16]  and
         whilst that would be better in the UK than in Bangladesh  there  is
         no certainty about precisely what treatments he  would  require  in
         the future but that it  was  clear  that  his  position  is  better
         understood than it was initially; that if the  appellants  were  to
         remain on in  the  United  Kingdom  whilst  the  second  and  third
         appellants well integrated, they have no financial means and  would
         be a burden on the state [17];

      x) there would be a positive aspect the return of  the  appellants  to
         Bangladesh  and that they would be able to reunite with the  father
         [18];

     xi) it was manifestly the case and well established that the  interests
         of the children were best served by being the with  both  of  their
         parents being the departure of the father to Bangladesh  must  have
         played some part and have a negative effect on the  appellants  and
         in the psychological difficulties the second and  third  appellants
         suffered and that reuniting with them would be a benefit;  that  it
         may be that the  father  would  the  wherewithal  to  pay  for  any
         necessary treatment for the third appellant in  Bangladesh  or  for
         him to come to the UK if necessary.

 9. He therefore dismissed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

10. The appellants sought permission to appeal on the  grounds  that  Judge
    Duff had erred:-

      i) In concluding [16]  that  the  evidence  was  not  that  the  third
         appellant would be completely untreatable in Bangladesh but that it
         would be better managed in the UK as in doing  so  he  ignored  the
         medical evidence that the services that would be required  was  not
         available in Bangladesh, the evidence of  Dr  Campbell  Hewson  and
         Brigadier Chowdhury being unchallenged, as this is not  a  case  in
         which there would  be  different  levels  of  management  but  that
         management for the ongoing care would simply not  be  available  in
         Bangladesh;

     ii)  in  completely  disregarding  the  impact  of  the   psychological
         problems the third appellant would face in Bangladesh as set out in
         the letter of Dr Coulthard, in particular ignoring  the  conclusion
         that if returned it was likely that the third appellant would  come
         to significant harm either physically or psychologically [10];

    iii) in  not  taking  into  account  in  assessing  proportionality  the
         evidence from the head teacher that they are integrated  and  doing
         well at school, and in particular that the  third  appellant  faces
         bullying in Bangladesh due to his  physical  appearance,  a  matter
         having a potentially significant psychological effect as stated  by
         Dr Coulthard [11];

     iv) in taking  into  account  in  assessing  proportionality  that  the
         appellants would be a financial burden  on  the  country  and  they
         would absorb substantial resources on the NHS, the latter not being
         a permissible factor;

      v) in failing adequately to explain why he believed the effect of  the
         father being in Bangladesh would not now be helpful to  the  second
         and third appellants.

11. On 29  September  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholson  granted
    permission noting that it was arguable that the judge may have erred in
    proceeding on the basis that this is  more  of  a  question  of  better
    treatment being available in  the  UK,  there  being  evidence  of  the
    complex surgery the third appellant would require would not   available
    in Bangladesh; and, that the judge had not specifically stated what the
     best interests of the third appellant were.

12. I heard  submissions  from  both  of  the  representatives.   Mr  Latif
    submitted that given that the judge had accepted the medical  evidence,
    he had  erred  in  concluding  that  there  were  different  levels  of
    management, when in fact there would  be  no  management  of  different
    conditions in Bangladesh.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed
    adequately to deal with the report from the clinical  psychiatrist  and
    had not taken it into account in assessing proportionality which,  like
    the psychological harm, was a factor which should have been taken  into
    account in assessing the effect on the private life also.  He submitted
    also that the judge failed to take into account the amount  of  support
    that the appellants had from the wider community in the United Kingdom.



13. Mr Mangion submitted that there  was  no  dispute  as  to  the  medical
    evidence but that  this  is  not  a  case  where  there  is  continuing
    treatment; rather, it is a case where there is to be  a  management  in
    the future of secondary  conditions  arising  from  the  treatment  the
    appellant had received. He submitted  that  it  was  unclear  when  the
    treatment either to the leg or to the jaw would be required, nor was it
    clear when and if there would be any treatment necessary as a result of
    the effect of radiotherapy and chemotherapy.

14. Mr Mangion submitted also that it was evident from the determination at
    [13]  and  at  [18]  that  the  judge  had  taken  into   account   the
    psychological report and the possible  impact  and  that  this  just  a
    factor to be taken into account.

15. In reply, Mr Latif accepted that it was a very  bold  statement  by  Dr
    Coulthard but nonetheless is one that should be taken into  account  as
    the opinion of a consultant psychologist.

Discussion

16. I note from AE (Algeria) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 653 where the child was
    receiving highly specialised medical treatment, was  severely  disabled
    and had severe learning difficulties and extremely complex needs,  that
    Maurice Kaye LJ held [9]:-

         "What  was  required  was  a  structured  approach  with  the  best
         interests of Mia and her siblings as a  primary  consideration  but
         with careful consideration also of factors pointing the other  way.
         Such factors include but are not limited to the overstaying of  the
         children and their mother and the illegal entry  and  bogus  asylum
         claims of the appellants' father.  But that is no doubt what the UT
         had in mind when referring to 'the  need  to  maintain  immigration
         control'.   Moreover,  I  do   not  consider  that  it   would   be
         inappropriate for the future cost and duration of  Mia's  treatment
         and care in this country to play a part in the  balancing  exercise
         as matters relating to the  economic  wellbeing  of  this  country,
         given the strains on the public finances."

17. For the reasons set out below, I consider that Judge Duff did, as he is
    enjoined to do by AE (Algeria), carry out a  structured  assessment  of
    Article 8 in what was not an easy case.

18. There was no dispute about the  medical  evidence  in  this  case.   Dr
    Campbell-Hewson was clear that the appellant was in complete  remission
    and that the problems as to the future related not to the cancer or any
    ongoing condition or  illness  but  the  management   of  the  physical
    difficulties the third appellant faces as a result of the treatment  he
    received.  What is not, however, clear from  the  letters  as  to  when
    surgery and dental surgery will be required in the future,  how  often,
    nor is it clear when the right foot  will  require  further  corrective
    surgery.  There does, however, appear to be no doubt that  the  surgery
    will be necessary.

19.  The  consequences  flowing  from  radiotherapy,  that   is   endocrine
    dysfunction, is less clear but it would appear to require monitoring to
    identify  in  the  future  the  problems  which  may  flow   from   the
    chemotherapy.  It was therefore open to Judge Duff to  consider  as  he
    does [16] that there is no certainty as to what  will  be  required  in
    future or when.  No timescale is provided nor is there  any  indication
    of what, if any, monitoring is carried out with regards  to  the  third
    appellant's endocrine system or  in  relation  to  the  possible  toxic
    effects of chemotherapy.  Further, there is little evidence as  to  the
    consequences of the failure to monitor or of a  failure  to  carry  out
    corrective surgery.

20. This is not a case in which there will  be  an  absence  of  continuing
    treatment.  It cannot be argued that the appellant is receiving ongoing
    care.  Still less is it arguable on the basis of  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Campbell-Hewson or Brigadier Dr Chowdhury that the  appellant  requires
    to be in the United Kingdom for the foreseeable future  with  leave  in
    order to continue treatment.  And it was in the circumstances  open  to
    Judge Duff to conclude that care and management would be better in  the
    United Kingdom than in Bangladesh. It may be that testing will need  to
    be done in Bangladesh but Brigadier Dr Chowdhury says nothing about the
    availability of ongoing testing;  his  report  is  geared  towards  the
    possibility of further surgery.  A  comparison  of  what  is  available
    between the United Kingdom and Bangladesh is  therefore  predicated  on
    the assumption that something will be continuing in the United  Kingdom
    and there is no evidence that that is the case.

21. In the light of the above, Judge Duff was  therefore  entitled  to  the
    conclusions about continuing treatment that he did.

22. Turning to the letter from Dr Coulthard, she states  that  he  requires
    longer term medical care but as noted above, that is not treatment  for
    an existing complaint.  It is evident from Judge  Duff's  determination
    [11] that he had taken all the factors relating to the appellants  into
    account, particularly of the second and third.   He  then  goes  on  to
    discuss the evidence of Dr Campbell-Hewson and Brigadier  Dr  Chowdhury
    before turning to the letter from Dr Coulthard. It is evident from  his
    determination at [18] that he has taken into account the  psychological
    difficulties.  It is therefore incorrect to state as is averred in  the
    grounds [10] that the judge had not considered the conclusions and  had
    made no reference to the strongly worded conclusion.

23. There is no requirement on the judge to quote every  part  of  evidence
    and it is evident in this case that the judge had had regard to it.  In
    essence this is really an  argument  about  the  weight  to  attach  to
    various  factors  in  assessing  proportionality,   as   indeed   other
    submissions in the grounds [11] regarding the submission that the judge
    had not considered the evidence about their education produced  by  the
    head teacher.  A judge is not required to  deal  with  each  and  every
    piece of evidence particularly where, as here, there is  no  indication
    that specific attention was drawn to it, or that it is of necessity  of
    particular significance or that the attention to Miss B..   letter  had
    been raised in submissions or in a skeleton argument.   In  conclusion,
    therefore, it is not properly arguable that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    approach to the evidence of Dr Coulthard or to the weight  he  attached
    thereto.

24. In the light of AE (Algeria) it is not arguable that the judge erred in
    taking into account the cost there would be of treating the  appellant;
    on the contrary, he was entirely right so to  do.

25. Contrary to what is averred in the grounds at [13] the statement of the
    first appellant at [5] records that the children  are  distressed  that
    their father is abandoning them in the UK and [15]  that  the  children
    would be particularly affected by their father's abandonment of them in
    the UK.  She states "I am worried about the effect it has had  on  both
    children, in particular [the third appellant] because  he  has  already
    had to go through so much with his illness".  In the light of that  and
    the agreement that the family  is  still  a  family  unit,  it  is  not
    properly arguable that the judge did  not  give  adequate  reasons  for
    reaching his conclusion.   Further,  a  possible  amelioration  of  the
    children's psychological condition and the distress they suffered was a
    factor to be taken into account.  His submission  to  the  contrary  is
    unsustainable.

26. Accordingly, for these reasons, I am satisfied that  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Duff did not  involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold it.



Signed        Date 17 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
