

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/08941/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|No hearing                                    |Determination Promulgated    |
|6th August 2013                               |16th August 2013             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President

                                   Between

                                PRATIK SHIMPI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Following the grant of permission to appeal in this case I reviewed the
    file and wrote to the parties as follows:



        "The appellant points out  that  the  decision,  to  dismiss  the
        appeal against the variation decision, appears to be at odds with
        his reasoning in  paragraphs  6-11,  which  could  only  lead  to
        allowing the appeal.


        I propose to deal with this appeal without a hearing, to identify
        the circumstances set out above as constituting an error of  law,
        to  set  aside  Judge  Heynes'  decision  and  to  substitute   a
        determination allowing the appellant's  appeal  for  the  reasons
        given in Judge Heynes' paragraphs 6-11.


        Any proposal to the contrary must be made within  14  days  of  the
        date of this letter".

 2. No response has been received.

 3. Paragraphs 6 - 11 of Judge Heynes' decision are as follows:

        "6.  Appendix C of the Immigration Rules does not require a Tier  4
           applicant to provide proof of relationship  to  a  parent  whose
           bank statements have been submitted to satisfy  the  maintenance
           requirement.


        7.  The application form is not clear on the point.   M15  asks  if
           the maintenance funds in the name of the applicant of the parent
           or guardian.  The Appellant ticked the box confirming the latter
           and was instructed to go to M16.  That asks him to confirm  that
           he is providing a letter from his parent which  he  ticked.   An
           applicant is not then directed to another box.  M17 simply  says
           "I am also providing one of the  following:"  which  includes  a
           birth certificate naming himself and his parents.  It  does  not
           specifically cite this as a requirement.


        8.  The Appellant had, in fact, provided a  copy  of  his  passport
           which shows Lankanath Dalaptrao Shimpi as his father.


        9.  With his grounds of appeal, the Appellant  provided  his  birth
           certificate showing Lankanath Shimpi to be his father.  No issue
           has been raised as to the reliability of  this  document  and  I
           find that they are related as claimed.


        10. Given that  the  application  form  does  not  state  that  the
           submission of a birth certificate is an  essential  requirement,
           Appendix C does not require it and the Respondent had a reliable
           document, the Appellant's passport,  showing  the  name  of  his
           father, the submission of a birth certificate, which would  have
           provided  no  more  reliable  information  than  the  Respondent
           actually had, could have been dealt with  under  the  Evidential
           Flexibility Policy.


        11. I am not persuaded that the failure to have  provided  a  birth
           certificate constituted a breach of paragraph 245ZX(d).  Even if
           it  did,  no  purpose  is  served  by  insisting  on  a  further
           application being made".

 4. For those reasons  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  have  his  appeal
    allowed.  I set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    substitute a decision allowing the appellant's appeal.









                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 6 August 2013
