
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/08361/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 27 May 2016                      |On: 7 June 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                           MR MAHATEEMSINGH DHUNOO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  Mr J Martin, counsel instructed by Raj Law Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated  on  9  October
         2015, of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie  (hereinafter  referred
         to as the judge).

Background

      2. The appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  on  5
         September 2000. An in-time application made for leave to remain  as
         a student was refused on 9 February 2001 with no right  of  appeal.
         On 7  June  2002,  the  appellant  sought  reconsideration  of  the
         aforementioned  decision.  On  5  June  2006,  the  appellant   was
         encountered working and was briefly detained. On 6 August 2014, his
         previous application was reconsidered and refusal  was  maintained.
         Thereafter the appellant sought a further  reconsideration  and  an
         application to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  compassionate
         grounds which was refused with no right of appeal. The Secretary of
         State agreed to reconsider the matter upon the appellant submitting
         a pre-action protocol letter.

      3. On 12 February 2015, a decision was made to remove the appellant. A
         refusal letter of  the  same  date  noted,  in  summary,  that  the
         appellant made no claim to have a partner or child  in  the  United
         Kingdom; that he had lived in the United Kingdom for less  than  20
         years and that it  was  not  accepted  that  there  would  be  very
         significant obstacles to his integration  if  he  was  required  to
         return to Mauritius. The appellant's claim to  play  a  significant
         role in caring for his aunt and uncle (with whom he did not reside)
         was not considered to amount to exceptional circumstances.

      4. On 22 July 2015, Raj Law Solicitors sent the respondent a statement
         of additional grounds which asserted  that  the  appellant  was  an
         extended family member of a national of the European Economic Area,
         in that he was dependent upon his above-mentioned  uncle  and  aunt
         who are both French nationals.

      5. At the hearing before the judge, the appellant and  his  aunt  gave
         evidence. The judge noted  that  it  was  not  contested  that  the
         appellant did not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
         and proceeded to consider the Article 8 claim  outside  the  Rules,
         based on the  judge's  acceptance  that  the  appellant  played  an
         important role in caring for his aunt and  uncle.  Ultimately,  the
         judge decided that the consequences of the appellant's removal were
         not sufficiently serious to outweigh the  public  interest  in  the
         maintenance of effective immigration control.

      6. In the grounds seeking permission, it was  argued  that  the  judge
         failed  to  consider  the  statement  of  additional  grounds   and
         supporting material which was said to have  been  enclosed  in  the
         appellant's bundle of evidence submitted for the appeal before  him
         and therefore only considered the Article 8 claim.

      7. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  PJM  Hollingworth  granted  permission,
         finding that it was arguable that an error of law  had  arisen  for
         the reasons given in the grounds.

      8. The respondent's Rule 24 response noted that there is no  reference
         to the appellant's claim to be an extended family member of an  EEA
         national in the decision and reasons. It was said not to  be  clear
         if this issue was pursued at the hearing.

      9. Reference was also made in the Rule 24 response to the  appellant's
         subsequent application under the Regulations  made  on  22  October
         2015. This was refused on 26 April 2016 and it was said to be  open
         to the appellant to appeal that decision instead.

The hearing

     10. At the hearing before me, Mr  Martin  argued  that  the  judge  had
         limited his consideration of the appellant's  case,  to  Article  8
         outside the Rules. The statement of additional grounds  was  before
         the judge, enclosed in the appellant's bundle and which referred in
         detail to the appellant's claim under Regulation 8.  There  was  no
         question but that this bundle was before the judge, because he  had
         referred to other documents contained therein.

     11. Mr Martin  drew  my  attention  to  the  respondent's  decision  in
         relation to the appellant's recent unsuccessful application  for  a
         residence card. In brief, his application been refused for want  of
         a valid  identity  document  (which  was  with  the  respondent  in
         relation to the matter before me) and he had been accorded no right
         of appeal.

     12. Mr Walker  conceded  that  it  was  "clear"  that  the  appellant's
         Regulation 8 claim was before the judge; it should have been  taken
         into account and he invited me to remit the matter  to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Decision on error of law

     13. The appellant's documents which were before the  judge  included  a
         statement of additional grounds which was served on the  respondent
         on in July 2015. That document made it abundantly  clear  that  the
         appellant was claiming to be an extended family member, in that  he
         claimed to be dependent on or  living  in  the  same  household  as
         relatives who were French nationals. That aspect of his claim  went
         entirely unaddressed by the judge.

     14. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there are errors of  law
         such that the decision be set aside to be remade.

     15. The appellant's Article 8 claim  and  Regulation  8  claim  involve
         consideration of  similar  evidence  therefore,  for  the  sake  of
         simplicity, none of the judge's findings are preserved.

     16. I considered listing this matter to be heard in the Upper Tribunal,
         in view of practice statement 7 of the Senior President's  Practice
         Statements of 10 February 2010 (as amended), however the  appellant
         has yet to have any consideration of his Regulation 8 claim at  the
         First-tier Tribunal and it would be unfair to deprive him  of  such
         consideration.

     17. No anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ and I can see no reason
         for doing so now.




Conclusions


The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision to be re-made.

    Directions


       . This appeal is remitted to be  heard  de  novo  by  any  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge except Judge Devittie.

       . The appeal should be listed for a hearing at Taylor House.

       . Time estimate is 2 hours.


Signed:  Date: 5 June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

