
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/08136/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 19 April 2016                          |  On 10 May 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                AWAIS KHALIQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, Counsel, instructed by Hanson Young
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  10  January  1988.   He
    was granted leave to enter the UK as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  on  2
    September 2010 until 23 April 2012.  He was granted  further  leave  to
    remain until 15 January 2015 in the same capacity.  On 31  August  2013
    he applied for  further  leave  to  remain  but  this  application  was
    refused.  On 16 February  2015,  on  the  basis  that  the  educational
    testing  service  (ETS)  had  confirmed  to  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant's English language test had been obtained through  deception,
    the application was refused under paragraph 322(1A) of the  Immigration
    Rules.  The application for leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student was refused.  On the same date the respondent took  a  decision
    to remove the applicant stating that he had the right  of  appeal  from
    outside the country.

2.   Undaunted by this the appellant  appealed  in-country  and  his  appeal
    came before the First-tier Tribunal on 3 September 2015.  The appellant
    was represented by Mr Biggs on that occasion.

3.   Mr Biggs applied for an adjournment of the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the basis that  he  had  been  served  a  respondent's
    bundle on the day of the hearing and a jurisdictional  issue  had  been
    raised by the respondent.

4.   The  Presenting  Officer  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  raised  no
    objection to the adjournment request.

5.   The First-tier Judge found that in respect of the bundle  of  documents
    served on the day of the hearing the appellant had an  out  of  country
    appeal referring to Mehmood and Ali v Secretary of  State  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 744 and that there was no  jurisdiction  to  determine  the  appeal
    against the removal decision.

6.   In relation to the claim under Article 8 Mr Biggs referred  to  Section
    92(4)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and  the
    case of Nirula v First-tier Tribunal [2012] EWCA Civ 1436.  However the
    judge found that when the appellant  had applied for further  leave  to
    remain there was no reference to any claim pursuant to Article 8.   The
    first time there had been a reference to a potential  Article  8  claim
    was within the appeal form  itself.   The  appeal  form  was  dated  19
    February 2015 and was lodged with the Tribunal on 25 January 2015.  The
    appeal post-dated the removal decision.  It was clear from Nirula  that
    the claim  had  to  precede  the  appeal  and  that  had  to  mean  the
    institution of an appeal rather than the date of  hearing.   The  judge
    found no reason to  adjourn  and  dismissed  the  appeal  for  want  of
    jurisdiction.

7.    Counsel  settled  grounds  of  appeal  pointing  out  there  had  been
    procedural unfairness in that material had been handed  to  Counsel  on
    the day of the hearing in support of the claim that the  appellant  had
    used deception.  It was further indicated by the Home Office Presenting
    Officer that the respondent would take a jurisdictional  point  and  in
    the light of these two matters Counsel had applied for  an  adjournment
    at the outset of the hearing taking the point that  the  jurisdictional
    issue was not clear cut and that the appellant's case  was  that  there
    was jurisdiction because a human rights claim had been made before  the
    issuance of the appeal on 25 February 2015 and this point had been left
    open by the Court of Appeal in Nirula at paragraph 25.  As I have said,
    the Presenting Officer agreed to the adjournment  application  on  both
    the grounds it was put.

8.   The judge returned and refused the application  on  the  jurisdictional
    issue.  Counsel then invited the judge to  hear  him  in  full  on  the
    question of  jurisdiction.   The  question  of  jurisdiction  had  been
    outlined during the course of  the  application  for  the  adjournment.
    This request was refused.

9.   It was contended that the judge had failed  to  make  any  findings  of
    fact that were necessary not having the benefit of hearing Counsel make
    his submissions on the evidence.  There had been accordingly procedural
    unfairness.   The First-tier  Tribunal  granted  permission  to  appeal
    finding it was necessary to explore the issue of jurisdiction  and  the
    judge may have erred in law.

10.  In the respondent's response it was pointed out that there  could  have
    been no surprise in the point taken on jurisdiction since this had been
    raised in the notice of the immigration decision which had been  served
    upon him.  The human rights claim must precede any appeal which must be
    made in person to the Secretary of State.

11.  Counsel at the hearing before me relied on the grounds  of  appeal  and
    stated that the appellant had made his  application  on  an  Article  8
    basis when encountered on 16 February 2014.  The respondent had  served
    a Section 120 notice on  the  appellant  on  20  February  2016  and  a
    response had been  filed on 22 February 2016.  A letter had  been  sent
    on 19 February 2016 and the appeal had been issued on 25 February 2016.



12.  Mr Avery had not previously had sight of the  Section  120  notice  and
    noted that it was puzzling why it had been served.

13.  Counsel informally lodged a bundle including  the  Section  120  notice
    and the response and an appellant's witness statement.  Counsel pointed
    to the Home Office case  notes  on  19  February  2015  mentioning  the
    appellant's relationship to a British citizen who was in the house with
    the appellant.

14.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved  my  decision.   I  can
    only interfere with the decision if there was a material error of  law.
    I am confident that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not intend to act
    in any way unfairly and may not have appreciated the fact that  Counsel
    had intended to develop his submissions on the jurisdiction  issue  had
    the adjournment application been refused. However  the  end  result  is
    that the matter was not properly explored and as it is a  matter  going
    to jurisdiction the point cannot be brushed aside.  The Tribunal either
    has jurisdiction or it does not.  This was an application which was not
    opposed by the Presenting Officer, in fact she agreed to it.

15.  In the premises the judge was not given the benefit of  Counsel's  full
    argument on the question of jurisdiction and she might have assumed the
    point was more cut and dried than in fact Counsel  maintained  that  it
    was on the particular facts of this case. As was pointed out by Counsel
    in the grounds of appeal, the requirement that a claim  could  be  made
    after the Section 10 decision but before the issuance of an appeal  had
    been left open by the Court of Appeal.   In the premises I am satisfied
    that the judge did err in law on a procedural point and accordingly  it
    is open to me to consider the fuller evidence that has  now  been   put
    forward.   This raises a  new  and  complicating  factor  in  that  the
    respondent appears to have served a Section 120 notice on the appellant
    and the response was filed by the appellant in time.  Mr Avery did  not
    have notice of this material until the  hearing  before  me.   If  this
    Section 120 notice is what it appears to be, there  would  arguably  be
    some fault on both sides for not bringing it to the  attention  of  the
    First-tier Judge.  Service of  the  notice  might  arguably  give  some
    support to the appellant's claim that the Secretary of State  was  made
    aware of the Article 8 dimension to his case at a time which  may  have
    relevance to the determination of the jurisdictional issue.

16.  It is plain that the matter could not be resolved by me given the  late
    service of the evidence and in any event it appears desirable that  the
    appeal should be heard afresh in the light of the extent  of  the  fact
    finding required.  It will be necessary, for example, to hear from  the
    appellant about the precise sequence of events and it will be necessary
    for the respondent to give consideration to the effect of  the  Section
    120 notice if any on the jurisdictional point.

Notice of Decision

17.  This appeal is  accordingly  remitted  to  be  heard  afresh  before  a
    different First-tier Judge.

18.  The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated.

Fee Award

19.  The First-tier Judge made no fee award and it  is  not  appropriate  to
    make one at this stage.

20.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 3 May 2016


G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


