

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/08440/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |     Decision Promulgated    |
|On 15 January 2016                            |     On 4 February 2016      |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

                              JOHN OLUWOLE AWE
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of John Oluwole Awe, a citizen of Nigeria born  27
       April 1965, arising from the decision of the Secretary of State of 12
       February  2015  to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a  residence   card
       recognising his asserted right of residence as the spouse of  an  EEA
       national exercising Treaty Rights in the United Kingdom.  The  matter
       having been dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appeal  now
       proceeds with permission in the Upper Tribunal.


    2. Given the stance properly and  pragmatically  taken  by  the  parties
       before me, my decision can be brief.


    3. The Appellant applied for a residence card based on his  relationship
       with Cabal Carla Rodrigues, a citizen of Portugal, working at a  hair
       salon at the time of the application.  It  was  refused  because  the
       Secretary of State did not  accept  that  their  relationship  was  a
       durable one.


    4. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed his appeal, taking the  view  that,
       notwithstanding the absence of a refusal letter  giving  reasons  for
       the Secretary of State's conclusion (which  was  stated  in  a  brief
       notice of decision, not in itself a "reasons  for  refusal"  letter),
       the appeal could be justly determined, and that absent  the  original
       supporting documents that accompanied the application, and given that
       the missing item constituted a failure that lay  at  the  Appellant's
       door, it was inevitable that the appeal should be dismissed.


    5. Grounds of appeal contested the  lawfulness  of  that  approach,  and
       permission to appeal was granted by Judge Woodcraft  on  25  November
       2015 noting that the course of action taken was arguably procedurally
       unfair.


    6. Once Mr Kandola had  had  sight  of  a  witness  statement  that  was
       overlooked, the advocates before me agreed that the appeal  had  gone
       off on the wrong footing.


  Findings and reasons


    7. The parties were correct to agree that  the  proceedings  below  were
       marred by material procedural  irregularity.  Rule  24(1)(d)  of  The
       Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
       Chamber) Rules 2014 sets out:


           "24.-(1) ... when a respondent is provided  with  a  copy  of  a
           notice of appeal, the respondent must provide the Tribunal with-
           (a) the notice of the decision to which  the  notice  of  appeal
           relates and any other document the respondent  provided  to  the
           appellant giving reasons for that decision;"


    8. Accordingly it can be seen that the absence of a refusal letter was a
       matter which placed the Respondent, not the Appellant, in  breach  of
       the Rules.  Furthermore, the Appellant had put a positive case as  to
       the durability of his relationship  in  a  short  witness  statement,
       which was overlooked by the First-tier Tribunal. It seems to me  that
       these twin errors fatally undermine the decision appealed against.


          Decision:

    The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  a
    material error of law. Given that the Appellant  has  effectively  been
    deprived of a fair hearing, it is appropriate to remit  the  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be considered afresh.

             [pic]
Signed:                                            Date: 15 January 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
