
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08265/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th May 2016                              |On 15th July 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                   MR CAWD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on  [  ]  1981.   On  18th
    November 2011 the Appellant was granted discretionary leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  of
    Human Rights on the basis of his  relationship  with  [HM],  a  British
    citizen.  On 13th November 2014 the Appellant applied for an  extension
    of his discretionary leave on the  basis  of  his  private  life  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1).  In  support  of  the  application  the  Appellant
    submitted a statement which confirmed he was not in a relationship with
    [HM] and that the  relationship  was  terminated  following  horoscopes
    showing that they were  "strongly  not  compatible".   The  Appellant's
    application was refused by the Secretary of State by Notice of  Refusal
    dated 19th February 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal  came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Kainth sitting at Richmond on 15th September 2015.  In a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 12th October 2015  the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    allowed on human rights grounds.

 3. On 15th October the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  On 6th April 2016 Acting Resident First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Zucker refused permission  to  appeal.   In  refusing  permission
    Judge Zucker noted that in essence the grounds submitted that the judge
    "reviewed" the Respondent's discretion;  made  inadequate  findings  in
    relation to the Appellant's mental health and  wrongly  looked  at  the
    wider application of Article 8 ECHR.  He found that the grounds pointed
    to no material arguable error of law.

 4. Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   They
    appear to be undated.  However they  relied  on  the  original  grounds
    submitted in support of the first application for permission to appeal.
     On 21st April 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein  granted  permission
    to appeal.   He  noted  that  the  application  demonstrated  that  the
    Tribunal may have made an error of law with reference to Section  86(6)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and in  consequence
    in its approach to the Respondent's review of the  application  for  an
    extension of discretionary leave and Article 8 and in terms of  Article
    8 of the European Convention of Human  Rights  and  the  mental  health
    issues raised in this case.  Further in appearing to find that it would
    be disproportionate  to  remove  the  Appellant  to  Sri  Lanka  before
    purporting to apply the statute may also have been a material error  of
    law.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I note  that  this  is  an  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State but for the purpose  of  continuity  throughout  the
    appeal process Mr CAWD is referred to herein as the Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent.  No Rule  24  response  has  been
    filed on behalf  of  the  Appellant.   The  Appellant  appears  by  his
    instructed Counsel Mr Briddock.  Mr  Briddock  is  familiar  with  this
    matter.  He appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and he is also  the
    author of the Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Wilding.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Wilding relies on the original Grounds of  Appeal.   He  points  out
    that there are three Grounds of Appeal.  Firstly the  judge's  approach
    to the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department's  review  of  the
    application for an extension of discretionary leave and Article 8 claim
    outside the Rules disclosed material errors of law.   He  submits  that
    even though the judge purported to allow the  matter  with  respect  to
    Article 8, the judge has in fact sought  to  review  the  Secretary  of
    State's  decision  outside  of  the  Rules  and  exercise  of  her  own
    discretion.  He takes me to paragraph  22  of  the  decision  which  he
    contends is the offending paragraph where the judge states:

         "The Appellant does succeed on the basis that the Respondent should
         have considered the other factors as referred to  in  paragraph  17
         above  when  looking  at  whether  or  not  a  further  period   of
         discretionary leave should have been granted".

 7. He submits that that approach  is  unlawful  and  that  the  judge  has
    prevented statute from reviewing the Secretary of State's  exercise  of
    discretion outside of the Rules by  virtue  of  Section  86(6)  of  the
    Nationality and Immigration Act 2002 and that the judge did not purport
    to find that the Secretary of State had failed to apply any  applicable
    policy.  He submits that only then could the judge have found that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the  law.   He
    further considers that the judge's approach to Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules was contrary to a number of binding  authorities,  in
    particularly the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v  SS
    (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  He  further  contends  it  was
    incumbent upon the judge to use his own finding  at  paragraph  21  the
    terms of Rule 276ADE(1)(vi) as the reference point for whether  or  not
    there were compelling features outside the Rules justifying a grant  of
    leave.  He points out that paragraph 276ADE is not a part  of  Appendix
    FM as asserted by the judge.  He takes me back to paragraph 22  of  the
    judge's decision, accepting that the judge has considered the Secretary
    of State's discretionary leave policy but the judge has  not  made  the
    final step and said that the decision was unlawful, and thereafter from
    paragraphs 23 to 25 the  judge  has  failed  to  give  due  and  proper
    consideration to the matters he had just mentioned and  that  paragraph
    276ADE cannot be met.  The judge  has  not,  as  Mr  Wilding  suggests,
    "signposted" himself as to how he would address  paragraph  276ADE  and
    the fact that the starting point  weighed  heavily  on  supporting  the
    public interest as the issue to be considered.

 8. He submits that the Article 8 analysis has been made on  the  basis  of
    the discretionary leave policy and not by undertaking a proper  Article
    8 analysis.  He refers me specifically to  paragraph  24  adopting  the
    discretion of the Secretary of State which he submits is not  something
    that the First-tier is entitled to do.

 9. Mr Wilding then turns to the second Ground of Appeal, namely  that  the
    judge's approach to Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  of  Human
    Rights and mental health was wrong and disclosed a  material  error  of
    law.  He notes that at paragraph 24 the judge  has  concluded  that  it
    would be disproportionate to remove the Appellant to Sri Lanka  on  the
    basis of the medical evidence on  the  basis  that  there  would  be  a
    "substantial threat to the Appellant's wellbeing".  He notes that it is
    significant that other than quoting the view of the two  psychiatrists,
    the judge made no actual finding on what risk arises from his return to
    Sri Lanka other than that he would be  able  to  reintegrate  and  that
    failure of finding constitutes a material error.  He  points  out  that
    despite identifying the evidence the judge has made no finding  at  all
    regarding the risk on return to Sri Lanka and, given the prominent role
    of the position regarding the Appellant's mental  health,  that  is  an
    important reason why that  should  have  been  addressed.   Further  he
    considers there  is  a  conflict  in  the  findings  of  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 21 and 24 as to whether or not the Appellant's mental health
    would have a material effect on his return.  He  points  out  that  the
    judge has failed to give due and proper consideration to  the  position
    of paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  when  starting  this
    consideration.

10. Finally he turns to the arguments relating to the judge's  approach  to
    Section 117B of the NIA 2002, pointing out that the Secretary of  State
    contends that the judge's approach was unlawful.  He notes the  judge's
    conclusions at paragraph 24, and thereafter the  judge  has  turned  to
    paragraph 117B but submits that  the  judge  misstates  paragraph  117B
    pointing out that it is not a guide and that the  judge  describes  the
    position failing to give weight to private  life  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant whilst his position was precarious and that  the  failure  to
    analyse these issues in themselves constitute a material error of  law.



11. In response Mr Briddock accepts that it is not open  to  the  judge  to
    exercise discretion on behalf of the Secretary of State but points  out
    that he has not done that and that the conclusion at paragraph 22 is on
    the sole issue of acceptance as to whether or not the  policy  has  not
    been followed.  He emphasises that the  judge  has  not  said  that  he
    intends to allow the appeal on that basis.  He then goes on to consider
    Article 8 which he considers the judge was perfectly  entitled  to  do.
    He argues that the findings of the judge at paragraph 22  must  not  be
    taken in isolation.  He says the  judge  has  looked  at  the  position
    regarding  jurisdiction  following  the  amended  2002  Act.   He   has
    consequently only allowed  the  appeal  under  Article  8  and  not  by
    exercising discretion or not by finding the decision is, or is not,  in
    accordance with the law as this would fall outside the jurisdiction  of
    the judge.

12. He turns then to Ground 2 and to the  mental  health  point  submitting
    that this is  a  non-starter  and  misleading.   He  submits  that  the
    arguments have to be looked at in the round and not  merely  restricted
    to issues of mental health and that  he  emphasises  this  was  not  an
    attempt to try to persuade the court that there was a breach of Article
    3 of the European Convention of Human  Rights.   He  submits  that  the
    argument put forward by Mr Wilding and in the Grounds of Appeal on this
    ground do not assist the Secretary of State  at  all  and  that  mental
    health is just one of the factors that a judge has  decided  upon  when
    looking at the matter under Article 8.

13. So far as paragraph 117B is concerned, he actually adopts the  approach
    adopted by Judge Zucker when refusing permission.  He contends that the
    judge has given sufficient reasons, being the  medical  evidence  taken
    together with other factors set out, and whilst he concedes that a more
    structured approach might have been preferable within Section 117B,  he
    contends it is clear that had reference been made earlier the  decision
    would have been no different and in any event the reference to  Section
    117B forms part of the explanation for the finding that  removal  would
    be disproportionate.  He accepts that Section 117B is not a  guide  but
    that the judge has looked at all the facts.

14. In brief final response Mr Wilding refers me to SS (Congo) pointing out
    that  a  failure  under  the  Rules  is  relevant   when   giving   due
    consideration under Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   He  specifically
    relies on paragraph 33 of SS (Congo) and he  asks  for  all  the  above
    reasons that I find a material error of law and remit the  matter  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

The Law

15.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

16. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

17. This is a complex appeal.  It has a three-pronged approach.  The  first
    relates to the judge's approach to the Secretary of State's  review  of
    the application for the extension of discretionary leave and Article 8.
     Reference is made to the alleged prevention to the  judge  by  statute
    from reviewing the Secretary  of  State's  exercise  of  discretion  by
    virtue of Section 86(6) of the 2002 NIA.  Section 86(6) was omitted  by
    Schedule 9  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014  with  savings  within  the
    Statutory Instrument 2014/2771.  However the judge has looked  at  this
    matter under Article 8  outside  the  Rules  and  not  as  a  basis  of
    discretion whether or not the decision was in accordance with the  law.
    What the judge has gone on to do  is  to  look  at  this  matter  under
    Article 8 outside the Rules.  The consequent issue is whether or not in
    doing so he has misdirected himself.  It is clear from paragraph 24  of
    the judge's determination that the judge has addressed  his  Article  8
    analysis by perhaps  inadvertently  adopting  the  discretionary  leave
    policy of the Secretary of State rather than by carrying out a detailed
    Article 8 analysis.  This is not an approach that is within  the  power
    of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  albeit  I  can  appreciate  in  this
    instant case how it  came  about.   However  I  am  satisfied  that  by
    adopting that approach the error  of  law  is  found  and  that  it  is
    material.

18. Secondly, in addition it is fair to say that  the  judge  has  made  no
    findings relating to the Appellant's return to Sri Lanka as a result of
    his mental health and as to whether that in itself constitutes a breach
    of Article 8.  There is consequently a contradiction in paragraph 24 of
    the judge's decision.

19. Finally I accept the arguments set out by the  Secretary  of  State  in
    that there is a fundamental misapplication of Section 117B of the  2002
    Act insofar as the approach to it by the judge is  wrong  in  that  the
    judge has made  a  finding  on  proportionality  prior  to  considering
    Section 117B.  When looked at  in  the  round  it  is  therefore  quite
    possible that the judge may have come to a  different  conclusion  with
    regard to his Article  8  analysis  and  the  Article  8  analysis  and
    findings are inadequate.

20. These factors consequently constitute material errors of law and  I  am
    satisfied that the correct approach is consequently to  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and to remit the matter back to the
    First-tier for rehearing with none of the findings of fact to stand.

Decision and Directions

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.

 2) None of the findings of fact are to stand.

 3) The matter is remitted to be reheard before any Immigration Judge other
    than Immigration Judge Kainth sitting at  Taylor  House  on  the  first
    available date 28 days hence with an ELH of three hours.

 4) That there be leave to either party to file  an  up-to-date  bundle  of
    documents, both subjective and objective, upon  which  they  intend  to
    rely at least fourteen days prior to the restored hearing.

 5) That the Appellant do attend the remitted hearing.  In the  event  that
    the Appellant requires an interpreter it is the responsibility  of  the
    Appellant's legal representatives within seven days of receipt of these
    directions to notify the Tribunal.

The  Appellant  has  previously  been  granted  anonymity  in   the   appeal
procedure.  No application is made to vary that status  and  the  previously
made anonymity direction is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 15 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date 15 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
