
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08780/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          MR PHILIP BOAMAH FORDWDO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss N Nnamani (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Dean promulgated on 2nd March 2015, following a hearing at Taylor House
    on 20th February 2015.  In the determination, the judge  dismissed  the
    appeal of Philip Boamah Fordwdo.  The  Appellant  subsequently  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  Ghana,  who  was  born  on  16th
    February 1964.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 29th January 2014 refusing him  further  leave
    to remain in the UK as a Tier 5  Temporary  Worker  (Religious  Worker)
    Migrant.

 3. The Respondent rejected the claim for two  reasons.   First,  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  245ZX(B)(C)  in
    that the Appellant did not  claim  any  points  for  a  certificate  of
    Sponsorship and he did not possess a certificate of Sponsorship from  a
    recognised Sponsor.  Second, as far as paragraph 276ADE of Appendix  FM
    was concerned, he had a wife and child living in Ghana  and  could  not
    qualify in terms of Article 8 rights in this country.

The Appellant's Claim

 4. The Appellant's claim is that he has been  in  the  UK  for  ten  years
    having arrived on 3rd November 2004, so that by 5th November  2014,  he
    had already completed ten years in the UK.  He had been  granted  leave
    to remain as a work permit holder until 10th June 2009  when  he  first
    arrived on 3rd November 2004.  Thereafter, there was considerable delay
    in  this  various  applications  being  properly  considered   by   the
    Respondent Secretary of State.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge had an application before him to vary Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    include the ten year rule, but refused to do so, holding that, although
    the Appellant had entered the UK in 2004, in order to make a successful
    application he would need to demonstrate to the required standard  that
    he had at least ten years' continuous lawful residence in the UK.   The
    present forum was not one where such an application could  be  properly
    be determined.  Second, the Respondent had not made a decision  on  the
    basis of the ten year rule and therefore no decision under the ten year
    rule existed against which he could appeal.

 6. The judge went on to consider that the Appellant was 51 years old, came
    to the UK in 2004, but did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(iii) to (vi).

 7. The judge went on to consider Article 8 and referred to the decision in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  He went on to state that the Appellant did have
    an established private life in  the  UK,  but  that  private  life  was
    established in the knowledge that he had only a temporary basis of stay
    in this country.  The passage of more time does not create a legitimate
    expectation that further leave would be granted, the  judge  held  (see
    paragraph 22).  In addition, the Appellant's private life  amounted  to
    nothing more than ordinary day-to-day life, friendships, and employment
    (paragraph 24).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.



Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the Appellant  should  have  been
    granted leave to amend his grounds of appeal to enable him to  rely  on
    the ten years' lawful residence rule, so that he could  meet  paragraph
    276B of HC 395.   The  Grounds  of  Appeal  did  not  assert  that  the
    Appellant met the requirements of paragraph 245ZQ(B)(C).

10. On 7th July 2015,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that it was arguable that the judge did  not,  in
    reaching his decision  on  proportionality  of  removal,  consider  the
    lawfulness or otherwise of the Appellant's stay in the UK.

11. On 14th August 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered on the  basis  that
    the  Respondent  did  not  oppose  the  Appellant's   application   for
    permission to appeal and invited the Tribunal to determine  the  appeal
    with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing to consider the proportionality
    of removal, the lawfulness or otherwise of the Appellant's stay in  the
    UK, to be assessed as well.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 27th November 2015, Miss Nnamani, appearing
    as Counsel on behalf of the  Appellant,  submitted  that  the  Rule  24
    response by the Respondent  Secretary  of  State  did  not  oppose  the
    application for permission to appeal, which was now  conceded,  and  so
    the only issue for this Tribunal was that of proportionality.  However,
    she also submitted that it was important for the other  grounds  to  be
    argued as well, as her application by fax of 24th November 2014, sought
    out to emphasise once again.  This is because  this  case  had  a  long
    history and there had been considerable delay, and  the  Appellant  had
    satisfied the ten year rule, so that Article  8  considerations  should
    not be excluded from the final decision.

13. Miss Everett, appearing on behalf of the Respondent submitted that  the
    Upper Tribunal  in  granting  permission  had  expressly  excluded  the
    consideration of other grounds.  Furthermore, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did have the same application to consider at paragraph 9  of  the
    determination, and decided (at paragraph  10)  that  he  would  not  be
    granting permission to amend the grounds so as  to  include  the  other
    matters.  That determination by the judge at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    level had been upheld by UTJ Coker in the Upper Tribunal,  so  that  it
    was affirmed that no other grounds were to be considered now except the
    ten year rule.

14. I ruled that permission to include  the  other  grounds  would  not  be
    granted as no convincing case had been made out in circumstances  where
    UTJ Coker had already determined that permission was granted solely  on
    the basis of considering the proportionality of removal.   Furthermore,
    as UTJ Coker made clear, Judge Dean had refused permission to amend the
    Grounds of Appeal on the basis expressly that the decision  subject  of
    appeal before him was an appeal against a decision to refuse him a Tier
    5 visa.  There had been no application for leave to remain on the basis
    of ten years' lawful residence.  There was accordingly no decision with
    respect to that  matter  by  the  Respondent  Home  Office  that  could
    properly be appealed.  In any event, at the date of the decision, which
    was the subject of the appeal, the Appellant had not accrued ten years'
    lawful residence.  The date of the decision was 29th January 2014.  The
    Appellant only accrued ten years' residence on 5th November 2014.

Remaking the Decision

15. The sole issue before this Tribunal,  with  an  error  of  law  finding
    already having been made by UTJ Coker on 7th July 2015, is the asserted
    failure of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to factor into his  assessment
    the claimed lawfulness of the Appellant's residence at the date of  the
    hearing.  I find that the judge did not, in reaching  his  decision  on
    the proportionality of removal, consider the lawfulness or otherwise of
    the Appellant's stay in the UK.  The grant of permission goes on to say
    (see paragraph 2) that, "the parties are reminded that if the  decision
    is set aside it is likely that this appeal will be re-determined on the
    basis of submissions only".

16. I heard little by way  of  submissions  from  Miss  Nnamani  about  the
    lawfulness of the Appellant's residence at the  date  of  the  hearing.
    Instead, the submissions were largely confined to attempting to  reopen
    the consideration of the ten year lawful residence point, with  respect
    to which no application had been made before the  Respondent  Secretary
    of State, and no decision from that authority.

17. What appears clear, however, is  that  the  Appellant  entered  the  UK
    lawfully on 3rd November 2004 as a work permit holder, and was  granted
    various extensions of leave to remain, right the way through until 10th
    June 2009.  His final application on 25th August 2009 was then refused,
    when he applied to remain as a Tier 5 Religious Migrant.  Despite  that
    refusal in 2009, however, the Appellant had remained lawfully in the UK
    pending the outcome of his appeal, by  virtue  of  Section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971, because leave was granted pending the outcome  of
    his appeal.  The  Appellant,  accordingly,  had  ten  years  of  lawful
    residence in this  country.   An  application  for  ten  years'  lawful
    residence, however, has not, as has repeatedly been stated, been  made.



18. Instead, what is in issue here is whether the Appellant  met  paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules, because this was  the  application  that
    the Respondent Secretary of State had been considering all along.   The
    Appellant's original Grounds of Appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    prepared by Samuel Louis Solicitors has very little to  say  about  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights in the UK.  The  refusal  letter  of  29th
    January 2014, had already emphasised  that  the  Appellant's  wife  and
    child  were  in  Ghana  and  that  the   Appellant's   representative's
    correspondence "does not elaborate on  the  family  relationship;"  and
    that, "although your sister-in-law writes of regular contact with  you,
    there is no information about  your  brother  or  any  extended  family
    life".  The judge had clearly found that the Appellant had "established
    a private life during his time in this country and  that  his  proposed
    removal will interfere with that private life" (see paragraph 21).

19. Given that the judge had referred to a  consideration  of  the  "Razgar
    principles" (see paragraph 19), it is clear that the first  and  second
    steps of Lord Bingham's tabulation in Razgar  (see  paragraph  17)  had
    been found in favour of the Appellant.  The remaining questions were in
    relation to the  issues  of  legitimacy,  necessity,  and  fairness  or
    proportionality  or  reasonableness.   These  remaining   issues   were
    encapsulated by the remaining three steps in Lord Bingham's tabulation.
     If the first and second step was resolved in favour of the  Appellant,
    the third step was whether the interference was in accordance with  the
    law.  There is here no burden on the Appellant or on the  Secretary  of
    State.   The  determination  of  this  question  is  a  simple  factual
    question.  The interference was plainly in accordance with the law.

20. However, in relation to the fourth and fifth steps,  which  dealt  with
    the     issue     of     necessity,     and      the      issue      of
    fairness/proportionality/reasonableness, which was the last  step,  the
    judge's failure to  consider  the  impact  of  the  ten  years'  lawful
    residence in this  country,  in  relation  to  the  proportionality  of
    removal, is such that the decision must be set aside.

21. In considering whether steps four and five  of  the  Razgar  tabulation
    fall to be determined in favour of the Appellant, I conclude  that  the
    decision was neither necessary in a democratic society in the interests
    of the economic wellbeing of the country or for the protection  of  the
    rights and freedoms of others,  nor  was  it  proportionate.   This  is
    because the Appellant had lived lawfully for ten years in the  UK.   It
    is true that the Appellant does not refer, in terms of his private life
    rights in the UK, to more than  ordinary  day-to-day  friendships,  and
    employment.  However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  made  a  clear
    finding of facts (at paragraph 21) that the Appellant's  removal  would
    interfere with the established private life that he did  have  in  this
    country.

22. It is incorrect to say that that private life can simply be swept aside
    because it has "been established in the knowledge that he has been here
    on a  temporary  basis  throughout  his  time  in  this  country"  (see
    paragraph 21).  If that were to be the case, no Article  8  application
    would ever succeed.  Article 8 applications arise with most force  when
    the Immigration  Rules  cannot  be  complied  with.   Accordingly,  the
    interference here is not proportionate to  the  legitimate  public  end
    that is sought to be achieved because the Appellant has been in the  UK
    lawfully, has been in lawful employment, and does have friends, as  has
    been accepted.  His wife and child may be in Ghana, but his claim is in
    relation to his "private life" and  not  in  relation  to  his  "family
    life".

23.  The  only  issue  that  can  militate  against  his  claim  in   these
    circumstances is the public interest considerations under Section 117B,
    but his residence in this country has not been "precarious" because  he
    has been here with lawful permission and  has  accumulated  a  specific
    number of years in this country, which had a  formal  application  been
    made to the Respondent Secretary of State on  that  basis,  would  have
    entitled him to a consideration of leave to remain in this  country  on
    the basis of the so-called "ten year rule".

24. The fact that this is so, cannot be an irrelevant consideration as  far
    as the Article 8 evaluative exercise is concerned.  Accordingly, I find
    that the balance of considerations fall to be determined in  favour  of
    the Appellant and this appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law so that it falls to be set aside.  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  allowed.


No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    8th December 2015

