
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/08143/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 13 September 2016                          |On 15 September 2016         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                    V S J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andonian ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 27 January 2016, in
    which the FTTJ dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal  of
    leave to remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  and  to  remove  the
    appellant under s47 of the  Immigration,  Nationality  and  Asylum  Act
    2006.

 2. Given my references to the children  of  the  appellant's  partner,  an
    anonymity order is appropriate.

Background

 3. The claimant is an Indian citizen and a Hindu. Her partner is a British
    citizen, originally from Pakistan.  She lives with her partner who  has
    four children aged 31, 27, 13 and 11.  The elder children  are  adults.
    The two younger children, who are British, live with their mothers  but
    are in contact with their  father  and  the  appellant  regularly.  The
    appellant entered the UK as a student in 2009. This was extended  until
    January 2012. She made subsequent applications  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a student which were refused. Following  an  appeal  she  was
    granted 60 days' leave outside the Immigration Rules to find a  Tier  4
    sponsor, that leave expiring on 22 November 2014. She applied for leave
    to remain in the UK on the basis of her  family  life  on  20  November
    2014. This was refused and she appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Her appeal was refused under the Immigration  Rules:  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE. It was not considered outside the Rules.


 4. The appellant was granted leave  to  appeal  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rimington in the following terms:

         "... The grounds  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  assert  that  he  judge
         misdirected himself in law  when  taking  into  account  irrelevant
         matters stating that the appellant could  not  'switch'  categories
         and the judge failed to address  the  interests  of  the  sponsor's
         children.


         The judge does not appear to have applied the 'switching' provision
         or lack of it against the appellant. Indeed it is not taken in  the
         Secretary of State's refusal letter in line with  E-ELTRP  2.2  (b)
         (ie the appellant must not be in breach of Immigration laws  (which
         she is) unless EX.1 applies).  The judge proceeded,  in  line  with
         the refusal letter to consider the appeal under Appendix  FM,  with
         reference to EX.1 and EX.2.


         The judge addressed any insurmountable obstacles to the partner and
         her sponsor continuing family life outside the  UK  under  Appendix
         FM. The judge records that the sponsor has children, but  he  makes
         no findings about  the  children  and  does  not  factor  into  the
         assessment  of  insurmountable  obstacles  the  British   national,
         sponsor's children. The  judge  considered  whether  the  appellant
         could make an application for entry clearance from abroad and found
         that she could.  The  finding  regarding  insurmountable  obstacles
         under Appendix FM, however, is a matter  to  be  considered  first.
         Bearing in mind the judge accepts that the  appellant  and  sponsor
         have a relationship and the sponsor has children with whom  he  has
         contact, the failure to address this point is an arguable error  of
         law."


 5. In her R24 reply, the respondent states the following:


         "The respondent does not oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal on the basis that the FTTJ  did  not  consider
         whether the fact that the  sponsor  has  children  in  the  UK  and
         contact with them would amount to  an  insurmountable  obstacle  to
         family life continuing in India under EX.1.   The  sponsor  invites
         the  Tribunal  to  determine  the  appeal   with   a   fresh   oral
         (continuance) hearing."


 6. Hence the matter came before me.



Error of Law Submissions

 7. Mr Avery, for the respondent, indicated at the outset  of  the  hearing
    that whilst it was conceded by the respondent that the decision of  the
    FTTJ contained an error of law, the basis on which that concession  had
    been made was amended:  he  submitted  that  the  appellant  could  not
    benefit from EX.1 because she did not meet the eligibility requirements
    as a partner under paragraph E-LTRP.2.1(b) which required her  to  have
    at least six months' leave to remain: her last grant of leave to remain
    had been for 60 days only. That said, he accepted that the  appellant's
    and sponsor's relationship with the two younger children was  a  matter
    of relevance to s117B(6) of the 2002 Act (parental  responsibility  for
    the children) and, for that reason, he maintained the  concession  that
    the decision contained an error of law  for  failure  to  consider  the
    interests of the children: the same considerations applied to EX.1  and
    to s117B(6).  He accepted it was a material error of law.


 8. Mr Ahmed, for the appellant, did not object to this alteration  of  the
    concession albeit he disputed the contention that EX.1 did not apply to
    the appellant.


 9.  Both  parties'  representatives  agreed  that  I  should  decide,   as
    preliminary issue, whether EX.1 applied in this case.  In  so  doing  I
    take into account the parties' representative's submissions.


10. The requirements for limited leave to remain as a partner are  set  out
    in Section R-LTRP. The requirements to be met are  that  the  applicant
    and their partner are in  the  UK,  the  applicant  has  made  a  valid
    application for limited or indefinite leave and  either  the  applicant
    must  not  fall  for  refusal  under  Section  S-LTR  (the  suitability
    requirements) and the  applicant  meets  all  of  the  requirements  of
    Section E-LTRP (the eligibility requirements), or  the  applicant  must
    not fall for refusal under Section S-LTR (the suitability requirements)
    and "the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs  E-LTR.1.2-1.12
    and E-LTR.2.1" and "paragraph EX.1" applies.

11. I bear in mind the guidance in Sabir  (Appendix  FM  -  EX.1  not  free
    standing) [2014] UKUT 63 (IAC) where it was held that the  architecture
    of the Rules as regards partners is such that EX.1  is  "parasitic"  on
    the relevant Rule within Appendix FM that  otherwise  grants  leave  to
    remain. If EX.1 were  intended  to  be  a  free-standing  element  some
    mechanism of identification would have been used. The structure of  the
    Rules as drafted required it to  be  a  component  part  of  the  leave
    granting Rule. This is now made plain by the respondent's  guidance  to
    which I was referred by Mr Ahmed.  It was submitted by Mr Ahmed that it
    was the appellant's immigration history  which  should  be  taken  into
    account  in  considering  whether  the  appellant  complied   with   E-
    LTR.2.1(b).  I do not accept this proposition:  it  is  entirely  clear
    from the wording of E-LTR.2.1(b) that  it  refers  to  the  applicant's
    current status and not to her immigration history:  it  refers  to  the
    applicant's status in the present tense and cannot  be  read,  even  by
    inference, as referring to her former status.

12. For these reasons, I find that EX.1 does not apply to the appellant and
    that it was an error of law for the FTTJ to  consider  the  appellant's
    circumstances by reference to  it.   That  said,  the  FTTJ  found  the
    appellant did not fulfil the criteria in EX.1 so his  failure  to  take
    into account the interests of the minor children of  her  partner  when
    considering whether there "insurmountable obstacles to that family life
    with that partner continuing outside  the  UK"  is  immaterial  to  the
    outcome of the appeal under the Immigration Rules: the  appellant  does
    not fulfil the criteria in E-LTRP.2.1(b) and is unable to benefit  from
    EX.1.

13. That said, Mr Avery accepted there was an error of law  in  the  FTTJ's
    decision on the grounds the FTTJ should have  taken  into  account  the
    children's interests in considering the public interest factors  listed
    in  s117B,  particularly  sub-section  (6).  That  submission  must  be
    premised on an acceptance that the appellant's circumstances  are  such
    as to warrant consideration outside the Rules and  in  accordance  with
    the Article 8 jurisprudence.

14. The appellant's  grounds  for  permission  to  appeal  refer,  somewhat
    obliquely, to SS (Congo) and Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and I  infer  from
    this that it is the appellant's case that the appeal should  have  been
    considered outside the Rules and  in  accordance  with  the  Article  8
    jurisprudence. Given the submissions of Mr Avery, I find that  this  is
    not disputed.

15. I agree with the parties that, given that situation and  the  existence
    of two minor children with whom the  appellant's  partner  has  regular
    contact, the FTTJ should have gone on to consider the Article  8  claim
    outside  the  Rules,  there  being  no  framework  in  the  Rules   for
    consideration of these two children's interests pursuant to s55 of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

16. Mr Ahmed submitted that, if a material error of  law  were  found,  the
    matter should be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing; he did so on the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal was  the
    best place for consideration of the issues and because, were I to  find
    against the appellant, her appeal rights would be  limited.   Mr  Avery
    submitted the matter should be decided  before  me.   I  noted  updated
    evidence had been provided for the hearing before me. I also took  into
    account the terms of the Practice Direction  and  considered  that  the
    matter could be decided  before  me.  The  appellant  and  her  partner
    therefore gave oral evidence: they adopted their witness statements but
    did not give additional oral evidence and they were not cross-examined.



17. I accept the appellant and her partner are in a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship. They have been together since 2010. There is no  evidence
    that she is financially independent.  I  find  therefore  that  she  is
    dependent on her partner.  Her partner has two adult children with whom
    he is in contact. He also has two minor children: a son aged 13  and  a
    daughter  aged  11.   They   have   different   mothers   from   former
    relationships.  The appellant's partner sees his son every day and  his
    daughter every weekend.  His elder daughters, who are both adults, live
    with their husband and mother respectively.   The  appellant's  partner
    picks up his son from school each day, attends parents; evenings, takes
    him to football and spends time with him during the week,  at  weekends
    and during the holidays. He takes an active interest in  their  studies
    and personal  lives.   The  appellant's  partner  brings  his  youngest
    daughter, aged 11, home to spend time with him in the  home  he  shares
    with the appellant.  The appellant is close to this child and  if  they
    were separated it would cause the appellant pain and distress; it would
    also upset the child who is used to seeing the appellant every  weekend
    and spending time with her.


18. There is no evidence that the appellant  has  a  parental  relationship
    with any of her partner's children.

19. The appellant claims her partner would be devastated if were  separated
    from his children. He would not  be  able  to  cope;  his  two  younger
    children would "suffer immensely and the separation would affect  their
    wellbeing" according to the appellant.  It would not  be  possible  for
    the minor children to live with the appellant and her  partner  outside
    the UK because they are British and spend the majority of  their  lives
    with their mothers with whom they live for the majority  of  the  week.
    It is claimed it is the two younger children who would  suffer  in  the
    appellant's partner were to live with the appellant outside the UK.

20. The appellant and her partner  claim  they  could  not  live  in  India
    together: the appellant's parents have come round to  the  relationship
    but her brothers have not. The  appellant's  partner  is  a  Muslim  of
    Pakistani origin. The appellant is a Hindu.  If the appellant  were  to
    return to India her family would not allow her to return to the UK  and
    would ensure the relationship with her partner came to an end.  If  the
    appellant were to return there would be nobody  to  support  her  there
    until she was granted entry clearance to  return  to  the  UK.   It  is
    claimed the appellant's partner would not be granted a  visa  to  enter
    India, given his Pakistani origin. His relatives with his surname, have
    been refused visas to enter India because  of  his  Pakistani  surname.
    The appellant's partner has lived in the UK for 41 years and would find
    it difficult to adjust to life in India.

21. The appellant claims she would be unable to settle in Pakistan  because
    she is Hindu; she would be subjected to discrimination on the basis  of
    her religion; she would not be accepted. Nor could she return to  India
    after living in Pakistan because  she  would  not  be  accepted  there.
    Interfaith marriages are said to be rare  in  Pakistan  and  result  in
    death and disowning.  In any event, the appellant and her  partner  are
    not married and their relationship  would  be  considered  illegal  and
    punishable in law in Pakistan. In any event, the appellant would not be
    given permission to live or settle in Pakistan due to her  nationality.
    Even if she were granted a visit visa she would be subject to reporting
    restriction and limited travel.  The  appellant  claims  she  would  be
    isolated in Pakistan.

22. It is the appellant's claim that she has adopted  the  British  way  of
    life, after seven years living here. She has close  friends  here;  she
    has never been a burden on the state.

23. The appellant does not qualify under Appendix FM.  Whilst  I  note  the
    appellant's claims, as summarised above, I am unable to find  that  the
    appellant has demonstrated that there are very significant obstacles to
    her integration into life in India, contrary to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)
    of the Rules.  She would return to India on  a  temporary  basis  while
    making her application for entry clearance; in that situation she would
    either be separated from her partner on a temporary basis or  he  would
    be separated from his children, while accompanying her, on a  temporary
    basis.  I make the best interests of the two minor children  a  primary
    consideration but there is no independent evidence to suggest that  the
    temporary cessation of direct contact between the  appellant's  partner
    and his children would have a negative  impact  on  the  well-being  or
    welfare of the two minor children, notwithstanding I accept they  would
    be distressed and upset by the  lack  of  direct  contact  during  that
    period.

24. I do not doubt it is in the best interests of the  two  minor  children
    for their relationship with their father, the appellant's  partner,  to
    continue as it does now.  I accept that he  gives  them  guidance  with
    their personal and educational issues. There is no evidence  that  they
    suffer from ill-health or  that  they  are  other  than  stable,  well-
    adjusted children.  There is no medical or other evidence, such as from
    a  social  worker,  to  indicate  that  they  would   be   particularly
    disadvantaged by limited or permanent withdrawal of direct contact with
    the appellant's partner.  Nonetheless I accept that this  would  impact
    negatively on their well-being. I also accept that it would not  be  in
    their best interests or welfare  to  uproot  them  from  their  current
    domestic arrangements, ie each living for the majority of the time with
    their mother.

25. I find the  appellant  and  her  partner  to  be  honest  and  credible
    witnesses. However, I have been provided with no evidence or background
    material to suggest that their concerns about hostility in Pakistan and
    India towards their relationship are well-founded.  Whilst there may be
    objections within the appellant's family to her relationship  with  her
    partner, no consideration has been given  to  the  possibility  of  the
    appellant and her partner living apart from her family and in their own
    domestic environment.  I am  satisfied  therefore  that  there  are  no
    practical, religious, family, cultural  or  other  obstacles  to  their
    living independently in either Pakistan or India together, albeit  such
    relocation   would   entail   considerable   upheaval   and   distress,
    particularly  as  a  result  of  the  appellant's  and  her   partner's
    separation from the appellant's partner's children.

26. I also note the evidence of the witnesses that the appellant's  partner
    would be prepared to support an application by the appellant for  entry
    clearance to the UK as his partner.   I  infer  also  that,  given  the
    couple are living together and the appellant has no or limited right to
    work here, the appellant's partner is providing her with  accommodation
    and maintenance.  I find that he would be  prepared  to  continue  that
    arrangement if the appellant were to return to India to  make  such  an
    application for entry clearance. It is therefore  irrelevant  that  she
    would not be welcomed by her family: she could  live  independently  in
    India on return.

27. I bear in mind the guidance in Razgar, R (on the Application of) v SSHD
    [2004] UKHL 27. I am satisfied that Article 8 is  engaged  because  the
    consequences of  the  respondent's  decision  are  sufficiently  grave.
    The respondent's decision is in accordance with the law.

28. I turn to the issue of proportionality and in so doing  make  the  best
    interests   of   the   appellant's   partner's   children   a   primary
    consideration.  I  also  take  into   account   the   public   interest
    considerations in s117A-D and particularly, as submitted by  Mr  Avery,
    s117B(6).

29. S117B sets out the public interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
    cases as follows:

         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-
            (a)   are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
            (b)   are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-
            (a)   are not a burden on taxpayers, and
            (b)   are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-
            (a)   a private life, or
            (b)   a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-
             (a)    the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and
            (b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

30. The appellant does not fulfil the criteria  in  the  Immigration  Rules
    which address the public interest in  the  maintenance  of  immigration
    control. The appellant speaks English and is  integrated  into  British
    society.  However,  there  is  no  evidence  that  she  is  financially
    independent; she is dependent on her partner albeit  not  a  burden  on
    taxpayers.  The appellant's relationship with her partner, a qualifying
    partner, was formed in 2010 at a time when she had leave to remain as a
    student; thus weight can be given to that relationship.   There  is  no
    evidence to suggest that the appellant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with her partner's two younger children (who  are
    qualifying children, being British), albeit her relationship with  them
    is good.


31. I am in no doubt it  would  not  be  reasonable  for  the  two  younger
    children to leave the UK to live with their father  and  the  appellant
    outside the UK; they currently each live with their primary  carer  and
    the care provided by the appellant's father is  subsidiary  to  and  in
    addition to  that  provided  by  their  mothers.  It  would  be  wholly
    unreasonable to expect them to leave the UK  permanently  to  accompany
    their father abroad.  I proceed on the basis that, for family  life  to
    continue between the appellant and her partner, they would either  have
    to relocate together to  India  or  Pakistan  without  the  appellant's
    partner's children.  Alternatively, the appellant could return alone to
    India for a relatively short period to seek entry clearance to join her
    partner in the UK.  In the latter case, contact could be maintained  by
    means of  visits  and  indirect  contact  such  as  the  telephone  and
    internet.  The appellant's partner's evidence is that he would  sponsor
    such an application.

32. The appellant and her partner embarked on  their  relationship  in  the
    knowledge that the appellant had only limited leave to  remain  in  the
    UK, she being here on limited leave as a student in 2010.   That  leave
    was due to expire on 17 December 2010, shortly after  the  relationship
    started, and the appellant was granted further leave as a student on 20
    January 2011 until 30 January 2012.  Thus,  throughout  the  period  of
    their relationship they have known the appellant had only limited leave
    to remain here and that she had been granted such leave  on  the  basis
    she would be expected to return to India if she did not  qualify  under
    the Rules  for  further  leave  to  remain.  They  could  have  had  no
    expectation that she would be  granted  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Rules.

33. Contrary to the assertions of the  appellant  and  her  partner,  I  am
    unable to accept there are any obstacles to their living in Pakistan or
    India, either permanently or  temporarily  while  the  appellant  seeks
    leave to enter the UK as the partner of a British citizen. There is  no
    evidence to suggest that she would not qualify for such entry clearance
    and indeed the inference from the evidence and submissions is that  she
    would do so.

34. I have been referred by Mr Ahmed to EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL  41.
    The opinions of the House of Lords in that case are quoted in the Court
    of Appeal in VW (Uganda) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 5.  At paragraph 18 it
    states:

        "In EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41,  at  �12,  Lord  Bingham,  with  the
         assent of the other members of the Appellate Committee, said:

             'Thus the appellate immigration authority  must  make  its  own
             judgment and that judgment will be strongly influenced by  the
             particular facts and circumstances  of  the  particular  case.
             The authority will, of course,  take  note  of  factors  which
             have, or have not, weighed  with  the  Strasbourg  court.   It
             will,  for  example,  recognise  that  it   will   rarely   be
             proportionate to uphold an order for removal of  a  spouse  if
             there is a close and genuine bond with the  other  spouse  and
             that spouse  cannot  reasonably  be  expected  to  follow  the
             removed spouse to the country of removal, or if the effect  of
             the order is to sever a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
             between parent and child.  But cases will not ordinarily raise
             such stark choices, and there is in general no alternative  to
             making a careful and informed evaluation of the facts  of  the
             particular case.  The search for a hard-edged  or  bright-line
             rule to be applied to the generality of cases is  incompatible
             with  the  difficult  evaluative  exercise  which  Article   8
             requires.''"

35. The Court of Appeal further stated in VW (Uganda):

        "19.     ...  While it is of course possible that the facts  of  any
             one case may disclose an insurmountable obstacle  to  removal,
             the inquiry into proportionality is not a search for  such  an
             obstacle and does not end  with  its  elimination.   It  is  a
             balanced judgment of what can reasonably be  expected  in  the
             light of all the material facts."

    At paragraph 24, Sedley LJ concluded:

        "24.     EB (Kosovo) now confirms  that  the  material  question  in
             gauging the proportionality of a removal or deportation  which
             will or may break up a family unless the family itself decamps
             is not whether  there  is  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  this
             happening but whether it is reasonable to expect the family to
             leave with the appellant."

36. This appellant's case is not that her removal would sever a genuine and
    subsisting relationship: indeed this cannot be the case given that  she
    would apply for entry clearance to the UK as the partner of  a  British
    citizen who has agreed to sponsor her.


37. I have been referred by Mr Ahmed to the guidance in  Chikwamba  v  SSHD
    [2008] UKHL 40 and bear in mind the further guidance in  Hayat  (nature
    of Chikwamba principle) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 444  (IAC)  where  it  was
    held that the significance of Chikwamba is to make it  clear  that,  in
    appeals where the only matter weighing on the respondent's side  of  an
    Article 8 proportionality balance is the public policy of requiring an
    application to be made under the Immigration Rules  from  abroad,  that
    the legitimate objective will usually be outweighed by factors  resting
    on the appellant's side of the balance.  The Chikwamba principle is not
    therefore confined to cases where children are involved  or  where  the
    person with whom the appellant is seeking to remain has settled  status
    in the United Kingdom.

38. In SSHD v Hayat (Pakistan); Treebhowan (Mauritius) v SSHD  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1054 the Court of Appeal held that an  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom which cannot succeed under the Immigration
    Rules, and is being pursued under Article 8,  should  not  be  rejected
    simply on the procedural ground that the applicant can apply for  entry
    clearance from abroad.  On the "one stop" principle, the merits of  the
    Article 8 claim should be assessed, and the claim should be allowed  if
    the applicant does in fact have an Article 8 right to  remain  in  this
    country.  If the requirement to apply for entry clearance constitutes a
    disruption  sufficient  to  engage  Article  8,   there   will   be   a
    disproportionate interference unless there is  a  sensible  reason  for
    insisting on it.  Whether there is a sensible reason will depend on the
    facts of the case, including such matters as the length and  degree  of
    disruption and the effect on other family members.  Where Article 8  is
    engaged and there is no sensible reason for the disruption, the Article
    8 claim should be determined on its substantive merits.  In the instant
    cases, neither applicant was in the United  Kingdom  for  more  than  a
    temporary purpose, and neither had such  a  strong  claim  to  make  it
    disproportionate for him to apply for  entry  clearance  from  his  own
    country.  Chikwamba is not confined to settlement cases, but unless the
    likelihood of being granted entry clearance is very  strong,  Chikwamba
    does not come into play.


39. In R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department IJR [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC) it was held that:

         "(i)     Appendix FM does not include consideration of the question
             whether it would be disproportionate to expect  an  individual
             to return to his home  country  to  make  an  entry  clearance
             application to re-join family members in the U.K.   There  may
             be cases in which there are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
             family life being enjoyed outside the U.K. but where temporary
             separation to enable an individual to make an application  for
             entry clearance may be disproportionate.   In  all  cases,  it
             will be for the individual to place before  the  Secretary  of
             State evidence that such temporary separation  will  interfere
             disproportionately with protected  rights.   It  will  not  be
             enough to rely solely upon the case-law concerning Chikwamba v
             SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.

         (ii)     Lord Brown was not  laying  down  a  legal  test  when  he
             suggested in Chikwamba that requiring a claimant  to  make  an
             application for  entry  clearance  would  only  'comparatively
             rarely' be proportionate in a  case  involving  children  (per
             Burnett J, as he then was, in R (Kotecha and Das v SSHD [2011]
             EWHC 2070 (Admin)).

         (iii)    In an application for leave on the basis of an  Article  8
             claim, the Secretary of  State  is  not  obliged  to  consider
             whether an application for entry clearance (if one were to  be
             made) will be successful.  Accordingly, her  silence  on  this
             issue does not mean that it is accepted that the  requirements
             for entry clearance to be granted are satisfied.

         (iv)     In cases where the Immigration Rules (the  'IRs')  do  not
             fully address an Article 8  claim  so  that  it  is  necessary
             (pursuant to R (Nagre)) to consider the claim outside the IRs,
             a failure by the decision maker to consider Article 8  outside
             the IRs will only render the decision unlawful if the claimant
             in fact shows  that  there  has  been  (or,  in  a  permission
             application, arguably has been) a substantive breach of his or
             her rights under Article 8."

40. In the present case I am unable to accept that the appellant  would  be
    unable to live in India independently and apart from her  family,  with
    the degree of support she currently enjoys from her partner.  She could
    do so either on her own, with her partner remaining in  the  UK  whilst
    she waits for entry clearance, or her partner could travel with her for
    all or part of the time she is  in  India.   There  is  no  independent
    evidence to show that a short absence from  the  appellant's  partner's
    children would have a detrimental impact on them, given that they  live
    with their mothers.  I am unable to accept that the appellant would, as
    she claims, be under the control of her family in India  or  that  they
    would prevent her from returning to the UK. She need not tell them  she
    is in India.  This is not a case where the appellant has  any  parental
    role in respect of her partner's children. Her absence would not  cause
    them significant distress or upset and they would have the  support  of
    their mothers and their father. The appellant  can  remain  in  contact
    with the children by telephone and  the  internet.    For  the  reasons
    stated above, the appellant's  return  to  India  for  the  purpose  of
    obtaining entry clearance would not sever  her  relationship  with  her
    partner.  The evidence of the appellant does not suggest that temporary
    separation from her partner will interfere disproportionately with  the
    protected rights of the appellant, her partner or his children.


41. In summary,  I  accept  that  there  would  be  interference  with  the
    appellant's, her partner's and his children's  protected  rights  to  a
    family life as a result of the appellant's  return  to  India  to  seek
    entry clearance but I am unable to find that the degree of interference
    arising from a temporary interruption to  that  family  life  would  be
    disproportionate  to   the   respondent's   legitimate   objective   of
    maintaining immigration control. I note the evidence of the appellant's
    partner that he ensures he keeps his son informed when  he  leaves  the
    country "for a few  days"  and  this  is  an  arrangement  which  could
    continue if the appellant's partner were to travel to  India  for  some
    time to be with the appellant while she makes her application for entry
    clearance and waits for the grant of it. Whilst I bear in mind it is in
    the best interests  of  the  appellant's  partner's  children  that  he
    continues to be involved in their lives on a regular basis, there is no
    independent evidence to suggest that  the  absence  of  the  appellant,
    whilst she makes her application for  entry  clearance,  would  have  a
    detrimental impact on the children.  The absence of their father, on  a
    temporary basis, while he visits  the  appellant  in  India,  would  be
    unlikely to have a negative impact on  the  welfare  of  the  children,
    given that he has developed a strategy for managing his  absences  from
    his children in a way which does not cause them undue distress.


42. For these reasons, I find that the  degree  of  interference  with  the
    appellant's, her partner's  and  his  children's  protected  rights  is
    justified by the public interest in immigration control.

43. I find therefore that the error of  law  I  identified  in  the  FTTJ's
    decision is not material to the outcome of the hearing  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Decision

44. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve a
    material error of law.


45. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing
    the appeal. That decision stands.


Signed       A M Black                                   Date  14  September
    2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Fee Award

The FTTJ did not make a fee award and,  the  appeal  having  been  dismissed
there can be no fee award now.


Signed           A M Black                         Date 14 September 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black




