
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08162/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 December 2015                  |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MS MOJISOLA ENIGBOKAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeraman (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    No Appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellant  in  this  matter  is  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
    respondent is Ms Mojisola  Enigbokan  who  was  the  appellant  in  the
    proceedings before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  respondent  is  a
    citizen of Nigeria and her date of  birth  is  14  January  1981.   She
    appealed a decision made by the Secretary of  State  dated  23  January
    2014  refusing  to  issue  a  derivative  residence  card   under   the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 pursuant to the Zambrano  principle.



2.   In a determination promulgated  on  21  August  2014  the  First  -tier
    Tribunal (Judge Cohen) allowed the appeal under the EEA Regulations and
    in the alternative outside of the Rules under Article 8 ECHR.

3.   Grounds for Permission

    The Tribunal erred by failing to correctly apply Regulation  15A(4A)(c)
    of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (as amended).  The  appellant
    must satisfy sub-paragraph (c) that the relative British citizen  would
    be unable to reside in the UK or in another EEA state if the  appellant
    were required to leave.  The Tribunal failed to address this  issue  in
    the decision and there was  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the
    British citizen child would be unable  to  remain  in  the  UK  if  the
    appellant (her mother) were required to leave the UK.  A disinclination
    or reluctance on the father's part did not indicate inability  to  care
    for the child.

4.   Permission to Appeal

    Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge T R P  Hollingworth
    on 1 October 2014.  The permitting judge stated:

         "The judge found the appellant  a  credible  witness  and  accepted
         everything that was said by her.   Paragraphs  13  and  14  of  the
         determination are capable of review however.  They fail  to  attach
         sufficient weight to the fact that  the  father  is  named  on  the
         child's birth certificate.  Moreover, he was apparently involved in
         making a benefits claim for the  child  after  the  birth.   Giving
         these to the appellant albeit only for a  short  period.   Creating
         the impression that he was involved as a carer.  Neither  of  these
         aspects are referred to in the evaluation of the appeal.  They tend
         to suggest the natural father does have more involvement (with  the
         child) than the appellant contends.  The documents  supporting  the
         application are in fact limited in  evidential  terms.   The  child
         initially attended playschool.  This is not a school as  such.   It
         is fee paying and therefore  not  independent.   Neither,  are  the
         supporting letters from family members.  It is difficult to see how
         a GP could be in a sufficiently informed position to  identify  the
         appellant as sole carer when  the  consultation  was  for  a  minor
         ailment only and in isolation.  Furthermore,  the  judge  may  have
         attached insufficient weight to the obstacle regarding the  tenancy
         agreement referred to in the reasons letter.  This would have  some
         bearing on  the  appellant's  credibility.   All  the  respondent's
         grounds are arguable."

Error of law hearing

5.   The respondent failed  to  appear  at  the  hearing  before  me  on  21
    December 2015.  I was satisfied that notice of the date and time of the
    hearing had been sent to the respondent at her home  address  in  Essex
    and to her solicitors TW Solicitors.  There was no communication either
    from the respondent or from her solicitors giving any  explanation  for
    failure to attend and there was no request for  any  adjournment  made.
    Having regard to the overriding interest and pursuant to the Procedural
    Rules I decided to proceed to hear the appeal in  the  absence  of  the
    respondent and/or representative.

6.   Ms Sreeraman relied on the grounds of appeal arguing  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal failed to consider Regulation 15A(4)(c) adequately or  at
    all.  It was clear that the child's  father  was  in  the  UK  and  the
    Tribunal failed to consider the issue holistically. Rather it relied on
    the evidence given by the appellant which  the  Tribunal  found  to  be
    credible, in particular as regards the unwillingness of the  father  to
    look after the  child.   There  was  no  attempt  by  the  Tribunal  to
    reconcile those findings with the apparent involvement that the  father
    had had post birth including his name  on  the  birth  certificate,  an
    application made for child benefit and further in obtaining a  passport
    for the child some two years following the birth.  The  Tribunal  ought
    to have considered the test in AM  and  SM  such  that  there  must  be
    factors rendering the relatives to be unable to look after the child.

Discussion and Decision

7.   In support of her submissions  Miss  Sreeraman  relied  on  Ayinde  and
    Thinjom (Carers - Regulation 15A Zambrano) [2015] UKUT 560 (IAC) and MA
    and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside the EU) Iran  [2013]  UKUT  00380
    (IAC).

8.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  heard  evidence  from  the  respondent   Ms
    Enigbokan who the Tribunal found to be an  entirely  credible  witness.
    The Tribunal found that she was the primary carer of a British  citizen
    child and that Regulation 15A was  met  in  all  respects.   In  making
    findings and considering the circumstances the Tribunal had in mind the
    respondent's consistent evidence concerning her relationship  with  the
    father of the child and found that she  had  effectively  been  "warned
    off" from contact with him by his wife.   The  Tribunal  accepted  that
    other than on a handful of occasions when  she  met  with  the  child's
    father following the child's birth, he had not had any contact with the
    child since.  [13]

9.   At [14] the Tribunal considered the Secretary of State's  concern  that
    there was insufficient evidence  to  show  that  there  were  no  other
    relatives in the UK who could assist in the upbringing  of  the  child.
    The Tribunal found:

         "I am therefore entirely  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  former
         lover is not willing to look after M in the UK and that his wife is
         certainly opposed to doing so.  I therefore find  that  M's  father
         plays no active part in his life and would be unwilling to  act  as
         his carer in the UK."

    Reliance was placed on a letter from the school and GP  in  support  of
    the fact that the respondent is primary carer.

10.  There was no challenge by the Secretary of State to  the  finding  that
    the respondent was the primary carer for  the  British  citizen  child.
    The grounds argue  that  the  Tribunal  although  concluding  that  the
    requirements  of  Regulation  15A  were  met,  did  not  give  adequate
    consideration  of  Regulation  15A(4)(c)  and/or  the  Upper   Tribunal
    decision of MA and SM (cited above).  In that decision the Tribunal had
    regard to the High Court decision of J  Sanneh  v  SSWP  and  the  HMRC
    [2013] EWHC 793 (Admin):

         "The rights of an EU child will not  be  infringed  if  he  is  not
         compelled to  leave.   Therefore  even  where  a  non-EU  ascendant
         relative is compelled to leave EU territory, the Article 20  rights
         of an EU child will not be infringed if there is another  ascendant
         relative who has the right of residence in the EU, and who can  and
         will in practice care for the child."

11.  The applicable principles where, as here,  there  is  another  relative
    who may be able to care for the child, were further elaborated in Hines
    v Lambeth [2014] EWCA Civ 660 where Vos LJ held [24]

         "I do not however think that all things being equal the removal  of
         a child from the care of one responsible  parent  to  the  care  of
         another responsible parent would normally be expected so  seriously
         to impair his quality  and  standard  of  life  that  he  would  be
         effectively forced to leave the UK.  Apart from  anything  else  he
         would even if he did leave, still only have the care of one of  his
         previously two joint carers.   This  is  a  highly  fact  sensitive
         matter which involves consideration of the welfare of the child and
         requires an assessment  of  the  child's  individual  physical  and
         emotional  needs  and  circumstances  including   the   impact   of
         separation from a primary carer, however this is not an  assessment
         of the child's best interests."

12.  In this instance it is clear that  the  only  other  possible  suitable
    carer for the British citizen  child  would  be  his  father.   In  the
    decision made by the First-tier I acknowledge that the Tribunal has not
    specifically referred to Regulation 15(4A)(c) and  that   the  Tribunal
    has  focused  on  the  issue  of   primary   carer   without   detailed
    consideration  of  the  adequacy  or   otherwise   of   any   potential
    arrangements that could have been made for the father to care  for  the
    child.  That said I am satisfied that the Tribunal considered  all  the
    evidence that was available to it including the oral evidence from  the
    respondent which it found to be extremely credible.   It  may  be  that
    insufficient attention was given to a more detailed exploration of  the
    factual background and circumstances in relation to the child's father.
    However it is of note that the Secretary of State  was  represented  at
    the hearing and it was therefore open to  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    subject the evidence to scrutiny in order to assist the  Tribunal.   In
    light of the fact that the Tribunal can only make a decision  based  on
    the evidence before it,  I  am  satisfied  that  there  was  sufficient
    consideration of all relevant issues and that the Tribunal was entitled
    to place weight on the oral evidence of the respondent  in  reaching  a
    conclusion that the child's father was unwilling  to  assume  care  and
    responsibility. Indeed the Tribunal went further in  finding  that  the
    child's father had no contact or involvement with the child and his own
    personal circumstances were such that he would not be able  to  provide
    adequate arrangements for the child's care.  The end  result  therefore
    is that the child would effectively have  to  leave  the  UK  with  his
    mother.

13.  The question of weight to be attached to oral and documentary  evidence
    is a matter within the remit of the Tribunal and it is my view that the
    Tribunal  considered all of the  evidence  before  it.   There  was  no
    evidence of shared responsibility beyond the father's name being on the
    birth certificate and an application for child benefit but such matters
    were considered by the Tribunal and  sustainable  findings  made.   The
    Tribunal had in mind that it was the respondent's burden to address the
    issue under 15A(4A)(c). I am satisfied that  the  Tribunal  effectively
    took the view that in the absence of his mother looking after him there
    would be no  one  else  who  could  in  practice  provide  proper  care
    arrangements for the child who would be forced to leave the UK.

14.  Accordingly I am satisfied  that  the  decision  and  reason  does  not
    disclose any material error of law.

Decision

There is no error of law in the decision  and  reasons  which  shall  stand.
The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10.1.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 10.1.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
