
[pic]
Upper Tribunal                                                  Appeal
                                             Number: IA/08614/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           IA/08618/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 15 July 2014        On 16 July 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                               1) Yaw Sekyere
                            2) Bernard Kofi Osei
                          (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                   Respondents

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. G. Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondents:          Ms. C. Litchfield  of  Counsel  instructed  by
                            Ronik
                                                Solicitors.

                   DETERMINATION AND REASONS: ERROR OF LAW

   1. These are linked appeals against the decisions of First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Gordon promulgated on 16 April 2014, allowing Mr  Sekyere's  and
      Mr Osei's appeals against the Secretary of State's decisions dated  29
      January 2014 to refuse to issue residence cards under the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


   2. Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  Mr
      Sekyere and Mr Osei the respondents, for the sake of consistency  with
      the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer
      to Mr Sekyere and Mr Osei as the Appellants and the Secretary of State
      as the Respondent.


Background

   3. The Appellants are nationals of Ghana born on 3  August  1964  and  25
      August 1995 respectively. They are father and son. On 3  October  2013
      applications for a residence card as confirmation of a right to reside
      in the United Kingdom were  made  on  behalf  of  each  of  them.  The
      applications were based on a  Ghanaian  customary  marriage  by  proxy
      between the First Appellant and Ms Yaa Konadu, a Dutch national,  said
      to have taken place in Ghana, in the absence of  the  parties  to  the
      marriage, on 20 June 2013.


   4. The Appellants' applications were refused for reasons  set  out  in  a
      'reasons for refusal' ('RFRL')  letter  dated  29  January  2014,  and
      Notices of Immigration Decision were issued on the same date (although
      one wrongly gives the year as 2013). The Respondent was not  satisfied
      that Ms Konadu was exercising 'Treaty rights'. Further the  Respondent
      was not "satisfied  that  [the]  claimed  proxy  marriage  [had]  been
      properly executed", and was not otherwise  satisfied  that  the  First
      Appellant was in a 'durable relationship' with Ms Konadu.



   5. I pause to note that at the date of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
      consideration of the appeals the Respondent's RFRL was  not  on  file:
      see determination at paragraph 2. Mr Saunders provided me with a  copy
      of the RFRL today, which I have placed on file.


   6. The Appellants appealed to the IAC. They requested that their  appeals
      be dealt with 'on the papers'. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  allowed
      the Appellants' appeals without a hearing for reasons set out  in  her
      determination.


   7. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 23 May 2014.


Consideration

   8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the Appellants'  appeal  on  the
      basis that she was satisfied that the First Appellant's  marriage  was
      valid. In this context  I  note  that  the  Judge  did  not  have  the
      Respondent's case as set out in the RFRL, and so did not  address  it.
      In  essence  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted  the  marriage
      certificate at face value: see determination at paragraph 3.


   9. Similarly, the Judge did not have  the  benefit  of  the  Respondent's
      reasoning in respect of the issue of the exercise of Treaty rights  by
      Ms Konadu, and accordingly, in contrast to the contents  of  the  RFRL
      observed that there was no contention on the part of the Respondent of
      any failed attempt to  contact  the  employer,  before  accepting  the
      Appellants' case in this regard: see paragraph 4.


  10. Be that as  it  may,  the  Respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  seek  to
      challenge the decisions of the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  particular
      reference to the decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law)  [2014]
      UKUT 00024 (IAC) - promulgated  on  16  January  2014,  and  therefore
      before the First-tier Tribunal's consideration of this appeal.  It  is
      pleaded that the Judge erred in  not  having  regard  to  Kareem.  The
      Respondent also raised  a  challenge  to  the  Judge's  conclusion  in
      respect of the exercise of Treaty rights.


  11. I accept the substance of the Respondent's challenge in respect of the
      failure of the Judge to have regard to Kareem. Whilst it may  well  be
      that the Respondent did not raise either the case of  Kareem,  or  the
      substance of the matters determined thereunder in the RFRL  (which  in
      any event was not  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge),  it  was
      incumbent upon the Judge to have regard  to  the  applicable  law.  By
      failing to have regard to Kareem she failed to do so. As this went  to
      the core of the issues before her, it was a material error. The First-
      tier Tribunal Judge misdirected herself by not having  regard  to  the
      relevant case law, pursuant to which she should have considered  as  a
      starting point the question  of  whether  a  marriage  was  contracted
      between the First Appellant and Ms Konadu according  to  the  national
      law of the Netherlands.


  12. I note for  the  record  that  Ms  Litchfield  sought  to  resist  the
      suggestion that it was incumbent upon the Judge to consider whether  a
      marriage had been contracted according to the law of the  Netherlands,
      arguing that such a consideration was only necessary if there was some
      issue over the validity of the marriage certificate - which the  Judge
      had found to be valid. I do not accept that that is a  proper  reading
      of Kareem. I am reinforced in this by the decision in  TA  and  others
      (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC):  see  in  particular
      paragraph 20. Ms Litchfield's argument  is  essentially  the  argument
      raised in TA (see paragraphs 9  and  10),  but  resoundingly  rejected
      (paragraphs 12 - 20).


  13. In the circumstances I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge was flawed for material error  of  law  and  I  set  it
      aside.


  14. The decision in the appeal accordingly needs to be remade.


  15. Although no relevant  material  has  been  filed  in  respect  of  the
      validity of  the  First  Appellant's  marriage  under  Dutch  law,  Ms
      Litchfield indicated  that  those  instructing  her  had  commissioned
      evidence from a Dutch lawyer with whom they had been in  contact,  and
      evidence in support of the Appellants' cases was expected.


  16. In contrast to the election to have  the  appeal  determined  'on  the
      papers' before the First-tier Tribunal, both Appellants and Ms  Konadu
      attended the hearing today. I note that in the event that the evidence
      commissioned by the Appellants does not demonstrate recognition in the
      Netherlands of Ghanaian customary marriages by proxy, there will be  a
      necessity to explore the issue of 'durable relationship'.


  17. Further, although the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  a  favourable
      finding in respect of the  exercise  of  Treaty  rights,  she  did  so
      without the benefit of considering the Respondent's case as set out in
      the RFRL and without any oral evidence being heard.


  18. In all of the circumstances, and with the agreement of the parties, it
      is my judgement, that this appeal should  now  be  remade  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal, before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than
      Judge Gordon, at an oral hearing. In my judgement such a hearing is to
      be with all issues at large: in the particular circumstances  outlined
      above it would be an artificial exercise to  preserve  the  favourable
      findings in respect of the exercise of Treaty rights.


  19.  It  is  unnecessary  to  issue  any  specific  Directions;   standard
      Directions will suffice. The  Appellants'  representatives  are  aware
      that it is incumbent upon the Appellants to file and serve any further
      evidence upon  which  they  wish  to  rely,  including  in  particular
      evidence addressing the recognition of the First Appellant's  marriage
      by the Dutch authorities, at least seven days  prior  to  the  resumed
      hearing.


Decision

  20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
      error of law and is set aside.


  21. The decision in the appeal is to be remade by the First-tier  Tribunal
      at a hearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  except  First  tier
      Tribunal Judge Gordon, with all issues at large.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     15 July 2014
