
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08926/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th December 2013                            |On 16th December 2013      |
|Extempore Judgment                              |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                               Mohammad Ahmed

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Ifere (Kolia Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Ong (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant Mohammad Ahmed
    who is a citizen of Pakistan born on  5th  October  1977.   He  appeals
    against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Telford
    promulgated on 16th October 2013 following a hearing at Hatton Cross on
    10th October.  In his determination Judge Telford dismissed the  appeal
    under Article 8.  This was a case that was argued on Article 8  grounds
    only.

 2. The grounds of appeal, expanded upon before me  by  Mr  Ifere,  are  in
    effect quite simple, and they are that the grounds of appeal before the
    First-tier Tribunal argued that on the basis of Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL
    40, EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41, VW (Uganda)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5,  the
    Appellant ought to have succeeded.  That is because he  has  a  British
    wife and a child in the UK.  The judge failed in the  determination  to
    mention any of that case law relied upon  by  the  Appellant  and  that
    failure, it is argued, was an error of law. Mr Ifere argued  the  error
    of law was material to the outcome because the Appellant  was  entitled
    to succeed on the basis of that case law.

 3. My first task is to decide whether Judge Telford made an error  of  law
    and thereafter if he did whether and to what extent  his  determination
    should be set aside.  It is plain that the Judge did not refer in terms
    to that case law.  In the determination he set out the evidence that he
    had before him.  He noted that he heard from the Appellant and his wife
    who adopted their statements, gave evidence and  were  cross  examined.
    He noted some difficulties in the evidence as to whether  or  not  they
    were in fact married but accepted, and it is  plainly  the  case,  that
    they are in a relationship.  They live together, with the "wife's"  two
    sons and their own  child  born  in  May  2011.  The  Appellant  has  a
    relationship with his "wife's" sons akin to a stepfather although  they
    have regular contact with their own father.  The  Judge  accepted  that
    there was family life that engaged Article 8 and went  on  to  consider
    the  proportionality  of  the  Appellant's   removal   and   found   it
    proportionate.

 4. In deciding whether or not he made an error of law in referring to that
    case law and whether that was material, I need to look at the facts  of
    this case, and I also need to look at exactly what Chikwamba tells  us.
    The Upper Tribunal in the case of Hyat (nature of Chikwamba  principle)
    Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00444 (IAC)  looked  at  Chikwamba  and  where  it
    applies.  The headnote states that the significance of Chikwamba is  to
    make it plain that in appeals where the only  matter  weighing  on  the
    Respondent's side of an Article 8 proportionality balance is the public
    policy of requiring an application to be  made  under  the  Immigration
    Rules from abroad that legitimate objective will usually be  outweighed
    by factors resting  on  the  Appellant's  side  of  the  balance.   The
    Chikwamba principle  is  not  confined  to  cases  where  children  are
    involved or where the person with whom  the  Appellant  is  seeking  to
    remain has settled status in the United Kingdom.

 5. The case of Chikwamba had quite specific facts where there was  a  wife
    who it was sought to suggest should return to Zimbabwe to make an entry
    clearance application.  She was married to  a  Zimbabwean  refugee  and
    they had a very young child.  It was found in  those  circumstances  it
    would be wholly unreasonable to expect her to return to  Zimbabwe  with
    the harsh conditions there either with a very young child or  worse  to
    leave her very young child in the  UK  whilst  she  went  to  make  the
    application.  Clearly, in circumstances where the only reason  for  the
    refusal was that she was in the UK, and that was the reason she  failed
    to meet the Immigration Rules to insist upon her  to  return  for  that
    formulaic exercise was wholly unreasonable,  and  that  seems  entirely
    right.

 6. Hyat suggests that it is  not  restricted  to  cases  where  there  are
    children or where there is a refugee, but it does say in terms  in  the
    headnote that it is appeals where  the  only  matter  weighing  on  the
    Respondent's side of a proportionality exercise is the public policy of
    requiring the application to be made from  abroad.   One  of  the  most
    revealing paragraphs in Hyat is paragraph 24 which states that:-

         "Viewed correctly the  Chikwamba  principle  does  not  accordingly
         automatically trump anything on  the  State's  side  such  as  poor
         immigration history.  Conversely, the principle  cannot  be  simply
         switched off on mechanistic grounds, such as because  children  are
         not involved or that as in this case the Appellant is  not  seeking
         to remain with a spouse who is settled in the United Kingdom".

 7. It is necessary in the present case to look at what factors are on  the
    Respondent's side, and in that regard the Appellant's history  is  very
    relevant.  He arrived from Pakistan as a visitor on 2  September  2004.
    His leave expired on 27  November  2004.   He  overstayed,  so  he  was
    illegally in this country from November 2004.  We are now  in  December
    2013.

 8. On 7th August 2009, he came to the attention of the UK authorities when
    he was arrested for motoring offences, and at the time he also admitted
    to having worked illegally using false  identity  documents.   On  14th
    August 2009 he was convicted of having no insurance and  driving  other
    than in terms of a licence -  I presume  he  did  not  have  a  driving
    licence.  He still did not leave the country and on 3rd August 2010,  a
    year later, he applied for leave to remain.  That was refused  on  23rd
    August and he then asked for it to be looked  at  again  on  Article  8
    grounds.  The Decision was delayed in no small part by the Secretary of
    State wishing to give consideration to whether he should be deported on
    account of his general behaviour after he  had  been  arrested  for  an
    alleged assault.  In the event nothing came of that,  and  therefore  a
    Decision was made on 7th March 2013 to refuse him leave to remain.

 9. In this case we have a foreign national  who  has  been  an  overstayer
    since 2004, who has committed criminal offences,  who  only  claimed  a
    year after he had come to  the  attention  through  the  commission  of
    criminal offences, who entered a relationship with  a  British  citizen
    knowing he had no right to be in the UK  and  that  his  situation  was
    precarious, and in respect of his partner she also knew  the  situation
    was precarious.  They nevertheless chose to enter into  a  relationship
    and have a child, but they did so knowing the situation.  There was  no
    evidence as far as I can see before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  that
    the Appellant would have met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.
     This is certainly not a case where the only contra factor is  that  he
    is in the UK.  There are a great  many  reasons  why  this  gentleman's
    presence in the UK is against policy.

10. On his behalf it was claimed he did not have an  appalling  immigration
    history.  That I find is an extraordinary submission on  the  facts  of
    this case and one with which I wholly disagree.

11. Therefore it seems to me that this is a case where even  if  the  Judge
    had referred to the cases relied upon by the Appellant in  the  grounds
    of appeal the Appellant would not have succeeded in the  assessment  of
    proportionality because they do not assist him.  He is  very  far  from
    coming within the principles of Chikwamba, EB (Kosovo),  Hyat  and  the
    other cases relied upon.

12. For that reason, while it could be said the Judge erred in  failing  to
    specifically deal with those  cases,  it  made  no  difference  to  the
    outcome and therefore any error of law was immaterial.  The  appeal  is
    dismissed.





Signed                              Date 6th December 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
