












UPPER Tribunal
       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal NumberS:
                                IA/08414/2015
                                                               IA/08429/2015
                                                               IA/08433/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated on     |
|On: 14 June 2016                  | On: 29 July 2016                       |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                                     RZ
                                     JC
                                     AZ
                          anonymity directions made

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby, counsel (instructed by Douglass Simon
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I continue the anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal. It
      is to remain in place unless and until  this  Tribunal  or  any  other
      appropriate court, directs otherwise. As  such,  no  report  of  these
      proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellants  or
      any member of their family. Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
      could amount to a contempt of Court.


   2. On 7 May 2016, I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      promulgated on 30 September 2015 dismissing  the  appellants'  appeals
      against the refusal by the respondent of their applications for  leave
      to remain under Appendix FM, s.EX.1 (Family Life) and paragraph 276ADE
      (Private Life) of the Immigration Rules. The appellants are  a  family
      unit.  The first two appellants are the mother and stepfather  of  the
      third appellant, AZ, born on 17 October 2004.


   3. I found that there was no "lack of certainty" as stated by the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge that the appellant AZ  would  be  granted  British
      citizenship. Nor had her  continuous  presence  ever  been  at  issue.
      Further, it was incorrect to have found that no educational  documents
      had been provided beyond 2011. Reports dated July and March 2012  were
      provided.


   4. Accordingly, as at the date of hearing AZ had been in the UK  for  ten
      years. That affected the Judge's findings regarding both  AZ  and  her
      parents.


   5. I accordingly set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
      directed that the decision would be re-made  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.
      Permission was granted to the appellants to produce updated evidence.


     Remaking the decision


     Hearing on 14 June 2016


   6. I have had regard to the large bundles of documents  produced  by  the
      appellant's solicitors, including a bundle containing 465 pages  which
      had been before the First-tier Tribunal. I have also had regard to the
      bundle produced at the hearing before the Upper Tribunal on  18  April
      2016 containing a further 47 pages and a further bundle containing  81
      pages  produced for the hearing on 14 June 2016.


   7. The appellant RZ attended the hearing and gave evidence.  She  adopted
      her witness statement at pages 97-99, dated  6  August  2012  and  her
      statement at pages 4-5 signed at the hearing on 14 June 2016. She  has
      set out her address.


   8. RZ stated that she entered the UK in September 2002 and  has  been  in
      the UK ever since. She previously had leave to  enter  as  a  visitor.
      Prior to the expiration of her leave she became pregnant by her former
      partner. He is the father of her daughter, AZ,  who  was  born  on  17
      October 2004. Following her birth they broke up;  her  former  partner
      remained in contact with the child until she was five years  old.  The
      last time he saw her was on her fifth birthday.


   9. At the end of June 2012, the child's  father  informed  her  that  'he
      would be marrying' and did not wish to have contact with the child. He
      had not informed his family of the child's existence.


  10. Since arriving in  the  UK,  she  and  her  daughter  have  maintained
      themselves without  recourse  to  public  funds.  AZ  attends  school.
      Trinity School was her current school at the date  of  her  statement.
      She is doing well. She is for all practical purposes British.


  11. When she arrived in the UK,  she  was  only  22  years  old.  She  has
      therefore spent a considerable period of her  adult  life  here,  more
      than that which she spent in the Philippines.


  12. She originally thought that her relationship with her  former  partner
      was stable and thought it would be permanent.  She  set  out  problems
      that would await her and her daughter if they have to  return  to  the
      Philippines. As  at  August  2012,  the  child's  school  reports  and
      documents showed that she was doing very well.


  13. In her recent statement, at pages 4-5, dated 14 June 2016, she  stated
      that her earlier statement was submitted along  with  her  application
      for leave to remain on 4 December 2012.


  14. The current application was made on behalf of her, her partner JC  and
      AZ. That application remained pending for over a year and was  finally
      refused on 11 December 2013 without a right of appeal. That gave  rise
      to a judicial review hearing.


  15. The matter was resolved by way of a consent order. It was agreed  that
      the claim would be reconsidered and if a removal decision was made,  a
      right of appeal would also be granted.


  16. Since arriving in the UK, she 'sees' no other home with her family. AZ
      has spent her entire life here. Her school reports show  that  she  is
      doing very well. She referred to  the  damage  she  claimed  AZ  would
      suffer were she to be returned to the Philippines.


  17. In answer to 'supplementary questions', she repeated  that  the  child
      has had no contact with  her  father  since  her  fifth  birthday,  on
      October 17, 2009. He has accordingly not  seen  her  for  about  seven
      years. He has played no part in her life. He last contacted RZ in 2012
      after she asked for his passport when making the application. She does
      not know where he is now.


  18. There was no cross-examination.


  19. Mr JC attended the hearing and gave evidence. He adopted  his  witness
      statement at page 5A of the large  bundle,  which  he  signed  at  the
      hearing. He had read the statement of his partner before preparing his
      statement and confirmed that he agrees with the contents. He  referred
      to his statement made on 4 December 2012 at page 99A of the bundle.


  20. He said that three years after arriving in the UK, he met RZ. They had
      previously known each other in the Philippines but did not pursue  any
      relationship there.


  21. When they met in the  UK  she  informed  him  that  she  had  a  young
      daughter, AZ who was then less than a  year  old.  After  he  met  the
      child, they formed  a  close  bond.  Accordingly  his  commitment  was
      therefore not only to RZ but to AZ as well.


  22. His relationship with them now spans over ten  years.  He  has  "taken
      parental responsibility" for AZ. Any income he receives is shared as a
      family. The child looks to him as a father. He does normal things that
      a father/daughter would do together. He helps her with her homework.


  23. The child considers herself  to  be  "British".  She  does  not  speak
      Tagalog and her understanding of that language is very basic.


  24. He was only 26 when he arrived in the UK and is  now  about  40  years
      old. He has therefore practically grown up in the UK.


  25. In his statement signed at the hearing he  confirmed  that  they  have
      been living together as a family in the UK. They are closely knit  and
      dependent on each other for love and support on a daily basis.


  26. He referred to the submission of an application on 1 June 2015 on  the
      child's behalf under s.1(4) of the British Nationality Act  1987.   AZ
      has now been registered as a British citizen and the British  passport
      was produced.


  27. There was no cross examination.


Further documentation


  28. I have also had regard to the evidence produced which was  not  before
      the First-tier Tribunal. There is a letter dated 14 March 2016 sent by
      the appellants' solicitors to the Presenting Officers' Unit  notifying
      them of the successful application of AZ for registration as a British
      citizen. They were also informed that she has now obtained  a  British
      passport. A copy of that passport  and  registration  certificate  was
      supplied,  set out at pages 46-47. It is recorded  that  AZ,  who  was
      born on 17 October 2004, has been registered as a British  citizen  on
      11 November 2015. A British passport was issued to her on  3  December
      2015.






     Submissions


  29. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Walker stated that the  situation  now
      is that there are significant factors.  In particular,  the  child  is
      now a British citizen. There is no evidence of any criminality by  any
      of the appellants; moreover, the child has lived all her life  in  the
      UK and will be 12 in October 2016.


  30. Mr Walker referred to the respondent's guidance relating  to  Appendix
      FM, dated August 2015. At paragraph 11.2.3, under the  heading  "Would
      it be unreasonable to expect a British child to  leave  the  UK?"  the
      policy is that save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker
      must not take a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of
      a British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be  to
      force that British child to leave the EU, regardless  of  the  age  of
      that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice's judgment  in
      Zambrano.


  31. Mr Walker  accordingly  submitted  that  given  the  respondent's  own
      guidelines applicable to the circumstances of this case,  even  though
      he is not in the position to concede that the appeal should be upheld,
      he accepted that 'it would not be right' for the child AZ to  have  to
      leave the UK.


  32. On behalf of  the  appellants,  Mr  Sowerby  relied  on  the  skeleton
      argument before the First-tier Tribunal.  He  referred  to  E-LTRP.2.2
      relating to relationship requirements under Appendix FM regarding  the
      requirements to be met for limited or indefinite leave to remain as  a
      parent or partner.


  33. The child of the applicant must be under the age of 18 at the date  of
      application, living in the UK and is a British citizen, and  paragraph
      EX.1 applies.


  34. The  latter  section  refers  to  exceptions  to  certain  eligibility
      requirements for leave to remain as a partner or parent. The paragraph
      applies if  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship with a child who is under the age of 18, is in the UK and
      is a British citizen, and that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
      the child to leave the UK.


  35. He accordingly submitted that those conditions apply  and  the  appeal
      should be allowed under the rules.


  36. He also relied on Article 8. In the  respondent's  decision  dated  11
      December  2013,  the  respondent  stated  that  they  have   carefully
      considered whether EX.1 applies  in  respect  of  the  appellant  JC's
      application to remain as the partner of a settled British citizen.  It
      was acknowledged  that  he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship with AZ but his application fell for  refusal  under  the
      eligibility requirements of the rules as his partner  did  not  fulfil
      the requirements for leave to remain under Appendix FM. He accordingly
      could not benefit from EX.1.


  37. In the current reasons for refusal dated  10  February  2015,  it  was
      accepted that although he may play a role in the child's life and live
      in the same household, he has not  provided  evidence  to  demonstrate
      that he is a parent in line with the definition of paragraph 6 of  the
      Immigration Rules. A parent there includes the stepfather of  a  child
      whose father is dead  and  the  reference  to  stepfather  includes  a
      relationship arising through civil partnership.


  38. He submitted that there is no  reason  in  the  rules  to  prohibit  a
      stepfather benefiting from the parental relationship  with  a  British
      child. EX.1 applies if the applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      parental relationship with a child under 18, in the UK, who is in  the
      UK and is a British citizen, and that it would not  be  reasonable  to
      expect the child to leave the UK.


  39. He submitted that the appellant has a clear  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship with the child and that he should benefit  from  EX.1  of
      Appendix FM.


  40. He referred to the provisions of s.117A and B of the 2002 Act.


  41. He also submitted that the best interests of the child under s.55  had
      to be considered as a first consideration. Continued  regard  must  be
      had to the  policy that it would be unreasonable to expect  the  child
      to leave the UK.


     Assessment


  42. Although Mr Walker was unable to concede that  the  appeal  should  be
      upheld, he  very  fairly  accepted  that  following  the  decision  in
      Zambrano, the decision maker  should  not,  save  in  cases  involving
      criminality, make a decision in relation  to  the  parent  or  primary
      carer of a British citizen child where the  effect  of  that  decision
      would be to force that British child to leave the  EU,  regardless  of
      the age of the child.  RZ is her mother.


  43. It is now accepted that AZ is a British citizen.


  44. I accordingly consider the appeal under the provisions of Appendix FM,
      under EX.1.


  45. It has been acknowledged by the respondent that JC has a  genuine  and
      subsisting parental relationship with the child.


  46. In the decision dated 11 December 2013, although accepting  a  genuine
      and subsisting parental relationship with the child,  his  application
      fell for refusal under the eligibility requirements. In  the  decision
      dated 10 February 2015, it was considered that the phrase "genuine and
      subsisting  parental  relationship"  went  beyond   a   strict   legal
      definition of "partner" under paragraph 6 of the Rules and encompasses
      situations in which the applicant is playing a genuine  parental  role
      in a child's life, whether that is recognised as a matter  of  law  or
      not.


  47. I find from the undisputed evidence that the appellant JC does have  a
      genuine and subsisting parental relationship with AZ, for the purposes
      of EX.1. I find that he has played a  genuine  parental  role  in  her
      life.


  48. The child is under 18, resides in the UK and is a British citizen.


  49. Having regard to the decision properly made by Mr Walker, I find  that
      it would not be reasonable to expect AZ to leave the UK.


  50. I find that all three appellants have resided in the UK as a composite
      family unit. AZ is now a British citizen.


  51. I consider the appellants' claims based on  Article  8  of  the  Human
      Rights Convention outside the rules. RZ entered the UK on 11 September
      2002 and JC entered in or about October 2002. JC began a  relationship
      with RZ when the child, AZ, was less than a year old.


  52. Since then, he has lived with them as a family and has a  relationship
      amounting to parental responsibility for the child.


  53. Their applications for further leave  to  remain  constitute  a  joint
      application. In the judicial review proceedings, all three  appellants
      had the status of claimants. That arose out of the application made on
      4 December 2012 which was also a joint application for leave to remain
      under the provisions of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the rules.




  54. I find that the claims of the appellants are interlinked and following
      the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  PD  and  Others  (Article  8-
      conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC), it would  be
      artificial and unrealistic  to  determine  them  on  their  individual
      merits without reference to the other claims.


  55. I find on the evidence that to separate the child, AZ, from her mother
      and JC is not a viable proposition. There  is  no  evidence  that  she
      would remain in the UK and reside here with relatives or friends.


  56. The third appellant's appeal succeeds under the Rules. She has British
      citizenship and cannot be removed.


  57. I have regard to her best interests as a  primary  consideration.  She
      has spent over 11 years in the  UK.  She  has  been  involved  in  the
      prevailing culture, living standards, language and education. Her best
      interests are clearly served by her remaining  in  the  UK.   That  is
      expressly noted in the  respondent's  own  policy,  to  which  I  have
      referred.


  58. Moreover, her best interests are to maintain  and  continue  a  stable
      settled family life in the family unit  which  has  prevailed  over  a
      number of years. Those interests would be best served by continuing to
      live in the UK with both the first and second appellants.


  59. The first and second appellants' presence in the UK has  largely  been
      unlawful. They have nevertheless established private lives in  the  UK
      and have spent a greater proportion of their lives in the UK.


  60. If their appeals were to be dismissed, that  would  clearly  interfere
      with their right to respect for their private and  family  lives.  The
      decisions are in accordance with the law  and  in  the  pursuit  of  a
      legitimate aim, namely the maintenance of immigration control.


  61. I consider the question of proportionality. In that respect I have had
      regard to  s.117A(2)  where  I  am  obliged  to  have  regard  to  the
      considerations listed in s.117B of the 2002 Act.


  62. The public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
      control is engaged. The appellants are capable of speaking English.


  63. If the first and second appellants remain in the UK,  they  will  have
      the capacity to access publicly funded services and  benefits.  Little
      weight can be given to the private and family lives established in the
      UK.


  64. Under s.117B(6) in  the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
      deportation, the public interest does not  require  that  that  person
      should be removed where  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      parental relationship with a qualifying child  and  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  Clearly, AZ is such a
      qualifying child by virtue of her British citizenship.


  65. Accordingly, the question is whether it would be reasonable to  expect
      the third appellant to  leave  the  UK.  I  have  had  regard  to  the
      secretary of state's policy referred to, at 11.2.3. If the  first  and
      second appellants were required to leave the UK, the  effect  of  that
      decision would be to  force  the  third  appellant  to  leave  the  EU
      regardless of her age. That would be  an  impermissible  and  unlawful
      decision following the judgment of the European Court in Zambrano.


  66. The main countervailing factor is that the first and second appellants
      have no legal right to remain in the  UK.  Their  status  is  that  of
      unlawful  overstayers.  That  is  a  factor  of  considerable  weight.
      However, the child's best  interests  should  not  be  compromised  on
      account of the misdemeanours of her parents - PD and others, supra, at
      [41].


  67. Having regard to the evidence as a whole, I find that it would not  be
      reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the UK.


  68. I accordingly find under s.117B(6) that the public interest  does  not
      require the removal of the first and  second  appellants,  given  that
      they have genuine and subsisting parental relationships with the third
      appellant and it would not be reasonable to expect her  to  leave  the
      UK.


     Notice of Decisions


     I re-make the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  allowing  the
appellants'   appeals.


      Anonymity directions are continued.






     Signed                                                     Date 28
                                  July 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

