
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08834/2007


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 January 2014                            |On 20 January 2014           |
|Prepared 15 January 2014                      |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                             OMAR ABDULLAH OMAR

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Khubber, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Turpin
                    & Miller, Solicitors (Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


   NOTICE UNDER RULE 17 of THE ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL (PROCEDURE)
                                 RULES 2005


1.   Mr Omar Abdullah Omar, born on 27  July  1983,  is  a  citizen  of  the
    Netherlands.  He entered Britain in 2001 and in December 2005 and March
    2006 was sentenced for drug offences and the offence of  possession  of
    an imitation firearm with intent to cause fear and violence.

2.   On 6 June 2007 a decision to make a deportation order was made  against
    Mr Omar Abdullah Omar by virtue of Section 3(5)(a) of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971 as amended.

3.   Mr Omar appealed.  His appeal was heard by a panel of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Immigration Judge Brenells and Mr D C Walker (non-
    legal member) on 27 September 2007.  Their determination  allowing  his
    appeal  was  promulgated  on  10  October  2007.   On   reconsideration
    Designated Immigration Judge O.... found that  there  was  no  material
    error of law in the determination of the Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of
    State then appealed to the Court of Appeal.

4.   In a judgment entitled Cesar Carvalho v SSHD &  SSHD  v  Omar  Abdullah
    Omar [2010] EWCA Civ 1406 the Court of Appeal per Maurice K  LJ  found,
    in paragraph 45,  that:-

         "...the original determination was legally flawed  because  it  was
         unsupported  by  adequate  reasoning  and  that  the  decision   on
         redetermination was vitiated by a material legal error, namely  the
         failure to identify the legal flaw in the original decision..."

5.   The Secretary of State's appeal was therefore allowed.

6.   In paragraph 45 the conclusion of Maurice Kay  LJ was that:-

         "It follows that I would allow  the  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of
         State, quash the decision on reconsideration and remit the case  to
         the Upper Tribunal."

7.   It is, of course, relevant that by the date  of  the  judgment  of  the
    Court  of  Appeal,  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  had   been
    superseded by the First-tier tribunal (Immigraiton and Asylum Chambers)
    and the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber).

8.   The order made by the Court of Appeal, dated 14 December 2010,  ordered
    that:-

         "6)  Omar Abdullah Omar's statutory appeal against  deportation  be
             remitted to the lower tribunal for reconsideration de novo."

9.   By  the  time  the  appeal  was  listed  for  mention  before  me,  the
    appellant, who had been released from prison had  committed  a  further
    offence and was again in  prison.   He  had  also  fathered  two  young
    children.

10.  Mr Deller stated that the Secretary of State considered it  appropriate
    to make a further decision to deport so that all relevant factors could
    be taken into account at a further appeal were the appellant to  decide
    that he wished to  appeal  that  further  decision.   This  appeal  had
    therefore become academic.  The issue was therefore the disposal of the
    appeal.  He indicated that he wished to withdraw the decision of 6 June
    2007 and further to withdraw the case before the Upper Tribunal.

11.  Mr Khubber stated that he wished the findings and  the  conclusions  of
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal to stand.

12.  There is clearly conflict between the judgment of Lord Justice  Maurice
    Kay stating that the appeal should be remitted to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and the order made remitting the appeal to the "lower Tribunal".  It is
    my view that the order made takes precedence over what  was  stated  in
    the judgment.

13.  The order having  remitted  the  appeal  to  the  lower  Tribunal,  the
    provisions  of  Rule  17  of  the  Asylum  and   Immigration   Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 apply as Rule 17(2) states that an appeal should
    be treated as withdrawn if a respondent notifies the Tribunal that  the
    decision to which the appeal relates has been withdrawn.

14.  Sitting as a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, I  note  therefore  that
    the decision has been withdrawn and  therefore  the  appeal  should  be
    treated as withdrawn.

15.  However, if I am wrong and the appeal is now in the Upper  Tribunal,  I
    note that the Secretary of State has given notice of the withdrawal  of
    her case and, sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal,  I  consent  to
    the withdrawal of the Secretary of State's case.

16.  The result of this decision  is  that  there  are  now  no  longer  any
    proceedings before either the First-tier or the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    determination of the Immigration and Asylum Tribunal  therefore  stands
    and, it will be for the First-tier Tribunal to place what  weight  they
    consider appropriate on that decision taking into account what  Maurice
    Kay  LJ wrote in paragraph 45 of his judgment.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


