
IAC-AH-CJ-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/08243/2014
     IA/08837/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 8th January 2015                  |On 16th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                  ms Uriel Ojiugo Akiode (first Appellant)
         miss Oluwakemi Ngozika Akiode (a minor) (second Appellant)
                          (no ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    In person
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The first Appellant  was  born
    on 2nd November 1982.  The second Appellant was born on 27th  May  2008
    and  is  her  minor  child.   Unless  otherwise  specified  herein  all
    references to the Appellant refer to the first Appellant.  The claim of
    the second Appellant rises and falls on that of the first Appellant.

 2. The first Appellant had first arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  12th
    December 2007 with leave to enter to join  her  spouse  valid  to  31st
    January 2009.  She was subsequently granted an extension of stay  as  a
    Tier 1 Dependant valid to 25th February 2011.  She returned to  Nigeria
    on 28th August but returned to the United Kingdom with leave  to  enter
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student valid to 31st October.   That  leave  was
    extended  until  22nd  December  2013.   On  30th  January   2014   the
    Appellant's application pursuant  to  Article  8  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State.  In making such  refusal  the  Secretary  of  State
    noted that from 9th  July  2012  consideration  to  family  life  under
    Article 8 fell under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.   A  similar
    application made on behalf of the Appellant's  daughter  Oluwakemi  was
    also refused.  In  refusing  the  second  Appellant's  application  her
    immigration history was noted in particular that she had been  born  in
    the UK.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal  came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Prior sitting at Hatton Cross on 20th August 2014.  In a  determination
    promulgated  on  11th  September  2014  the  Appellants'  appeals  were
    dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds and human rights  grounds.



 4. On 14th September 2014 Grounds of Appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  were
    lodged.  On 12th November 2014  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Baird granted permission to appeal.  Judge  Baird  noted  that  it  was
    submitted in the grounds seeking permission that the judge had erred in
    failing to give adequate consideration  to  the  circumstances  of  the
    second Appellant, a child; in applying an  "exceptional  circumstances"
    test to the issue of  Article  8  ECHR;  in  failing  to  consider  the
    decision in Razgar; and in failing to properly consider the application
    in terms of the Immigration Rules.  Judge Baird concluded that  it  may
    well be that another judge hearing the appeal would reach  exactly  the
    same conclusion given that Judge Prior found the evidence of the  first
    Appellant to be wholly incoherent and inconsistent but considered  that
    it was the case that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  failed  to
    properly consider the Immigration Rules and  Article  8  and  therefore
    that the grounds were arguable.

 5. On 20th November 2014 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response opposed the  Appellant's
    appeal.  In particular it was contended that the Immigration Judge  had
    noted at paragraph 16 of his determination that the  Appellants  accept
    they cannot succeed under the Rules and further at paragraph 20 of  the
    determination  the  Immigration  Judge  had  made  an   assessment   of
    exceptional circumstances and weighing in the public  interest  in  the
    balance had found for the Secretary of State on the removal issue.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is  a  material  error  of  law.   The  Respondent
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Bramble.  There was no
    attendance either by a representative or by  the  first  Appellant.   I
    note that the first Appellant was represented  by  Counsel  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.   The  court  file  indicates  that  there  is  no
    representative and papers have been served on the  first  Appellant  at
    her last known address.  No papers have  been  returned.   I  therefore
    find that due service and notice has been given  and  the  appeal  will
    proceed in the absence of the Appellant.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. In the absence of the Appellant I treat the Grounds of  Appeal  as  her
    submissions.  Grounds for permission to appeal contend that  there  was
    no   adequate   consideration   given   to   the   second   Appellant's
    circumstances.  The submissions in the Grounds of Appeal  contend  that
    the Appellant had claimed that neither she nor her  daughter  had  ties
    with her native Nigeria and that it had been found  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge that this was  not  an  exceptional  circumstance  which
    might warrant a  grant  of  discretion  outside  the  auspices  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The contention was  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge materially erred in applying an exceptional circumstance test  to
    the consideration of  whether  discretion  ought  to  be  exercised  in
    relation to the  potential  engagement  of  Article  8  and  that  such
    reasoning went against the guidance given in MF (Article 8 - new Rules)
    Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC).  It was contended that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had omitted to deal with family life with regard to  the
    first Appellant's child when considering the factual questions  arising
    under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and  omitted  to  apply
    the five-stage test as set out in Razgar.   Further  it  was  contended
    that no proper consideration was afforded to the applicant's case under
    the Immigration Rules HC 194 and Appendix FM and that when the claimant
    did not meet the requirements of the Rules it would be necessary to  go
    on to make an assessment of Article 8 applying the criteria established
    by law.

 8. Mr Bramble in response to  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  takes  me  to  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge starting at paragraph 13
    where the judge had noted that it was the  closing  submission  of  the
    Appellants'  Counsel  that  the  Appellants  did  not  rely  upon   the
    Immigration Rules and that the central issue  in  the  appeal  was  the
    Article 8 rights and best interests of the  second  Appellant  who  had
    effectively lived continuously in the United Kingdom for six years.

 9. Mr Bramble submits that the judge went on to consider the  Respondent's
    case at paragraphs 15 and 16  and  made  findings  on  the  Appellants'
    credibility at paragraphs 17 and 18.  He points out that the judge gave
    full and proper consideration as to how long the second  Appellant  had
    been in the United Kingdom and at the end of paragraph 17 had taken  in
    fully the position of the second Appellant.  Further the issue  of  the
    health of the second Appellant had been fully addressed in paragraph 20
    of the determination.  He asked me to find that there  is  no  material
    error of law.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

12. It is always difficult when an Appellant does not appear and no further
    evidence or documentation is provided to make  an  assessment  and  the
    Tribunal is forced to rely on the evidence that was before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In any event I remind myself that it is not the role of
    the Upper Tribunal to re-hear decisions but to correct material  errors
    of  law  that  might  have  arisen   within   a   First-tier   Tribunal
    determination.  In this case there is clear evidence in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the Appellant who was represented by
    Counsel did not seek to rely upon the Immigration Rules  and  that  the
    issue to the appeal was the Article 8 rights and best interests of  the
    second  Appellant  bearing  in  mind  that  the  second  Appellant  had
    effectively lived continuously in the United  Kingdom  for  six  years.
    The position therefore considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was
    whether or not the Appellant could  succeed  on  a  claim  pursuant  to
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  The  starting  point  is  the
    credibility of the first Appellant and it is clear from paragraph 17 of
    the determination that the judge did not find the first Appellant to be
    a credible nor a consistent witness and paragraphs 17 and  18  set  out
    his reasons.  Thereafter the judge indicated  at  paragraph  20  giving
    reasons  that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  there  were   exceptional
    circumstances warranting the grant of leave under Article 8 outside the
    Rules.  But we do not know what further evidence, if any, was put  with
    regard to the second Appellant's further integration  into  the  United
    Kingdom therefore even if there could be  construed  to  have  been  an
    error I do not consider it could, be based  on  the  evidence  that  is
    available, material.

13. In MF (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC) the Upper
    Tribunal gave guidance  on  dealing  with  cases  covered  by  the  new
    Immigration Rules introduced by HC 194 on 9th July 2012.  This case did
    not fall within the Immigration Rules.  That would appear to  be  clear
    on the facts and by the admission made by the Appellants' Counsel.   It
    is true as is set out in the headnote to MF  and  referred  to  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal that:

         "vii.    when considering Article 8 in the context of an  Appellant
             who fails under the new Rules, it will  remain  the  case,  as
             before, that 'exceptional circumstances' is not to be regarded
             as a legal  test  and  'insurmountable  obstacles'  is  to  be
             regarded as an incorrect criterion."

14. The Grounds of Appeal seek to rely on that paragraph in isolation.   It
    has to be remembered that the headnote goes on to state:

         "viii.   However, as a result of the introduction of the new Rules,
             consideration by judges of Article 8 outside the Rules must be
             informed by the greater specificity which  they  give  to  the
             importance the Secretary  of  State  attaches  to  the  public
             interest."

    In this case the judge concluded that  there  was  no  reason  why  the
    Appellants' family life could not continue in Nigeria and of course the
    second and first Appellant would be required  to  leave  together.   MF
    (Nigeria)  was  effectively  followed  in  Kabia  (MF:   para   298   -
    "exceptional circumstances") [2013] UKUT 00569 (IAC) in  which  it  was
    said that exceptionality is a likely characteristic  of  a  claim  that
    properly succeeds rather than a legal test to be met.  In this context,
    "exceptional" means circumstances in which deportation would result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  individual  or  their  family
    such that a deportation would not be proportionate.  It does not appear
    to be argued anywhere that that threshold could be reached.

15. The hearing of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal took place  on
    20th August 2014.  From 28th July 2014 Section 19  of  the  Immigration
    Act 2014 came into force.  That amended  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002  by  introducing  a  new  Part  5A  which  contains
    Sections 117A, B, C and D.  These provisions apply to all appeals heard
    on or after 28th July 2014 irrespective  of  when  the  application  or
    immigration decision was made.  Whilst there is no  specific  reference
    to  the  statute  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  determination
    paragraph 117B sets out the public  considerations  applicable  in  all
    cases and in Haleemudeen v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ in considering MF  (Nigeria)  it  was  noted  that  the
    Immigration Rules are a complete code and  that  where  the  Article  8
    element of the Immigration Rules is not  met  (as  is  the  case  here)
    refusal would normally be appropriate, "but that leave can  be  granted
    where exceptional circumstances in the sense  of  'unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences' for the individual, would result".

16. Whilst the authoritative case law has consequently not been referred to
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge he  has  effectively  carried  out  an
    appropriate analysis and in such circumstances I am satisfied that  the
    judge has thoroughly looked at this matter and made an assessment which
    he was entitled to and that his decision discloses no material error of
    law.  In such circumstances the appeal of both  the  first  and  second
    Appellants are dismissed and the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge is maintained.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date 16th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 16th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


