
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA083092015
                                                                 iA083362015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 May 2016                       |On 26 May 2016                       |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                               Mr SI MING WANG
                               Ms HANGQIAO BAI
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:     Mr D Mold, Counsel
For the Respondent:     Mr Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Murray dated  19
    April 2016.  The appeal relates to a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Thew promulgated on 30 October 2015 relating to leave to remain.

2.    The Appellant's grounds of appeal seeking  permission  to  appeal  had
    contended that the Judge's decision was flawed because:

      1) The Judge failed to consider the matters raised in  respect  of  Ms
         Bai in respect of grounds made pursuant to section 120  Nationality
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;

      2) The Judge had erred in assessing whether the Respondent had  failed
         to consider exercising her discretion or if she  had  fettered  her
         discretion by not requesting additional documents before  rejecting
         Mr Wang's application.

3.    At the hearing before Mr Mold said that there was an  agreed  position
    between the parties. More specifically it  was  agreed  that  Ms  Bai's
    appeal ought to be allowed and remitted to the Secretary  of  State  to
    consider the 10 year long residence rules  application.  Mr  Mold  said
    that in so far as the second ground of  appeal  was  concerned,  namely
    that relating to Mr  Wang  in  respect  of  evidential  flexibility  or
    discretion arising from missing evidence, that fell to be dismissed.

4.    Mr Duffy said that Ms Bai appeared to meet the 10 year long  residence
    requirement, and subject to checks in respect of  any  gaps  and  other
    issues that may well succeed. He said that the Judge  made  a  material
    error of law in not considering the s120 notice grounds  as  they  were
    properly raised. He agreed Mr Wang's appeal be dismissed.

5.    Therefore having considered the joint  position  of  the  parties  and
    noting that the Judge had not considered the  s120  NIAA  2002  matters
    which were raised in the additional grounds submitted on behalf  of  Ms
    Bai, then it is clear that there was a material error of law. Ms  Bai's
    appeal therefore succeeds to the extent that  the  Secretary  of  State
    will consider her long residence application.

6.    As for Mr Wang's appeal, the sole ground of  appeal  has,  in  effect,
    been abandoned. I therefore dismiss his appeal.

Notice of Decision

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in respect of Mr Wang's
       appeal did not involve the making an  error  of  law.  Therefore  the
       decision dismissing his appeal is upheld.

    2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in respect of Ms  Bai's
       appeal did involve the making of a  material  error  of  law  and  is
       therefore set aside.  Therefore the Long Residence application raised
       by Ms Bai in her section 120 NIAA 2002  additional  grounds  will  be
       considered by the Secretary of State.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date: 25 May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
