
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08020/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd July 2016                             |On 5th August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                             MUHAMMAD AHMED AKIF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Y Chawdhery of Counsel instructed by Prestige
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Saffer of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 28th October 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male Pakistani  citizen  born  12th  November  1997,
    making him 18 years of age.  The Appellant was 17 years of age when the
    FTT heard his appeal.

 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor on  11th  June
    2005 as a dependant of his mother.  His  mother  subsequently  made  an
    asylum claim which resulted in the grant  of  refugee  status  on  27th
    September 2007 until 27th September 2012.

 4. Prior to the expiry of that leave the Appellant and his mother on  25th
    September 2012 applied for indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 5. The Respondent subsequently discovered that the Appellant's mother  had
    used deception when claiming asylum, and this resulted in  the  refugee
    status of the Appellant and his mother being cancelled on 26th  January
    2015.

 6. On 5th  February  2015  the  Respondent  refused  the  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain.  On  that  date  the  Respondent  issued  a
    Notice of Immigration Decision to the Appellant, refusing to  vary  his
    leave to remain, and indicating that a decision had been made to remove
    him from the United Kingdom.  A reasons for refusal letter of the  same
    date was issued, although this is addressed to the Appellant's  mother,
    and gives reasons for refusing her application.  The Appellant is named
    in that letter as a dependant.

 7. Both the Appellant and his mother appealed, and the appeal was heard by
    the FTT on 22nd October 2015.  The appeal was based upon Article  8  of
    the 1950 European Convention on  Human  Rights  (the  1950  Convention)
    outside the Immigration Rules.   The  skeleton  argument  submitted  on
    behalf of the Appellant to the FTT relies upon Article  8  outside  the
    rules, and the FTT records that Counsel who represented the  Appellants
    conceded that the appeals  could  not  succeed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 8. The FTT dismissed the appeals which caused the Appellants to apply  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 9. I will not summarise the grounds submitted on behalf of the Appellant's
    mother, as in her case permission to appeal was refused.   In  relation
    to the Appellant, it was contended that the FTT had  accepted  that  he
    was not at fault in relation to the deception  that  was  used  by  his
    mother to obtain asylum.  The FTT was also aware that  the  Appellant's
    adult sisters had been granted indefinite leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom, and therefore he should be treated in the same way.

10. It was contended that the FTT had ignored the fact that  the  Appellant
    had lived in the United Kingdom for more than half his  life,  and  had
    failed to consider his best interests.



11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Ford of the FTT and I set out
    below the grant of permission, which is also a refusal of permission in
    relation to the Appellant's mother who is  referred  to  as  the  first
    Appellant;

         "1.  The Appellants seek permission to appeal in  time,  against  a
             decision of First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Saffer)  dated  28th
             October 2015 whereby  it  dismissed  the  Appellants'  appeals
             against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to  refuse  their
             applications for leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds
             having revoked their refugee status due to  deception  on  the
             part of the first Appellant in her asylum application.

         2.   It is not arguable that Judge Saffer erred in respect  of  the
             first Appellant.  He did consider fully the reasons  that  she
             gave for her deception and there is no  inconsistency  in  his
             findings.

         3.   However it is arguable the Judge Saffer may have erred in  the
             consideration given  to  the  best  interests  of  the  second
             Appellant who played no part in the deception  being  a  minor
             when it was practised and who claimed to have entered  the  UK
             when he was only 6 and was 17 as at date of hearing.

         4.   It is arguable that his  best  interests,  the  issue  of  any
             insurmountable obstacles facing him on his  return,  the  fact
             that his father was settled in  the  UK,  Home  Office  policy
             and/or the issue  of  the  reasonableness  of  his  return  to
             Pakistan were not fully considered.

         5.   There is an arguable material error of law in relation to  the
             second Appellant only."

12. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary it was contended that the FTT had not  erred  in  law
    and had taken into account all relevant  circumstances,  including  the
    fact that the Appellant had limited contact with his father in the  UK,
    the length of the Appellant's residence in the UK, and  the  fact  that
    his elder adult sisters  resided  here.   It  was  contended  that  the
    grounds amounted to a disagreement with findings made by the  FTT,  but
    disclosed no material error of law.

13. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FTT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Oral Submissions

14. Mrs Chawdhery relied upon the grounds contained within the  application
    for permission to appeal, and paragraphs  3  and  4  of  the  grant  of
    permission.  I was asked to find that the FTT had erred in  considering
    the best interests of the Appellant as a child, and the  reasonableness
    of his having to leave the UK.



15. Mrs Chawdhery submitted that the FTT had not  taken  into  account  the
    considerations set out in paragraph 35 of EV (Philippines) [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874 which provides guidance on factors to  be  taken  into  account
    when considering the best interests of children.

16. Mrs Chawdhery pointed out  that  the  Appellant  had  not  returned  to
    Pakistan since arriving in the United Kingdom  in  2005,  and  his  two
    adult sisters and his father have  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.

17. With reference to the decision in MA (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705
    which Mr  McVeety  had  indicated  he  would  rely  on,  Mrs  Chawdhery
    submitted that even if the Appellant's mother's actions were taken into
    account when assessing whether it would be reasonable for him to  leave
    the UK, the FTT should still have concluded that his removal  would  be
    disproportionate.

18. Mr McVeety relied upon the Rule 24 response  and  MA  (Pakistan)  which
    provides  guidance  on  the  correct  approach  to  be   adopted   when
    considering whether it is reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK.
     Although this decision had not been published when  the  FTT  decision
    was promulgated, Mr McVeety submitted that the FTT had in fact followed
    the correct approach by taking into account the immigration history  of
    the Appellant's mother.

19. I was asked to note that in paragraph 50 the FTT had found that it  was
    reasonable to expect the Appellant to follow his  mother  to  Pakistan,
    and adequate reasons for that finding had been given.

20. At paragraph 42 the FTT had specifically accepted the  length  of  time
    that the Appellant had spent in the UK.  The FTT had been  entitled  to
    take into account the overall immigration history, and  the  fact  that
    the Appellant's family had abused the refugee system,  and  because  of
    the lies told by the Appellant's mother, had received financial support
    to which they were not entitled, and free education to which they  were
    not entitled.

21. Mr McVeety accepted that the decision may be  regarded  as  harsh,  and
    that many judges would have made a different decision.  However, I  was
    asked to accept that there were no relevant considerations that the FTT
    had not taken into account, and the test was whether the FTT had  erred
    in law, not whether the decision was harsh, and I was asked to conclude
    that the grounds displayed no error of law in the FTT decision.

22. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons


23. The issue that I am asked to consider  is  whether  the  FTT  erred  in
    considering the best interests of the Appellant as a child, and whether
    the FTT erred in considering that it was reasonable for  the  Appellant
    to return to Pakistan with his mother.

24. There is reference in the FTT decision and the grant of  permission  to
    insurmountable obstacles, but in my view this is not the  correct  test
    to be applied, and having read the  FTT  decision  as  a  whole,  I  am
    satisfied that this was not in fact the test applied.

25. The FTT was specifically asked to consider the appeal with  regards  to
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention outside the Immigration Rules.   There
    was a specific concession by Counsel on behalf of the  Appellant,  that
    his appeal could not succeed under the Immigration Rules.  I note  that
    the Respondent's  reasons  for  refusal  letter  did  not  specifically
    consider the Appellant's application,  but  addressed  the  application
    made by his mother, and referred to him as  a  dependant.   It  is  not
    entirely clear to me why the  Appellant  could  not  have  relied  upon
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) in relation to his private life, as it  appears
    that he had resided continually in the UK for seven years prior to  the
    date of application.  The Appellant had entered the UK as a visitor  on
    11th June 2005, and the application for indefinite leave to remain  was
    made on 25th September 2012.

26. However, paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) was not relied upon on behalf  of  the
    Appellant,  and  had  it  been,  the  test  would  have  been  one   of
    reasonableness, which is the test that was considered  by  the  FTT  in
    relation to Article 8 outside the rules.

27. In my view, the correct approach to considering Article 8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules is contained within paragraph 33 of SS (Congo) [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387 in which it is stated that compelling circumstances  would
    need to be identified to support a claim for a grant of leave to remain
    outside the new rules in Appendix FM.   Because  the  Appellant  was  a
    minor when his application for leave to remain was refused, and at  the
    date of the FTT hearing, the FTT  had  a  duty  to  consider  his  best
    interests as a primary consideration.  As made clear in paragraph 29 of
    ZH (Tanzania) [2011]  UKSC  4,  considering  the  best  interests  will
    involve asking whether it is reasonable to expect the child to live  in
    another country.

28. When considering whether it is reasonable to expect a child to live  in
    another country the guidance in MA  (Pakistan)  indicates  that  regard
    should be had to the wider public interests, including the  immigration
    history of the Appellant and his parents.  With  reference  to  section
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (the  2002
    Act) Elias LJ stated at paragraph 45 of MA (Pakistan) "that  where  the
    seven year rule is satisfied, it is factor of some  weight  leaning  in
    favour of leave to remain being granted."

29. The FTT, in my view, considered and  took  into  account  all  relevant
    factors.  The FTT at paragraph 42 recorded the length of time that  the
    Appellant had spent in the UK, which was more than half his life.   The
    FTT found that his contact with his father was limited to holidays  and
    telephone contact which could continue.  The FTT was aware  that  seven
    years  continuous  residence  after  the  age  of  4  is  a  factor  of
    significance.



30. The FTT considered that the Appellant did not have a  significant  role
    to play in his nephew's life, and he did not live with his adult sister
    who was married.  It was noted that the Appellant lived with his  other
    adult sister, finding that there was no reason why she could not return
    to Pakistan because although she had  settled  status,  she  is  not  a
    British citizen.

31. The FTT found, and this has not been successfully challenged, that  the
    Appellant's mother had not been a witness of truth at the FTT  hearing,
    and found that she did have a sister living in Pakistan.   The  FTT  at
    paragraph 43 found that the Appellant's  family  remaining  in  the  UK
    could visit Pakistan  or  remain  in  contact  using  modern  means  of
    communication.  At paragraph 44 the FTT is aware of the  correct  test,
    which is compelling circumstances, and concluded  that  there  were  no
    such compelling circumstances.

32. The FTT correctly took into account the appalling  immigration  history
    of the Appellant's mother when accepting that the Appellant  (paragraph
    36) was an entirely innocent victim of her behaviour.

33. Although not specifically referring to section 117B of  the  2002  Act,
    the considerations contained therein were  clearly  considered  by  the
    FTT.

34. Lewison LJ at paragraph 58 of EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874
    stated;

         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as  they
         are in the real world.  If one parent has no right to  remain,  but
         the other parent does, that is the  background  against  which  the
         assessment is conducted.   If  neither  parent  has  the  right  to
         remain, then that is the background against which the assessment is
         conducted.  Thus the ultimate question will be, is it reasonable to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
         the country of origin?"

35. Although there was no reference to EV (Philippines), I  find  that  the
    approach advocated by Lewison LJ is the approach adopted by the FTT.

36. The  FTT  identified  both  positive  and  negative  factors  and  made
    reference to these in paragraph 50, concluding that it  was  reasonable
    to expect the Appellant to follow his mother to Pakistan  "where  there
    is no evidence he would be neglected or abused, or having  unmet  needs
    that could not be catered for, or of there being no stable arrangements
    for his physical care for the remaining twenty days of  his  minority."
    The FTT found that the Appellant would have accommodation in  Pakistan,
    that he had the benefit of a  British  education,  and  that  he  could
    obtain employment or continue his studies.   The  FTT  also  considered
    that if the Appellant wished to study in the UK, he could make an entry
    clearance application as a student from Pakistan.

37. I agree with Mr McVeety's submission that there  are  some  judges  who
    would have made a different decision in this case.  That however is not
    the  test,  and  in  my  view  the  FTT  properly  assessed   all   the
    circumstances,  and  did  not  neglect   to   consider   any   relevant
    considerations.  The  grounds  contained  within  the  application  for
    permission to appeal, and the submissions made at the hearing,  display
    a strong disagreement with the FTT decision, but they do not disclose a
    material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FTT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  I do not set  aside  the  decision.   The
appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT.  There has been  no  application
for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal and I see no need to make  an  anonymity
order.




Signed                              Dated 26th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.



Signed                              Dated 26th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
