

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/08425/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 7th January 2015                           |on 9th January 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                        MARIA MAGDALENA UMANA ROMERO
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms N Loughran, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Handley, dismissing her appeal against  refusal  of  a  residence
    card under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The first ground of appeal is that the judge indicated at  the  hearing
    that he did not require to consider the grounds of appeal raised  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR, and barred the appellant's  representative  from
    making submissions thereon, but in the determination said that he could
    consider it, and then went on to find such grounds "not engaged".

 3. The second ground is that the judge erred by failing  to  consider  the
    best interests of the appellant's UK citizen  grandchildren,  for  whom
    she has been caring, and did not explain what  weight  he  gave  to  an
    expert report on this issue.

 4. I indicated at the hearing that in  my  opinion  the  first  Ground  of
    Appeal was well taken, but that  on  substantive  remaking  the  appeal
    would again fail, for the reasons which follow.  Ms  Loughran  declined
    the opportunity of an adjournment to prepare any further submissions.

 5. The decision under appeal explains at pages 1 to 4 why the evidence was
    insufficient  to  satisfy  the  criteria  for  a  derivative  right  of
    residence.  It goes on to say that if the appellant wishes to  rely  on
    Article 8 of the  ECHR  she  is  required  to  make  a  separate  valid
    application; that the appellant is not required to leave the UK if  she
    can otherwise demonstrate that she has a  right  to  reside  under  the
    Regulations;  and  that  the  interests  of  the  children  have   been
    considered on the basis of  the  information  provided.   Although  the
    appellant is told that having no alternative basis of stay  in  the  UK
    she should arrange to leave, and  that  if  she  does  not  do  so  her
    departure may be enforced, she is also advised that in that  event  she
    would be contacted again and  given  a  separate  opportunity  to  make
    representations against removal.

 6. In those circumstances I consider that while a right  of  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR is procedurally available, it is of no assistance
    to  the  appellant,  because  the   threat   of   removal   is   wholly
    insubstantial.

 7. JM v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1402, [2007] Imm AR 293  held  in  an  appeal
    against a decision to refuse to vary leave that a removal  decision  is
    not required before substantive Article 8  issues  may  be  considered.
    That is a different situation from an appeal under the Regulations.   A
    refusal to vary leave puts an appellant in the  potential  position  of
    committing a criminal offence when an appeal is dismissed.   That  does
    not presently apply.  In this case the respondent  specifically  offers
    to look at any further application  either  under  the  Regulations  or
    under Article 8 in terms of the Rules.  A removal decision can be  made
    in consequence of refusal to vary leave,  but  not  in  consequence  of
    refusal of a card under the Regulations.  I do not think that JM is  an
    authority for looking at  the  present  case  on  the  assumption  that
    removal will follow on the failure of the appeal.

 8. I am fortified in that view by the following consideration.   At  least
    since the July 2012 amendments  to  the  Rules,  any  consideration  of
    Article 8  must  begin  by  addressing  the  family  and  private  life
    provisions in the  Rules.   An  appeal  under  the  Regulations  cannot
    succeed on the basis that the decision is not in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules.  Regulation 26 and Schedule 1, paragraph 1,  excepts
    the grounds of appeal in the 2002 Act  at  section  84(1)(a)  and  (f).
    Substantive consideration of  family  and  private  life  issues  would
    inevitably involve looking at the Rules, a strange route to take in  an
    appeal which could not be allowed  under  those  Rules.   It  would  be
    illogical to allow an appeal on human rights grounds outside the  Rules
    where it might succeed under the Rules.

 9. The only interference with Article 8 rights of which the appellant  can
    presently complain is the requirement to make  an  application  to  the
    respondent.  That cannot constitute disproportionate interference.

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.   However,
    for the above reasons the  same  result  is  reached:  the  appeal,  as
    brought to the First-tier  Tribunal,  is  dismissed  on  all  available
    grounds.

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            7th January 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


