

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08762/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          | Promulgated on:             |
|On 29 October and 17th December 2013          |On 25 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                 THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                               BACKO MENDENGUE
                          (No Anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Hussain (of Counsel), instructed by Burton &
Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

1.  This  is  the  decision  of  the  panel  to  which  both  members  have
      contributed.


2.  The Appellant is a national of The Cameroon, who is now aged 34  years.
      He has been present in the United Kingdom for  some  10  years.    His
      appeal to this Tribunal has its origins in a decision made  on  behalf
      of the Secretary of State for the Home Department ("the  Secretary  of
      State") on 3 April  2012,  whereby  his  application  for  asylum  was
      refused for reasons given in a letter dated 27 March 2012.  This   was
      followed by a further  letter  dated  10  May  2012)  communicating  a
      decision to make a deportation order.  The Appellant appealed  to  the
      First-Tier Tribunal ("the FtT"), unsuccessfully.  He then appealed  to
      this Tribunal which, by its determination  dated  28th  January  2013,
      held that the decision of the FtT was vitiated by an error of law, the
      nature whereof appears from the following passages:


         "[23]    In my view in order to make a proper  sustainable  finding
             in relation to section 55 of the 2009 Act and make a  balanced
             assessment under Article 8,  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  should
             have made a clear and unambiguous finding in relation  to  the
             extent of the Appellant's relationship with his children.  Two
             of the children are British  citizens  and  all  of  them  are
             citizens of the EU ...


         [25]  The  First-Tier  Tribunal  considered  the  childrens'   best
             interests but did not reach a conclusion.  The assessment  was
             not adequate. ...


              A clear and unambiguous finding needs to be made  in  relation
             to the Appellant's relationship and contact with his  children
             and their best interests and  the  decision  under  Article  8
             [ECHR]  needs to be remade in  light  of  those  findings  and
             there needs  to  be  a  proper  consideration  of  the  public
             interest."

    The Upper Tribunal set aside the decision of the  FtT  to  dismiss  the
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR accordingly.


3.   By this further determination, the  Upper  Tribunal,  having  conducted
    hearings on 29th October and 17th December 2013, remakes the  decision.
    As the above r�sum�  demonstrates, the issues to be  determined  centre
    on the deportation provisions of  the  Immigration  act  1971,  certain
    provisions of the Immigration  Rules, Article 8 ECHR and section 55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 ("the 2009 Act").

CHRONOLOGY OF MATERIAL EVENTS

4.   The salient events in the history of  this  appeal  are  uncontentious.
      We summarise them thus:

        a)    The Appellant, who is a national of the Cameroon, now aged 34
           years, arrived in the United  Kingdom,  entering  and  remaining
           unlawfully, on some unspecified date prior to November 2008.


        b)    On 2nd November 2008, he was arrested on suspicion of  having
           attempted to use a false passport to  open  a  bank  account  in
           another name.   He  was  charged  with  possession  of  a  false
           identity document.


        c)    On the same date, 2nd November 2008,  the  Appellant  claimed
           asylum, asserting that he had travelled to the United Kingdom in
           September 2003 via France, where he had lived for some 9 months.




        d)    On 24th November 2008, the Appellant  was  sentenced  to  ten
           months imprisonment for possessing and using a false instrument.
            Further, the Court recommended his deportation.


        e)    On 31st December  2008,  the  Appellant  was  notified  of  a
           decision to make a deportation order.


        f)    On 3rd April 2009, following his release from prison, he  was
           granted immigration bail, with the remainder of his sentence  to
           be served in the community until 1st March 2010.


        g)    On 15th May 2009 the Appellant was arrested on  suspicion  of
           having committed the offence of common assault.  The victim  was
           his first female partner, "A" (infra).


        h)    On 16th July 2009,  the  child  "J"  was  born  to  "A",  the
           Appellant being the paternal father.


        i)    On 6th November 2009, the Appellant, having pleaded guilty to
           the assault charge, was sentenced to 50 days imprisonment.


        j)    When sentenced, the Appellant was time served.


          (At this point in the chronology there is a reasonably substantial
           gap of approximately one year's dimensions.)


        k)    In October and November 2010, the Appellant enrolled for  two
           educational courses.


        l)    In the year 2011, the Appellant  became  the  father  of  two
           children by two different mothers.  The child "R"  was  born  to
           "AA" on 29th January 2011.  The child "M" was  born  to  "A"  on
           26th November 2011.

5.   Chronologically, the next material event was the Secretary  of  State's
      decision in April 2012 rejecting the Appellant's asylum  claim.    The
      claim was based on an asserted fear of the Cameroonian Secret Services
      arising out of the Appellant's political activities when a  university
      student.  The detailed letter of decision makes clear that  the  claim
      was rejected primarily on the  ground  that  it  was  not  genuine  or
      credible.   The  reasons  for  this  assessment  were   expressed   in
      impressive detail which it is unnecessary to reproduce in the  present
      context, as the Appellant subsequently abandoned  his  appeal  against
      the refusal of refugee status.  It  suffices  to  highlight  that  the
      Appellant did not pursue his appeal against a decision which contained
      findings of mendacity against him.   The  Secretary  of  State's  also
      entailed that deportation of the Appellant would not infringe  any  of
      the rights of those concerned protected by Article 8  ECHR.  This  was
      followed by the separate decision to make a deportation order, in  May
      2012 (supra).

THE FAMILY FRAMEWORK

6.   The family matrix under scrutiny is somewhat complex.  It involves  the
      Appellant, two women from  whom  the  Appellant  is  estranged,  three
      children born to  these  women  and  of  whom  the  Appellant  is  the
      biological  father  and,  finally,  the  Appellant's  current   female
      partner.  We preface this summary with the observation that the dates,
      periods  and  sequences  pertaining  to  the   Appellant's   unmarried
      relationships with the two ladies mainly concerned are far from clear.
         We do not consider it necessary  to  disentangle  forensically  and
      comprehensively this complex jigsaw.  The most important finding which
      emerges, in our  estimation,  is  that  the  Appellant  moved  swiftly
      backwards and forwards between the two female partners  concerned  and
      liberally deceived and cheated  on  them.  This  is  illustrated  most
      graphically by the fact that the Appellant fathered two children  born
      separately to  these two ladies within a  period  of  ten  months,  in
      2011: see paragraph [4](l) supra.

7.   We elaborate on this complex web  of  adult/adult  and  parent/children
      relationships as follows:


        a)    'AA' was, historically, the Appellant's first female partner.
            We accept the  Appellant's  assertion  that  this  relationship
           began around 2006.  At that time,  AA  was  the  mother  of  two
           children born in 1996  and  1999  respectively.   The  Appellant
           assaulted AA on 15th May 2009, shortly after  his  release  from
           prison, giving rise  to  his  second  conviction,  made  on  6th
           November 2009.   This relationship  appears  to  have  been  re-
           established to some extent, resulting in 'AA'  giving  birth  to
           'M' on 17 November 2011.


        b)    'AN' was the Appellant's second female partner.  Based on the
           date of birth of their child, R,  on  29th  January  2011,  this
           relationship appears to have commenced some time  in  2010,  not
           long after the Appellant's conviction for assaulting  his  first
           female partner 'AA'.  In a letter dated 7th  May  2011,  written
           six  months  before  'M's'  birth,   AN  roundly  denounced  the
           Appellant,  declaring her relationship with him to be  finished,
           complaining that he was providing her with no support.


        c)    We note that in support of his  Article  8  ECHR  claim,  the
           Appellant submitted both a witness statement  and  a  letter  of
           support  from  'AA',  dated   15th   and   17th   January   2011
           respectively.  The Appellant's son 'R' was born to  a  different
           female partner, 'AN', some two weeks later.


        d)    The Appellant's relationship with 'AA' appears to have ended,
           when she was expecting their second daughter. Notably,  the  FtT
           recorded in its determination the Appellant's claim that he  was
           in an enduring relationship with "AA".  We find  that  this  was
           mendacious.  We further find that neither of  his  female  adult
           relationships had been in existence for a long time prior to the
           FtT hearing.  This finding is reinforced  by  the  consideration
           that both ladies refused to attend to testify on his behalf.  We
           attribute no weight whatsoever to either the  witness  statement
           or letter of support purportedly emanating from "AA".


        e)    The Appellant's relationship with his second female  partner,
           'AN' ended on some unspecified date before she wrote her  letter
           dated 7 May 2011.


        f)     'MN'  is  the  Appellant's  present  female  partner.   This
           relationship dates from early 2013.  We shall elaborate on  this
           topic infra.


        g)    The child J was born on 16th July 2009 and is now  aged  4  �
           years.  Her mother is 'AN'.


        h)    The child 'R' was born on 29th January 2011 and is  now  aged
           almost 4 years.  Her mother is 'AN'.


        i)    The child 'M' was born on 26th November 2011 and is now  aged
           2 years.  Her mother is 'AA'.

      As  the above sequence demonstrates, one  of  the  Appellant's  female
      partners, "AA", became pregnant by him within approximately one  month
      of the Appellant's other female partner, "AN", giving birth  to  their
      second child.  We shall examine further infra how this aspect  of  the
      Appellant's conduct, coupled with others, bears on the  issues  raised
      under Article 8 ECHR and section 55 of the 2009 Act.


8.   As recorded above,  most  recently,  the  Appellant  has  begun  a  new
      relationship with a different female partner.  We  elaborate  on  this
      infra.  Thus, in the overall matrix, there  have been, in the span  of
      some five years, three adult relationships  involving  the  Appellant.
      Two of these  have resulted in the birth of three children of whom the
      Appellant  is  the  biological  father  and  from  whose  mothers  the
      Appellant has been estranged for at least two years.   It would appear
      that, in total, these two relationships, which had the elastic element
      noted above, endured for a period of four years at most.  Furthermore,
      there are  five  children  in  the  picture.   The  Appellant  is  the
      biological father of three of them, all British citizens.  We  record,
      for completeness, that he was also nominally  the  stepfather  of  two
      sons born to 'AA' in 1996 and 1999 respectively.

THE EVIDENCE

9.    Some  of  the  evidence  which  this  Tribunal   has   considered   is
      identifiable from paragraphs [4] - [8] above. We  refer  also  to  the
      findings which we  have  incorporated  within  those  paragraphs.  The
      documentary  evidence  is  voluminous.   The  sources  from  which  it
      emanates include schools and nurseries, the relevant City  Council,  a
      hospital, a bank and a library.  In addition there are  sundry  retail
      purchase receipts, witness statements and copy  passports.   There  is
      also an extensive quantity  of  photographs,  coupled  with  DVDs  and
      summaries thereof.  This is supplemented by a series  of  letters  and
      the Appellant's asylum interview transcripts.  We have also considered
      a social worker's report.

10.  Evidence was given to this  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  his  present
      female partner and the aforementioned social worker.  We  record  that
      we heard the evidence of the Appellant's present female partner, "MN",
      in his absence.   It became necessary to interpose this evidence at  a
      stage when the Appellant's evidence was incomplete.  We considered  it
      preferable, with a view to avoiding any risk of pressure on her or any
      possible  contamination  of  her  evidence,  to  hear  this  witness's
      evidence in the Appellant's absence. By  virtue of this measure,  this
      witness's evidence was more reliable and, simultaneously, the risk  of
      the Appellant manufacturing or manicuring   his  incomplete  testimony
      was minimised.  Having raised this issue with  the  Appellant's  legal
      representatives, the Appellant consented to absenting himself from the
      hearing for this limited purpose and period.

11.  In  addition  to  the  findings  and  uncontested  facts  rehearsed  in
      paragraphs [4] - [8] above,  our  further  findings,  assessments  and
      conclusions are set out infra.

THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK

12.  At this juncture, we turn to the task  of  identifying  the  applicable
      legal rules and principles. At the outset, we would highlight that, by
      virtue of the Appellant's sentence of imprisonment, ten  months,  this
      is not an automatic deportation case.  Thus the regime constituted  by
      section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 and paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A
      of the Immigration  Rules  does  not  apply  to  him.   In  principle,
      therefore, he is in a stronger position than  those  embraced  by  the
      automatic deportation regime .  The legal rules governing his case are
      contained in, firstly, section 3 of the Immigration  Act  1971,  which
      provides in material part:

         "(5) A person who is not a British citizen is liable to deportation
             from the United Kingdom if -


             (a)  the Secretary  of  State  deems  his  deportation  to  be
                  conducive to the public good; or

             (b)  another person to whose family he belongs is or has  been
                  ordered to be deported


        (6)  Without prejudice to the operation of subsection (5) above, a
             person who is not a British citizen shall also be liable to
             deportation from the United Kingdom if, after he has attained
             the age of seventeen, he is convicted of an offence for which
             he is punishable with imprisonment and on his conviction is
             recommended for deportation by a court empowered by this Act to
             do so.

      In  this  case,  the  sentencing  court  recommended  the  Appellant's
      deportation from the  United  Kingdom.  These  provisions  of  primary
      legislation  must be  considered  in  conjunction  with  the  relevant
      provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which,  in  his  case,   are
      paragraphs 363, 396 and 397.

13.  The generic subject matter of Part  13  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is
      "Deportation".  We draw attention, firstly, to the issue of dates.  As
      recorded above, the decision to deport the Appellant from  the  United
      Kingdom was made prior to 9th July 2012.    The  significance  of  the
      latter date is  that  it  heralded  the  introduction  of  substantial
      changes to Part 13.  We are satisfied that these new provisions  apply
      to the Appellant's case, by virtue of paragraph 362, which provides:

         "Where Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under Part
         13 of the Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only succeed  where
         the requirements of these  Rules  as  at  09  July  2012  are  met,
         regardless of when  the  notice  of  intention  to  deport  or  the
         deportation order, as appropriate, was served."

     [Our emphasis.]

     Paragraph 363(i)  is  a  mere  rehearsal  of  section  3(5)(a)  of  the
      Immigration Act 1971 (supra).  The next material provision in Part  13
      is paragraph 396, which provides:

         "Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall  be
         that the public interest requires deportation.  It is in the public
         interest to deport  where  the  Secretary  of  State  must  make  a
         deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the  UK  Borders
         Act 2007."

      We interpose here the observation that the first, but not the  second,
      part of this discrete rule applies to this Appellant.  Next, paragraph
      397 provides:


         "A deportation order will not  be  made  if  the  person's  removal
         pursuant to the order would be contrary  to  the  UK's  obligations
         under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention.  Where
         deportation would not be contrary to  these  obligations,  it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation is out weighed."

14.  We consider that, in this Appellant's case, two aspects of  the  public
      interest are engaged.   The  first  is  the  public  interest  in  the
      maintenance of firm immigration control.  This arises  from  the  fact
      that the Appellant is an illegal entrant and his consequential lack of
      lawful immigration status.  The  second  is  the  public  interest  in
      deportation in appropriate cases.  Our analysis is that this  discrete
      public interest is not engaged in a case of discretionary  deportation
      unless and until the Secretary of State, in  accordance  with  section
      3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act, determines that it would be conducive to  the
      public good to deport the person concerned.  A determination  of  this
      kind is an evaluative judgment, to be made by the Secretary  of  State
      according to well established principles of public law.  Where - as in
      the present case - the Secretary of State  makes  a  determination  to
      this effect, we consider that the presumption contained in  the  first
      sentence of paragraph 396 of the Immigration Rules is triggered.  This
      is the second aspect of the  public  interest  which  arises  in  this
      Appellant's case.  Bearing in mind that this  is  an  Article  8  ECHR
      appeal, this means that, within  the  compass  of  Article  8(2),  the
      impugned decision of the Secretary of  State  pursues  two  legitimate
      aims  viz  the  maintenance  of  firm  immigration  control  and   the
      deportation of a person who has infringed the  criminal  laws  of  the
      United Kingdom and whose deportation has been assessed as conducive to
      the interests of the population of the United Kingdom as a whole.

15.  While we are alert to the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in  MF
      (Nigeria) - v - Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA
      Civ 1192, which  post  dated  the  first  instance  Determination,  we
      consider that it does not apply directly to the present appeal,  given
      our analysis that the  Appellant's  case  does  not  fall  within  the
      embrace of paragraphs 398 - 399A of the Immigration Rules.  Subject to
      this material distinction, we are mindful that  the  Court  of  Appeal
      held, firstly, that in cases where it is necessary to  decide  whether
      the deportation of  a  foreign  criminal  would  breach  rights  under
      Article 8 ECHR, great weight should be given to  the  public  interest
      where the offender is unable to  satisfy  any  of  the  provisions  of
      paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A. The Master of the Rolls continued:


         "[40]     ......  It  is  only  exceptionally  that  such   foreign
             criminals will succeed in  showing  that  their  rights  under
             Article 8(1) trump the public interest  in  their  deportation
             ....


         [42] ..... In approaching the question  of  whether  removal  is  a
             proportionate interference  with  an  individual's  Article  8
             rights,  the  scales  are  heavily  weighted  in   favour   of
             deportation and  something  very  compelling  (which  will  be
             'exceptional') is required to outweigh the public interest  in
             removal .....


         [43] The word 'exceptional' is often used  to  denote  a  departure
             from a general rule.  The general rule in the present  context
             is that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom  paragraphs
             399 and 399A do not apply, very  compelling  reasons  will  be
             required to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation.
             These compelling reasons are the 'exceptional' circumstances."



     The Court held, secondly, that the new  Rules  constitute  "a  complete
      code".  In the  balancing  exercise  to  be  performed,  the  Tribunal
      applies  a  proportionality  test  as  required  by   the   Strasbourg
      jurisprudence.  The words "other factors" refer to "all other  factors
      which are relevant to proportionality": paragraph [39].  To summarise:



        a)    If a claimant's case falls within paragraph 399 or 399A,  the
           exercise for the Tribunal involves a single stage only.

        b)    If a claimant's case does not fall  within  either  of  these
           provisions, it is necessary to consider, and determine,  whether
           there  are  exceptional  circumstances  outweighing  the  public
           interest in deportation:  this introduces  further  enquiry  and
           evaluative assessment, which will  entail  the  tribunal  making
           such findings of fact as the context requires.

16.  We are also alert to another important recent decision of the Court  of
      Appeal, SS (Nigeria) - v - Secretary of State for the Home  Department
      [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  The  central  theme  of  this  decision  is  the
      powerful weight to be attributed to the Parliamentary intervention  in
      this field.  By section 32 of the UK  Borders  Act  2007,  a  "foreign
      criminal" is any person who has received a sentence  of  at  least  12
      months imprisonment after 1st August 2008 or was in  custody  pursuant
      to such a sentence on that date and had not been served with a  Notice
      of Deportation. Section 32 of the 2007 Act continues:


      "(4)    For the purpose of section  3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Act
          1971, the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive   to  the
          public good.


             a) The Secretary of State must make  a  deportation  order  in
                respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33)."


     Section 33 provides:

          "(1) Section 32(4) and (5) -

                 (a)  Do not apply  where  an  exception  in  this  section
             applies (subject to subsection (7) below) .....

             (2)  Exception 1 is where removal of the  foreign  criminal  in
           pursuance of the deportation order would breach -

               a)  A person's Convention Rights, or


               b)  The  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the   Refugee
                  Convention."

     At this juncture, it is  convenient  to  set  out  section  55  of  the
      Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009,  which  is  another
      important element in the primary legislation framework:


              "(1)    The Secretary of State  must  make  arrangements  for
    ensuring that -


              (a) The functions mentioned in subsection (2) are  discharged
                  having regard to the need to  safeguard  and  promote  the
                  welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom ...

           2) The functions referred to in subsection (1) are -

               a) Any function of the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to
                  immigration, asylum   or nationality;


               b) any function conferred by or by virtue of the Immigration
                  Acts on an   immigration officer .....


           (3)     A person exercising  any  of  those  functions  must,  in
             considering the function, have regard to any guidance given to
             the person by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  purpose  of
             subsection (1)."

17.  Delivering the main judgment of the Court in SS, Laws LJ, referring  to
      the deportation of foreign criminals under the 2007 Act, stated:

         "[48]    ... Where such  potential  deportees  have  raised  claims
             under Article 8, seeking to resist deportation by  relying  on
             the  interests  of  a  child  or   children   having   British
             citizenship, I think with respect that insufficient  attention
             has been paid to the weight to be attached, in virtue  of  its
             origin in primary legislation,  to  the  policy  of  deporting
             foreign criminals ......


         [49] The policy's source, however, is as we have seen  one  of  the
             drivers of the breadth  of  the  decision  maker's  margin  of
             discretion when the proportionality of its application in  the
             particular case is being considered."

     Summarising, Laws LJ stated:

         "[55]    .... Proportionality, the absence of  an  'exceptionality'
             rule and the meaning of 'a  primary  consideration'  are  all,
             when properly understood,  consonant  with  the  force  to  be
             attached in cases of the present kind to the  two  drivers  of
             the decision maker's margin of discretion: the policy's source
             and the policy's nature and in particular to the great  weight
             which the 2007 Act attributes to the  deportation  of  foreign
             criminals."

                  [Emphasis added.]

     And in a later passage, Laws  LJ  refers  to  "the  extremely  pressing
      public interest in the Appellant's deportation": paragraph [58].

18.  We consider that the decision in SS, in common  with  the  decision  in
      MF, does not apply directly to the  Appellant's  case,  for  the  same
      reason viz the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  deport  him  was
      discretionary, rather than automatic, by virtue  of  his  sentence  of
      imprisonment being  of  less  than  12  months  duration.   Hence  our
      observation in  paragraph  [12]   above  that  the  Appellant  is,  in
      principle, in a stronger position than those  to  whom  the  automatic
      deportation regime applies.  In our opinion, the legal effect of  this
      is that the proportionality assessment is  somewhat  more  benign  and
      less rigorous to offenders such as this Appellant.   The  legislature,
      in enacting section  32  of  the  2007  Act  and  in  making  the  new
      provisions in Part 3 of the Immigration  Rules,  could  have  included
      offenders whose criminality attracts sentences of imprisonment of less
      than 12 months. However, it chose not to do so.  The  main  effect  of
      this  is,  in  our  judgment,  twofold.   Firstly,  the  circumscribed
      proportionality regime contained in paragraphs 398 - 399A of the Rules
      does not apply in cases such as the present.  Secondly, the second  of
      the public interests identified  above  viz  the  public  interest  in
      deporting certain foreign criminals applies with somewhat less  force.
      This, we would observe, is logically consistent with a  more  rigorous
      approach to more serious offenders and, correspondingly, a less severe
      approach to those whose offending is on a smaller scale.

19.  At this juncture, we draw  attention  to  the  decision  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal in Bah - v - Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2012] UKUT 00196 (IAC), where the Secretary of State made a  decision
      to deport a person who had been convicted of a series of offences over
      a period of time which attracted a variety of sentences  ranging  from
      fines to community orders and one sentence  of  imprisonment  of  five
      weeks, which was suspended.  The Secretary of  State  determined  that
      the deportation of the Appellant would  be  conducive  to  the  public
      good.  We  consider  that  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      consistent with our view that, in cases of the  present  genre,  where
      (as here) there is a human rights challenge, the task for the Tribunal
      is to conduct an orthodox human rights assessment.  This  will  entail
      asking, and answering, the staged questions formulated by the House of
      Lords in Razgar - v - Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2004] 2 AC 368 (infra).

20.  Given that we are desirous of promulgating  some  general  guidance  to
      Tribunals to be applied in cases of this kind, it  is  appropriate  at
      this juncture to highlight the distinctive functions of the First-Tier
      Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.  Where an  appeal  against  an  order
      deporting a foreign criminal is pursued, it is incumbent on the First-
      Tier Tribunal to consider all relevant evidence, to  make  appropriate
      findings of fact and, finally, to make its decision, bearing  in  mind
      the distinction between cases of this kind and those  embraced  by  MF
      (Nigeria) and SS (Nigeria), together with all of the other legal rules
      and principles in play in the  particular  case.   These  include  the
      guidance provided by the highest courts on  the  correct  approach  to
      Article 8  ECHR  and  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
      Immigration Acts 2009. The Upper Tribunal, however,  has  a  different
      function.  Where a further appeal is brought in this forum, permission
      having been granted, such appeal is, pursued, per section 11(1) of the
      Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 -

     ".... on any point of law arising from a decision made  by  the  First-
           Tier Tribunal   .........."


     Thus the question to be determined by the  Upper  Tribunal  is  whether
      the First-Tier Tribunal has erred in law in making its  decision.   In
      thus deciding, the Upper Tribunal does not conduct  an  open  -  ended
      enquiry into or review of the first instance decision.   Rather,  both
      the  appeal  and  the  ensuing  appellate  tribunal's   decision   are
      circumscribed by the terms in which  permission  to  appeal  has  been
      granted and the search for a material error of  law.   In  determining
      such appeals, the  Upper  Tribunal,  in  common  with  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal, must give  full  effect  to  all  of  the  legal  rules  and
      principles in play, in every case.  The decisions in MF and  SS   will
      frequently have a significant influence in deciding whether the First-
      Tier Tribunal has erred in law in any of the respects  falling  within
      the permitted grounds of appeal.  In  conducting  this  exercise,  the
      Upper Tribunal will scrupulously examine the substance of the decision
      of the First-Tier Tribunal.

21.  At this juncture, we remind ourselves that this is not an error of  law
      appeal.  By its determination dated 28th January 2013, this  Tribunal,
      differently constituted, has already found that the  decision  of  the
      FtT, which dismissed the Appellant's appeal, was vitiated by error  of
      law  consisting  of  a  failure  to  make  clear  findings  about  the
      Appellant's relationship with his children and to identify their  best
      interests,  in  breach  of  section  55  of  the  2009  Act   (infra).
      Accordingly, this Tribunal is engaged in the exercise of remaking  the
      decision.

ARTICLE 8 ECHR AND SECTION 55 OF THE BORDERS,  CITIZENSHIP  AND  IMMIGRATION
ACT 2009

22.  Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  ("the
      2009 Act") provides:

         "(1) The Secretary of State must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring
    that -


              a) the functions mentioned in sub-section (2)  are  discharged
                 having regard to the need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
                 welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom ....


           2) The functions referred to in sub-section (1) are -


              (a) any function of the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to
                 immigration, asylum or nationality;
              b) any function conferred by or by virtue of  the  Immigration
                 Acts on an Immigration Officer ...


           3)  A  person  exercising  any  of  those  functions  must,   in
              exercising the function, have regard to any guidance given to
              the person by the Secretary of State for the purpose of  sub-
              section (1)."

      While Article 8 ECHR and section 55 of  the  2009  Act  have  separate
      juridical identities, they are  clearly  associated.  Thus  where  the
      Article 8 family  life  equation  involves  children,  section  55  is
      immediately engaged. In ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC4,  Baroness  Hale
      emphasised that the best interests of the  child  must  be  considered
      first - see paragraph [26] - while Lord Kerr stated:

         "[46]    ........   A primacy of importance must be accorded to his
             or her best interests.  This is not, it is agreed, a factor of
             limitless importance in the sense that it  will  prevail  over
             all other considerations.  It is a factor, however, that  must
             rank  higher  than  any  other.   It   is   not   merely   one
             consideration that  weighs  in  the  balance  alongside  other
             competing factors. Where  the  best  interests  of  the  child
             clearly  favour  a  certain  course,  that  course  should  be
             followed unless countervailing reasons of  considerable  force
             displace them."

      As was recognised in Mansoor - v - Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2011] EWHC 832 (Admin), the onward march of the Strasbourg
      jurisprudence has involved the progressive  development  of  the  best
      interests of the child principle under Article 8.


23.  Most recently, in Zoumbas -  v  -  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2013] 1 WLR 3690, the Supreme  Court  has  considered  the
      interplay between the best interests of the child and Article 8  ECHR,
      rehearsing what might be termed a code compromising seven principles:
      (1)     The best interests of a child are  an  integral  part  of  the
           proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;
      (2)     In making that assessment, the best interests of a child  must
           be a primary consideration, although not always the only primary
           consideration;  and  the  child's  best  interests  do  not   of
           themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;
      (3)     Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by
           the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,   no   other
           consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;
      (4)     While different judges might approach the question of the best
           interests of a child in different ways, it is important  to  ask
           oneself the right questions in an orderly  manner  in  order  to
           avoid the risk that the best  interests  of  a  child  might  be
           undervalued when other important considerations were in play;
      (5)  It is important to have a clear idea of a  child's  circumstances
           and of what is in a  child's  best  interests  before  one  asks
           oneself whether those interests are outweighed by the  force  of
           other considerations;
      (6)     To that end there is no substitute for a  careful  examination
           of all relevant factors  when  the  interests  of  a  child  are
           involved in an article 8 assessment; and
      (7)     A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is
           not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.
     As Lord Hodge observed, the genesis of these  principles  is  found  in
      the United Nations  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child  1989,
      particularly   Article   3(1)   which,   in   turn,   influences   the
      interpretation of Article 8 ECHR.

24.  Expanding on the seven principles set out above, Lord Hodge  continued:



         "[13]    We would seek to add to the seven principles the following
             comments. First, the decision-maker is required to assess  the
             proportionality of the interference with  private  and  family
             life in the particular circumstances in which the decision  is
             made. The evaluative exercise in assessing the proportionality
             of a measure under article 8 ECHR excludes any "hard-edged  or
             bright-line rule to be applied to the generality of cases": EB
             (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department [2009]
             AC 1159, per Lord Bingham at para 12. Secondly, as Lord Mance
             pointed out in H(H) (at para  98)  the  decision-maker  must
             evaluate the child's best interests and in some cases they may
             point only marginally in one, rather than another,  direction.
             Thirdly,  as  the  case  of H(H) shows  in  the  context  of
             extradition, there may be circumstances in which the weight of
             another primary consideration can tip the balance and make the
             interference proportionate  even  where  it  has  very  severe
             consequences for children."

      In the case of  H(H),  the  Supreme  Court  held,  in  an  extradition
      context, that the United Kingdom's  international  treaty  obligations
      prevailed over the best interests of the children in  question.   Lord
      Hodge continued:


        "The third principle in para 10 above is subject to the  first  and
        second qualifications and may, depending on the  circumstances,  be
        subject to the third. But in our view, it  is  not  likely  that  a
        court would reach in the context of an  immigration  decision  what
        Lord Wilson described in H(H) (at para 172) as the "firm if bleak"
        conclusion in that case, which separated young children from  their
        parents."

      One of the obvious merits of the opinion of Lord Hodge in  Zoumbas  is
      that it consolidates in a single, accessible source  one  set  of  the
      principles which must be applied in cases of this  nature.   We  would
      add that where, as  in  the  present  case,  the  context  is  one  of
      deportation, it is incumbent on Tribunals to give full effect  to  the
      decisions in MF (Nigeria) and SS (Nigeria): see paragraphs [10] - [14]
      supra.

25.  We are mindful of the staged approach espoused by the  House  of  Lords
      in Razgar - v - Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] 2 AC
      368, per Lord Bingham at paragraph [17], which has the great merit  of
      minimising the risk of a Tribunal falling into error in the generality
      of cases involving Article 8 ECHR.  In the present case - as agreed by
      both parties - the relevant question  is  the  fifth  and  final  one,
      namely whether the anticipated interference with the right to  respect
      for the family life under scrutiny is proportionate to the  legitimate
      public end sought to be achieved.  We recall the observation  of  Lord
      Bingham,  in  the  same  case,  that  the  fifth  question  is:  "more
      judgemental" than the others: paragraph [24].  We are also alert  that
      the Razgar decision must be considered in the light  of  the  changing
      legal landscape ushered in by HC 398 - 399A and the  decisions  in  SS
      (Nigeria) and MF (Nigeria).  In this context, we refer to  the  recent
      decision of the Upper Tribunal in Kabia v SSHD [2013] UKUT 569 (IAC).

26.  In Huang - v - Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007]  2  AC
      167, Lord Bingham, referring to the task of the appellate  immigration
      authority in determining Article 8(2) issues, stated:

         "[16]    .....  The authority will wish to consider and  weigh  all
             that tells  in  favour  of  the  refusal  of  leave  which  is
             challenged, with particular reference to  justification  under
             article 8(2). There will,  in  almost  any  case,  be  certain
             general  considerations  to  bear   in   mind:   the   general
             administrative desirability  of  applying  known  rules  if  a
             system of immigration control is to be workable,  predictable,
             consistent and fair as between one applicant and another;  the
             damage to good  administration  and  effective  control  if  a
             system is perceived by applicants internationally to be unduly
             porous, unpredictable or perfunctory; the need  to  discourage
             non-nationals  admitted  to  the  country   temporarily   from
             believing that they can  commit  serious  crimes  and  yet  be
             allowed to remain; the need to discourage fraud, deception and
             deliberate breaches of the law; and so on. In some cases  much
             more particular reasons will be relied on to justify  refusal,
             as  in Samaroo  v  Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
             Department [2001]  EWCA  Civ  1139, [2002]  INLR  55 where
             attention was paid to the Secretary of State's  judgment  that
             deportation was a valuable deterrent to actual or  prospective
             drug traffickers, or R (Farrakhan) v Secretary of  State  for
             the Home Department [2002] EWCA Civ 606, [2002] QB  1391,  an
             article  10  case,  in  which  note  was  taken  of  the  Home
             Secretary's judgment that the  applicant  posed  a  threat  to
             community relations between Muslims and Jews and  a  potential
             threat to public order for that reason. The giving  of  weight
             to factors such  as  these  is  not,  in  our  opinion,  aptly
             described as deference: it  is  performance  of  the  ordinary
             judicial task of weighing up the competing  considerations  on
             each side and according appropriate weight to the judgment  of
             a person with responsibility for a given  subject  matter  and
             access to special sources of knowledge and advice. That is how
             any rational judicial decision-maker is likely to proceed.  It
             is to be noted that both Samaroo and Farrakhan (cases on which
             the Secretary of State seeks to  place  especial  reliance  as
             examples of the court attaching very  considerable  weight  to
             decisions of his taken in an  immigration  context)  were  not
             merely challenges  by  way  of  judicial  review  rather  than
             appeals but cases where Parliament had  specifically  excluded
             any right of appeal."

      We have reproduced this  passage  in  full  as  it  invariably  repays
      careful reading, mindful that it must now be considered in the  manner
      indicated in the light of the subsequent statutory and jurisprudential
      developments noted above.


27.  As appears above, we are alert to the more recent developments in  the
      jurisprudence in this field, in particular the decisions of the  Court
      of Appeal in SS (Nigeria) and MF (Nigeria).  While we are mindful that
      the most important consideration in cases involving the  more  serious
      offenders is that  the  public  interest  in  play  is  an  especially
      powerful one, we consider ourselves obliged to bear in mind  that  the
      public interest in  the  present  case  is  diluted  slightly  by  the
      consideration that the Appellant received a sentence  of  imprisonment
      below the relevant statutory threshold of 12 months.  This,  in  turn,
      will influence the primacy of importance which tribunals  must  accord
      to the best interests  of  any  affected  children,  which  finds  its
      juridical home in the proportionality assessment.  Statements such  as
      that of Lord Bingham in EB (Kosovo) [2009] 1 AC 1159,  paragraph  [*],
      must be considered in  their  full  juridical  context,  as  this  has
      evolved. Furthermore, in a succession of decisions, the higher  courts
      have emphasised the intensely fact sensitive  nature  of  every  case:
      see, for example, EB, paragraph [9], per Lord Bingham. We also bear in
      mind the guidance to be derived from Huang, paragraph [18]:


         "Human beings are social animals.  They  depend  on  others.  Their
         family, or extended family, is the group on which many people  most
         heavily depend, socially, emotionally and often financially.  There
         comes a  point  at  which,  for  some,  prolonged  and  unavoidable
         separation from this group seriously inhibits their ability to live
         full and fulfilling lives. Matters such  as  the  age,  health  and
         vulnerability of the applicant, the closeness and previous  history
         of the family, the applicant's  dependence  on  the  financial  and
         emotional support of the family, the prevailing cultural  tradition
         and conditions in the country of origin and many other factors  may
         all be relevant. The Strasbourg court has repeatedly recognised the
         general right of states to control the entry and residence of  non-
         nationals, and repeatedly acknowledged that the Convention  confers
         no right on individuals or families to choose where they prefer  to
         live. In most cases where the applicants complain of a violation of
         their Article 8 rights, in a case where the  impugned  decision  is
         authorised by law for a legitimate object and the interference  (or
         lack of  respect)  is  of  sufficient  seriousness  to  engage  the
         operation of Article 8,  the  crucial  question  is  likely  to  be
         whether the interference (or lack  of  respect)  complained  of  is
         proportionate to the legitimate end sought to be achieved."

      We  also  remind  ourselves  that  there   is   no   legal   test   of
      exceptionality: Huang, paragraph [20] and MF (Nigeria) paragraphs [40]
      - [43].  Furthermore, there is no hard-edged or bright line rule to be
      applied in the difficult evaluative exercise which Article 8  requires
      in cases such as the present: EB (Kosovo), paragraph [12].

FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

28.  We begin by finding that if the Appellant is deported from  the  United
      Kingdom this will entail an interference with the right to respect for
      family life enjoyed by the Appellant and his three biological children
      because the strong likelihood is that they will remain here with their
      respective mothers.  We are satisfied that this right is  not  engaged
      in respect of any other person.  In particular,  there  is  no  family
      life viz-a-viz the Appellant or either of his former  female  partners
      or their children.  Furthermore, we find that the relationship between
      the Appellant and his present girlfriend does not give rise to  family
      life between them, given its  recent  vintage  and  the  frequent  and
      lengthy periods of separation consequent upon the employment which she
      has  obtained  in  Northern  Ireland  .   In  addition,  there  is  no
      established family life between the Appellant's present girlfriend and
      any of the children concerned.

29.  Having found that there will be an interference  with  family  life  of
      the nature rehearsed above, we record that it  is  not  disputed  that
      such interference will be in accordance with the  law  and  pursues  a
      legitimate aim.   Thus  the  central  question  to  be  addressed  and
      determined is that of the  proportionality  of  the  interference,  in
      circumstances where the sentence of  imprisonment  concerned  is  less
      than 12 months.   We  begin  this  exercise  by  addressing  the  best
      interests of the three children concerned.  We find that the Appellant
      plays an active part in their lives.  He is  a  normal,  unexceptional
      caring and loving father.  The children benefit  from  his  attention,
      care, love and involvement in their respective lives.  These  benefits
      are constrained by considerations  of  the  Appellant's  very  limited
      finances, the three separate residential addresses involved,  the  two
      different family units and factors of time and distance.

30.  We consider that the care and attention which the Appellant invests  in
      his three children has mixed motives.  One of the motives in  play  is
      undoubtedly that of normal parental love and dedication.  However,  we
      are satisfied that the Appellant's conduct has also been motivated  by
      self interest, namely his strong desire to avoid deportation.  In this
      respect, we  highlight  the  significant  qualitative  and  quantative
      differences between the evidence presented to the FtT in  August  2012
      and the evidence amassed for  this  Tribunal  in  December  2013.   We
      consider that the substantially greater quantity of evidence of family
      involvement now available is attributable  to  the  mixed  motives  to
      which we have referred.

31.  Having examined all  of  the  evidence  scrupulously,  we  are  of  the
      opinion  that  the  conception  of  the  two  children  born  to   the
      Appellant's different female partners on 29th January  2011  and  26th
      November 2011 was motivated, at least in part, by pure  self  interest
      on the Appellant's part.  These children were conceived at a time when
      the Appellant's asylum  claim  was  undetermined  and  the  threat  of
      deportation  had  materialised.   He  fathered   these   children   in
      circumstances where he was aware of his unlawful immigrant status  and
      was pursuing an asylum claim which  he  later  abandoned.   We  remind
      ourselves  at  once  that  this  finding  must  not  contaminate   our
      assessment of  the  three  childrens'  best  interests.   However,  it
      informs our assessment of their best interests in the future.

32.  The evidence relating to the Appellant's relationships with  women  and
      our findings in relation to the aforementioned births impel us to find
      that the Appellant is a  person  who  charms  and  manipulates  women.
      Relationships with women are a  major  part  of  his  life.   Properly
      analysed and in hindsight,  it  is  clear  that  during  a  period  of
      approximately four/five years, the Appellant's main adult relationship
      was with 'AA', punctuated by an "affair" with 'AN'.   Thus,  during  a
      period of some 28 months, 'AN' gave birth to a child,  'AA'  then  did
      likewise and, finally, 'AA' gave birth to a second child.   Throughout
      this period, the purportedly "stable" partnership was with 'AA', while
      the "affairs" were with AN.  We consider that the Appellant,  by  this
      conduct, has shown himself to be a fickle,  unreliable,  irresponsible
      and highly self-interested person.   We  consider  that  these  traits
      will, in due course, operate to the detriment of his children.

33.  Moreover, the Appellant was convicted of assaulting 'AA'  within  weeks
      of his release from prison.   We find that the account of the  assault
      given by the Appellant to this Tribunal and elsewhere is not worthy of
      belief.  We do not believe the Appellant's detailed evidence  to  this
      Tribunal concerning the precipitating incident.  We find that  it  was
      contrived and did not withstand the scrutiny to which we subjected  it
      by questioning.  Furthermore, our questioning of the Appellant and the
      social worker established  to  our  satisfaction  that  the  Appellant
      sought to deceive the social worker by  failing  to  disclose  to  him
      either of his previous convictions.  This, coupled with our probing of
      the social worker's evidence, impels us to  the  freestanding  finding
      that we can  attribute  no  weight  to  the  opinions  or  assessments
      expressed in his report.

34.  Our findings above are bolstered by further  considerations  pertaining
      to the two ladies in question.  Neither attended any of the succession
      of Tribunal hearings, beginning in August  2012,  to  testify  on  the
      Appellant's behalf.  We find the explanations for this  given  by  the
      Appellant to the FtT - in paragraphs 6 and 9 of  its  determination  -
      and to this Tribunal wholly  unworthy  of  belief.   We  further  find
      specifically  that  neither  of  these  women  has  testified  on  the
      Appellant's behalf for the simple reason that their evidence would  be
      more likely to undermine and confound, than support  and  verify,  the
      various claims and assertions which make up  his case.  The  Appellant
      has claimed, inter alia, that he had a strong, close relationship with
      'AA'.  This is confounded by the sequence of events highlighted  above
      and, further, the need for  Court  intervention,  in  the  form  of  a
      contact order, dated 16th December 2010, in respect of the child 'J'.

35.  We would highlight, in this discrete context, the paucity  of  evidence
      relating to the year 2010.  Furthermore, we  note  in  particular  the
      letter dated 26th January 2011 from the Immigration Advisory  Service,
      a Community Legal Service representing the Appellant,  to  UKBA.   The
      contents of this letter reflect  that  the  Appellant  had  given  his
      representatives instructions that -

         "My client's private and  personal  life  has  settled  down  since
         August 2009 ...  He has reconciled with his wife with  whom  he  is
         now expecting a child ...   His private life is now stable.  He  is
         the father figure to his wife's two sons.  He is  expecting  a  new
         child later this year and he plays a major role  in  the  care  and
         upbringing of his new daughter."

     [Emphasis supplied]

      This letter airbrushes both  the  assault  conviction  and  the  Court
      contact proceedings.  Strikingly,  it  was  written  just  three  days
      before 'AN' gave birth to R.  It also coincides with  a  letter  dated
      15th January 2011 apparently signed by AA, describing herself  as  the
      Appellant's "former partner".  This was followed by a letter dated 7th
      May 2011 written by 'AN', who had given birth to the Appellant's child
      just some three months previously.  This letter  discloses  that  some
      months beforehand the Appellant had involved this lady in  an  attempt
      to secure the status of civil partnership.  We accept this  assertion.
      It continues:


         "I want to make it clear that I am no longer in a relationship with
         [the Appellant] ...  We are not together any more [and I]  can tell
         you he is currently not providing me and my son's support."

      This letter was written by the mother of the child, 'R', who had  been
      born some three months previously.  This is the  lady  with  whom  the
      Appellant had, per the instructions reflected  in  the  aforementioned
      legal adviser's letter, no role and no  existence.   She  was  someone
      other than the lady with whom he allegedly had a "stable" relationship
      following a reconciliation and the mother of two sons  in  respect  of
      whom the Appellant was allegedly "the father figure".  Our analysis of
      this evidence readily  yields  the  finding  that  the  Appellant  was
      liberally making untruthful representations in support of his case and
      was blithely enmeshing his female partners  in  an  elaborate  web  of
      unmistakable deceit.    We  recall,  at  this  juncture,  the  earlier
      Tribunal's finding of mendacity in its rejection of his asylum  claim:
      see [5] supra.


36.  Many of the findings and assessments rehearsed above do not involve  or
      relate directly to any of the three children concerned,  all  of  whom
      are blameless of the machinations and deception  we  have  found.   We
      must now identify and assess their best interests.   We are  satisfied
      that, at present, they are somewhat better off with the Appellant than
      without him. He is making some  contribution  to  their  lives.  Their
      interests and  welfare  are  enhanced  and  promoted  in  consequence.
      However, we believe that the benefit currently enjoyed by the children
      is fragile and likely  to  be  short  lived.   We  have  assessed  the
      Appellant as a strikingly self-interested person.  This  is  reflected
      in, inter alia, the new relationship which he  has  developed  with  a
      woman some ten years younger  than  him.   He  clearly  has  a  strong
      interest in this relationship.  Our expectation is that he will invest
      much  time,  effort  and  energy  in  this  relationship  or,  if   it
      terminates, in some further adult liaison with another woman.  He  and
      his current girlfriend have given unequivocal evidence that  they  are
      planning a long term relationship which  will  involve  the  birth  of
      further children. If this relationship is to survive and develop,  the
      Appellant is likely to spend significant periods of time  in  Northern
      Ireland, where his current girlfriend works.  Our expectation is  that
      this will become a priority  for  him,  at  the  expense  and  to  the
      disadvantage of his  three  children.   Furthermore,  if  his  current
      relationship develops and prospers  in  the  manner  planned  by  both
      partners, it will involve the birth of  children,  events  which  will
      inevitably divert the Appellant's time, interest  and  attention  from
      his existing children to a major extent.  In addition, our  assessment
      of  the  Appellant  as  a  fickle,  unreliable   self-interested   and
      manipulative person means that one  can  have  no  confidence  in  his
      current relationship with his children being maintained come whatever.


 37.  Our  various  findings  and  assessments  above  impel  to  the  firm
      conclusion that while the Appellant's departure from the lives of  his
      three children would not be in their best interests, this  will  be  a
      short term loss to them.  In  the  medium  and  longer  terms,  he  is
      unlikely to be a dedicated, devoted and responsible father.  He  will,
      rather, give precedence to other interests.  Beyond  the  short  term,
      therefore, the  three  children  will  unquestionably  be  better  off
      without him.  The  undisputed  evidence  is  that  they  have  loving,
      devoted and responsible mothers.  We find that, beyond the short term,
      their best interests  will  not  be  compromised  by  the  Appellant's
      absence.  They will be better off without him.  They will  not  suffer
      the uncertainty, insecurity and confusion which his predictably shadow
      presence in their lives would engender. We remind ourselves that, as a
      matter of law, the potency of the public interest engaged  is  diluted
      somewhat by the length of the  Appellant's  sentence  of  imprisonment
      (ten months).  We further take into account the lack of expedition  in
      the various decision making processes.  Having done so, on the grounds
      and for the reasons above, we give determinative weight to the  public
      interest  favouring  the  Appellant's  deportation  from  the   United
      Kingdom.   We   conclude   that   his   deportation   would   not   be
      disproportionate.  Thus, there will be no  breach  of  the  rights  of
      those laying claim to the protection of Article 8 ECHR.

DECISION

38.  We remake the decision by dismissing the appeal, thereby affirming  the
      determination of the FtT which, in turn, upheld the  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State to deport the Appellant from the United Kingdom.

                          Signed:
                           [pic]
                                               The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                     Date:     20  March 2014
