
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08602/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2017                    |On 16 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                           MR KRISHANAN Mootoosamy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Deepchand, Solicitor from Lambeth Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judges Froom and  McKenzie,  sitting
    as a panel), promulgated on 4 July 2016, in which they concluded in the
    first instance that there was no valid appeal before them.   The  panel
    went on to consider the Appellant's Article 8 case  in  any  event  and
    concluded that this failed.

 2. The issue of validity concerned the question of whether  the  Appellant
    had in fact signed the payment mandate as part of his  application  for
    further leave to remain.  The initial application was attempted  to  be
    made on 19 September 2014, the day the Appellant's previous  leave  was
    due to expire.  By a letter dated 2 October 2014 the  Respondent  wrote
    back to the  Appellant  stating  that  the  attempted  application  was
    invalid because the payment mandate had not in fact been  signed.   The
    Appellant, through his solicitors, then resubmitted an  application  on
    10 October 2014.  By a decision dated 3 February  2015  the  Respondent
    refused leave to remain (and in the process rejecting  the  Appellant's
    human rights claim) and stated  that  there  was  no  right  of  appeal
    against that decision.  Nonetheless the Appellant lodged an appeal with
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. That appeal was lodged late and a reference was made to a Duty Judge to
    decide the issue of timeliness.  The  Duty  Judge  duly  found  in  the
    Appellant's favour and at the same time raised the issue of whether  or
    not this case  involved  an  issue  relating  to  the  case  of  Basnet
    (validity  of  application  -  respondent)  [2012]   UKUT   00113(IAC).
    Directions were written up and sent out on 21 July  2015  (there  is  a
    question as to whether these were in fact sent  to  the  Respondent,  a
    matter to which I will return).



Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The history of the case is set out in some detail by  the  panel.   The
    findings and reasons begin at paragraph 21.

 5. In  paragraph  21  the  panel  cites  both  the  case  of  Basnet  and,
    importantly, the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Mitchell  (Basnet
    Revisited) [2015] UKUT 00562  (IAC).   The  decision  in  Mitchell  was
    published on the Tribunal's website on 20 October  2015,  eight  months
    before the hearing.

 6. At paragraph 23 the panel noted that the directions  of  21  July  2015
    referred to previously did not appear to have been received  by  either
    the Appellant or the Respondent.  It had evidence that  the  directions
    had been sent out to the Appellant at his home address  but  there  was
    nothing to show that it had been sent out to the  representatives.   In
    respect of service on the Respondent, the panel noted that  no  address
    had been given on the directions notice.  It is implicit  in  paragraph
    23 that the panel concluded that the directions had probably  not  been
    sent out to at least the Respondent.  Therefore the panel  stated  that
    was going to determine the appeal on the evidence that was  before  it,
    focusing on that of the Appellant.

 7. Between paragraphs 24 and 30  the  panel  gives,  on  my  count,  seven
    reasons for rejecting the Appellant's claim that he had in fact  signed
    the payment mandate.  The reasons include: a failure to  challenge  the
    Respondent's assertions back in 2014; a failure to provide any evidence
    on the Appellant's particular; a failure to refer to the mandate  point
    in his grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal; and a failure even
    to mention this clearly in  his  witness  statement  prepared  for  the
    appeal before the panel.  As a result of these reasons, at paragraph 31
    the panel concludes that the Appellant had not proved on the balance of
    probabilities that he signed the payment mandate.   It  followed,  said
    the panel, that the Appellant's attempted application on  19  September
    2014 was not a valid application, and therefore his leave  had  expired
    on the same date.  At the point that he did make a valid application in
    October 2014, he had no extant leave to remain.  As a result  of  this,
    the Respondent's decision of 3 February 2015 did not carry  with  it  a
    right of appeal.  That dealt with the question of the validity.

 8. The Tribunal goes on between paragraphs 33 and  50  to  deal  with  the
    Article 8 claim in a "belt and braces" approach.  It concludes that the
    Respondent's decision was proportionate.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 9. The grounds of appeal include fairly  lengthy  citations  of  case  law
    together with copied passages therefrom.  Whilst the case of Basnet  is
    referred to, nothing is said about the decision in Mitchell whatsoever.



10. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal  but  then
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington on 1 September  2016.   Judge
    Rimington refers to the decision in Basnet and  comments  that  it  was
    arguable that the panel failed to apply  it  correctly.   There  is  no
    reference in the grant of permission to the decision in Mitchell.



The hearing before me

11. Mr Deepchand provided me with a copy of the  directions  issued  on  21
    July 2015 together with an attendance note dated 3 January 2017.   This
    note indicates that Mr Deepchand had been told by the Tribunal  Service
    customer advisor that the directions and questions had been served both
    on the Appellant's representatives and the Respondent in July 2015.

12. I raised the Mitchell issue with Mr Deepchand  at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing and asked for submissions on this point.  In essence,  I  posed
    the question of whether the Appellant's case was in reality a Mitchell-
    type of case rather than a Basnet scenario.  If it were the former, the
    Tribunal would have been correct in placing the burden  of  proof  upon
    the Appellant.  If it were the latter, the panel  would  have  been  in
    error in so doing.

13. Mr Deepchand submitted that  there  was  a  fairness  point  here.  The
    directions issued in July 2015 had in fact been issued and received  by
    the Respondent, yet the Respondent had  not  complied  with  them.   He
    accepted that prior to the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  the
    Appellant's solicitors had made no contact with either the Tribunal  or
    the Respondent in order to chase up the  apparent  non-compliance  with
    the said directions.   Mr  Deepchand  submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence before the panel had  been  that  he  did  in  fact  sign  the
    relevant payment mandate.  He suggested  that  if  the  Respondent  had
    complied with  the  2015  directions  the  panel  may  have  reached  a
    different conclusion.

14. Mr Tarlow relied on the Mitchell case.  He submitted that the  findings
    made by the panel were open to them and that  there  were  no  material
    errors of law.



Decision on error of law

15. As I announced to the parties at the hearing, I conclude that there are
    no material errors of law in the panel's decision.

16. It is right that the Duty Judge  issued  Basnet-related  directions  in
    July of 2015.  This act preceded publication of the  Mitchell  decision
    by some four months or  so.   It  is  debateable  whether  or  not  the
    directions were in fact served on the Respondent given that no  address
    is included at the bottom of the directions notice.  I conclude  it  is
    more likely than not that these directions were not in fact either sent
    or received by the Respondent, and that this same conclusion  was  open
    to the panel. However, even if the directions were  received,  that  is
    immaterial to the conclusions reached by the panel.

17. As is clear from paragraph 21  of  its  decision,  the  panel  referred
    itself correctly to both the decisions in Basnet and Mitchell.   I  see
    from the Record of Proceedings that the Mitchell case was discussed  at
    some length at the hearing itself and thus it cannot be said  that  the
    Appellant's representatives were taken by surprise in any way.   It  is
    clear to me that what the panel has in effect done is to conclude  that
    the Appellant's case fell within the ambit of Mitchell rather than that
    of Basnet.  This was a case involving (to use the phraseology  employed
    in Mitchell) a form that was "not good on its face".   In  other  words
    this was a case in which a relevant aspect  of  the  form,  namely  the
    payment mandate, had not been signed by the  Appellant.   This  is  the
    very type of scenario that arose in the  Mitchell  decision  (see,  for
    example, paragraphs 8 and 9).  In such a case, as Mitchell makes clear,
    the burden rests not with the Respondent but with  the  Appellant  (see
    paragraph 11 of Mitchell). Thus there is no misdirection in law by  the
    panel as to the location of the burden of proof.

18. It is also clear to me that the findings made in paragraphs  24  to  30
    and the reasons stated in support of those findings were  clearly  open
    to the panel on the evidence before  it  (including  that  relating  to
    paragraph 9 of the Appellant's witness statement, which I have  checked
    for myself).  There is nothing perverse  about  them  whatsoever,  they
    have not been properly challenged in  the  grounds  of  appeal  in  any
    event, and the conclusion of the panel that it rejected the Appellant's
    claim that he did sign the payment mandate was one  that  was  entirely
    open to it.  That being the case, the panel  was  correct  to  conclude
    that the purported application on 19 September 2014 was  invalid,  that
    the Appellant had no extant leave to remain  when  he  made  the  valid
    application in October of the same year, and that  in  consequence  the
    Respondent's decision of 3 February 2015 did not carry with it a  right
    of appeal.

19. I would just add one further point.  Mitchell also makes clear that the
    Respondent holds forms (including payment mandate forms) for a  maximum
    of eighteen months before these are destroyed.   At  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the panel in June 2016 more  than  eighteen  months  had
    elapsed since the purported application in September 2014.  It was  the
    case that the Respondent simply could not have produced  that  evidence
    even if she had received the directions. The  passage  of  time  during
    which the form will have been destroyed was caused by the Appellant not
    raising the point earlier than he did (just prior to the appeal hearing
    itself).

20. Further, even if the Respondent had received  the  directions  in  June
    2015 but had not complied with them  it  makes  no  difference  to  the
    outcome in this case.  That is because this is a Mitchell-type scenario
    rather than a Basnet-type scenario, and the burden of proof rested with
    the Appellant and not the Respondent.

21. In respect of the panel's treatment of the Article 8 issue,  whilst  it
    was  unnecessary  for  this  exercise  to  have  been  undertaken,  the
    conclusions reached are unimpeachable.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  any  material
errors of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 13 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 13 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

