
IAC-AH-SC-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/08274/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th May 2015                              |On 28th May 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                Nagina aslam
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Kelly promulgated on 18th July 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born 1st January 1986 who
    on 26th March 2013 applied for a residence card as the sister of an EEA
    national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United   Kingdom.    The
    Appellant's sister is Haseena Aslam, to  whom  I  shall  refer  as  the
    Sponsor.  It was contended  that  the  Sponsor  was  exercising  treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom as a self-employed person,  and  therefore
    fell within the definition of a 'qualified person' in  accordance  with
    regulation 6 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 (the 2006 Regulations).

The Refusal

 3. The application was refused by Notice  of  Immigration  Decision  dated
    10th January 2014.  The decision indicated  that  the  application  had
    been considered in accordance with regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations
    but there were insufficient grounds for issuing a residence  card,  and
    the application had also been considered under Article 8  of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention), but  it  was
    not accepted that refusal of the application breached  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 rights.

 4. The Respondent issued a reasons for refusal letter which was also dated
    10th January 2014 which may be summarised as follows.

 5. It was accepted that DNA evidence proved that the Appellant and Sponsor
    are  siblings.   The  application  was  considered  with  reference  to
    regulation 8(2).  The Respondent required evidence that  the  Appellant
    was dependent upon or resided with the Sponsor prior  to  entering  the
    United  Kingdom,  and  that  since  entering  the  United  Kingdom  the
    Appellant had continued to be  dependent  upon  or  residing  with  the
    Sponsor.

 6. It was accepted that the Appellant had provided  evidence  of  residing
    with the Sponsor, but it was not accepted that  she  had  provided  any
    evidence that she was dependent upon the Sponsor  before  entering  the
    United Kingdom, or since entering the United Kingdom.

 7. The Respondent's records showed  that  the  Appellant  was  encountered
    working illegally on 12th July 2012 at Naila Hair and Beauty Salon, [ ]
    Slade Lane, [ ].  While  at  the  premises  two  telephone  calls  were
    answered by UKBA officers, both callers asking  for  appointments  with
    the Appellant, who was the only member  of  staff  present  but  denied
    working at the premises, claiming  that  she  was  only  working  on  a
    voluntary basis undertaking four hours a week  work  experience  for  a
    course at Manchester City College.  The Appellant  denied  knowing  the
    owner of the business and was not cooperative in giving details of  the
    manager.

 8. UKBA staff found post addressed to the Appellant at the Salon and  also
    post addressed to the  Sponsor,  but  the  Appellant  denied  that  the
    Sponsor was her sister.  The Appellant stated that she  was  not  aware
    that she was in the United Kingdom without authority, and that  an  EEA
    application had been submitted on her behalf.  That application  showed
    that Haseena Aslam was the Appellant's sister, and Slade Lane was given
    as her current address.  The Appellant stated that the Sponsor was  not
    in the United Kingdom and she did not know when she would  return,  and
    she stated that the Sponsor had only arrived in the United  Kingdom  in
    October or November 2011.

 9. The EEA application gave Slade Lane as the Appellant's address, but the
    Appellant claimed she had never lived at that property and  was  living
    at Egerton Road, [ ].  It was noted that  the  Appellant's  father  was
    present at the time of the enforcement visit, and  was  living  in  the
    accommodation upstairs.

10. The Appellant claimed that she was being supported by Social  Services,
    who also provided her accommodation and money for food and course fees.



11. The Respondent  decided  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  provide
    sufficient evidence that she was dependent upon or  residing  with  the
    Sponsor prior to entering the United Kingdom, and insufficient evidence
    had been provided to prove that since entering the United Kingdom,  she
    had continued to be dependent upon or residing with  her  Sponsor,  and
    the application for a residence card  was  refused  with  reference  to
    regulations 8(2)(a) and (c) of the 2006 Regulations.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

12. In summary it was contended that the Respondent's decision was  not  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules, and not in accordance  with  the
    law, that discretion under  the  Immigration  Rules  should  have  been
    exercised  differently,  and  the  decision  breached  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 rights.

13. It was contended that the Appellant is an extended family member of the
    Sponsor having entered the United Kingdom as the  spouse  of  a  person
    present and settled here, but her marriage broke down and the Appellant
    became dependent upon her family, especially the Sponsor who  were  all
    living in Germany at the time.

14. It was submitted that the Appellant was dependent upon the Sponsor when
    she was residing in Pakistan before  her  marriage,  and  was  entirely
    dependent upon the Sponsor in the United Kingdom.

15. It was further submitted that Article  8  was  engaged,  and  that  the
    decision to refuse the residence  card  was  disproportionate,  as  the
    Appellant had family life in the United Kingdom.

The First-Tier Tribunal Decision

16. The appeal was initially heard by Judge Kelly (the judge) on  6th  June
    2014.  The judge allowed the appeal on the basis  that  the  Respondent
    had not considered whether the Appellant had been or  was  currently  a
    member of the Sponsor's household, and therefore the decision  was  not
    in accordance with the law.   However,  after  the  hearing  the  judge
    discovered that he had been working from  an  incomplete  copy  of  the
    reasons for refusal letter, and that issue had in fact been  considered
    by the Respondent.  The judge  therefore  gave  directions  that  there
    should be a further hearing, which took place on 4th July 2014.

17. After hearing evidence from  the  Appellant,  the  Sponsor,  and  their
    father, the judge dismissed the appeal on  the  basis  that  regulation
    8(2) of  the  2006  Regulations  was  not  satisfied.   The  judge  was
    satisfied that the  Appellant  was  currently  a  member  of  the  same
    household as the Sponsor, but was not satisfied that  they  had  shared
    the same household in Pakistan immediately before the Appellant came to
    the United Kingdom.  The judge noted that the  Sponsor's  evidence  was
    that she had left Pakistan to live in Germany in  1998,  and  that  the
    Appellant left Pakistan in 2006 to travel to the United  Kingdom.   The
    Sponsor claimed to have arrived in the United Kingdom in 2010.

18. The judge was not satisfied that the Appellant is currently financially
    dependent upon the Sponsor,  noting  that  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had lied to Immigration Officers  at  the  enforcement  visit
    which the judge recorded as taking place on 12th  July  2013,  although
    the interview record which took place at the time, indicates  that  the
    visit was on 12th July 2012.

19. The judge also  found  that  the  appeal  was  bound  to  fail  on  the
    Appellant's  own  account  of  her  immigration  history  because   the
    Appellant did not join her EEA national Sponsor in the United  Kingdom,
    as it was the Sponsor who arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  after  the
    Appellant.  There was no consideration of Article 8.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

20. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    It was contended that when the parties attended the hearing on 4th July
    2014, both parties were confused as to why there was a further hearing,
    as they were under the impression that the appeal had been  allowed  at
    the first hearing on 6th June 2014.

21. The Appellant noted that the Respondent's representative  requested  an
    adjournment as he  did  not  have  any  papers  which  application  was
    refused.  The Appellant contended that  the  judge  did  not  give  the
    Appellant's  representative  the  opportunity  to   ask   comprehensive
    questions, but took over and asked questions  of  the  Appellant.   The
    representative contended that the judge did not allow him to examine or
    re-examine the Appellant.

22. It was contended that the judge had not considered Article 8,  although
    this had been raised as a  Ground  of  Appeal,  and  that  the  judge's
    assessment of regulation 8(2) was  flawed  as  he  had  not  adequately
    considered that the Appellant remained a member of the  same  household
    as the Sponsor and remained entirely dependent upon her.

Permission to Appeal

23. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Chohan who found the grounds arguable.

24. The Respondent submitted a response pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 indicating that  the  application
    for permission to appeal was not opposed, and the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    invited to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  so  that
    there could be a further oral hearing.

25. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Preliminary Issues

26. There was no attendance by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.   At  a
    previous hearing there had been no attendance, and on that occasion the
    Appellant's representatives submitted a fax on the day of the  hearing,
    indicating that their client was unable to  attend  the  Tribunal,  and
    requesting that a decision be made on the  papers.   That  hearing  was
    adjourned.

27. I was satisfied that proper notice of the hearing before  me  had  been
    given, and I considered rule 38 of the 2008  Procedure  Rules.   I  was
    satisfied that the Appellant and her representatives had been  notified
    of the time, date and place of the  hearing,  and  that  there  was  no
    explanation  for  their  non-attendance,  and  no  application  for  an
    adjournment.  I considered that it was in the interests of  justice  to
    proceed with the hearing.

28. However before doing so, I asked the Tribunal clerk  to  telephone  the
    representatives.   I   received   a   message   indicating   that   the
    representatives had stated that they had not been able to contact their
    client, and that they had submitted a letter to the Tribunal a few days
    previously.  They were asked to re-send this letter immediately but  it
    was not forthcoming, and therefore the hearing proceeded.

Error of Law

29. Miss Johnstone confirmed that she relied  upon  the  rule  24  response
    which indicated that the application for permission to appeal  was  not
    opposed, but Miss Johnstone also submitted that even if the  judge  had
    erred, then the error was  not  material  because  of  the  finding  in
    paragraph 19 that the appeal could not succeed in  any  event,  because
    the Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom before the EEA national
    Sponsor.  However, having been referred to Aladeselu  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    144, Miss Johnstone conceded that the judge was wrong in  law  to  make
    such a finding, and  accepted  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside.

30. I found it appropriate to set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, based on an error of law.  It  is  unfortunate  that  at  the
    first hearing on 6th June 2014, the judge was mistakenly  working  from
    an incomplete copy of the Respondent's reasons for refusal letter,  and
    his error was not corrected by either representative.  When  the  judge
    realised his mistake, he correctly decided that there needed  to  be  a
    further hearing.  Unfortunately the  notice  that  was  issued  to  the
    parties was not clear as to why there was to be a further hearing.  The
    notice in fact indicated that the hearing on 6th  June  2014  had  been
    adjourned which was not the case.

31. This resulted in the parties attending a  hearing  on  4th  July  2014,
    without knowing why there was to be a further  hearing  and  they  were
    therefore not prepared.

32. The judge does not refer, in his decision, to the principles set out in
    Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - Reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC) which for ease
    of reference I set out below;

         "Under the scheme set out in reg 8 (2) of the Immigration (European
         Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006,  a  person   can   succeed   in
         establishing that he or she is an 'extended family member'  in  any
         one of four different  ways,  each  of  which  requires  proving  a
         relevant connection both prior to arrival in the UK and in the UK:

         i.   Prior dependency and present dependency.

         ii.  Prior membership of a household and present  membership  of  a
         household.

         iii. Prior dependency and present membership of a household.

         iv.  Prior membership of a household and present dependency."

         It  is  not  necessary,  therefore,  to  show  prior  and   present
         connection in the  same  capacity:  i.e.  dependency-dependency  or
         household membership-household membership ((i) or (ii)  above).   A
         person may also qualify if able to show (iii) or (iv)."

33. The judge  made  findings  that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  had  not
    previously been in the same  household  in  Pakistan,  that  they  were
    currently in the same household, but the Appellant  was  not  currently
    financially dependent upon the Sponsor.  He omitted to make findings as
    to whether the  Appellant  had  been  dependent  financially  upon  the
    Sponsor, prior to coming to the United Kingdom and this was a  material
    error, as prior dependency was referred to in the Grounds of Appeal.

34. In my view the judge was wrong in law in paragraph 19 in  finding  that
    notwithstanding any other  findings,  the  appeal  was  bound  to  fail
    because the Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom before her  EEA
    national Sponsor, and this did not  satisfy  regulation  8(2)(c).   The
    Court of Appeal found in Aladeselu that it was not  necessary  for  the
    EEA Sponsor to have arrived in the United Kingdom before the  dependent
    relative.

35. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside with no
    findings preserved.

Re-Making the Decision

36. I decided that it was appropriate to re-make the decision in the  Upper
    Tribunal, and it was not necessary to remit this  appeal  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

37. I heard submissions from Miss Johnstone who relied upon the reasons for
    refusal letter dated 10th January 2014.  I was asked to find that there
    was no evidence that the Sponsor  and  Appellant  resided  together  in
    Pakistan before the Appellant came  to  the  United  Kingdom.   Equally
    there  was  no  satisfactory  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    financially dependent upon the EEA national Sponsor in Pakistan.

38. I was asked to find that there was  no  satisfactory  evidence  of  the
    Appellant being dependent upon the Sponsor in the United  Kingdom,  and
    that the credibility of the Appellant was damaged by working  illegally
    in July 2012, and not being truthful when interviewed.

39. In relation to Article 8, which had not  been  dealt  with  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, I was asked to  find  that  the  Tribunal  had  no
    jurisdiction to consider this, even though the Respondent's  Notice  of
    Immigration  Decision  indicated  that  Article  8  had  in  fact  been
    considered.  In the alternative, if Article 8 was to  be  considered  I
    was asked to find that the Appellant could not satisfy the  Immigration
    Rules, and that there were  no  compelling  circumstances  to  consider
    Article 8 outside the rules.

40. If Article 8 was considered outside the rules, I was asked to take into
    account section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (the 2002 Act), and  to  take  into  account  that  there  was  no
    evidence  that  the  Appellant  speaks  English,  nor  that   she   was
    financially independent, and I was asked to find that  her  immigration
    status was precarious.

41. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

42. In remaking the decision, I have taken into  account  the  Respondent's
    bundle of documents with Annexes A - N, together  with  the  Notice  of
    Appeal, and the Appellant's bundle of documents comprising  163  pages.
    I have also taken into account a further witness statement made by  the
    Appellant  which  is  undated,  but  attached  to  a  letter  from  her
    representatives dated 3rd June 2014, and an undated  witness  statement
    of the Appellant's father attached to the same  letter.   I  have  also
    been provided with the notes of an interview that took place  with  the
    Appellant when she was encountered working illegally on 12th July 2012.



43. In considering the 2006 Regulations the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
    Appellant and the standard of proof is a  balance  of  probability.   I
    have taken into account all the evidence placed before me.

44. I set out below regulation 8(2) of the 2006 Regulations;

         "8(2)    A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA national,  his  spouse  or  his
             civil partner and-

             (a)  the person is residing in a country other than the United
                  Kingdom and is dependent upon the EEA  national  or  is  a
                  member of his household;

             (b)  the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a)  and
                  is accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom  or
                  wishes to join him there; or

             (c)  the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a),  has
                  joined  the  EEA  national  in  the  United  Kingdom   and
                  continues to be dependent upon him or to be  a  member  of
                  his household."

45. I have considered regulation 8(2) taking into  account  the  principles
    set out in Dauhoo.

46. I find as a fact that the Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, and  that
    the Sponsor is a German national, and that they are related as claimed.
     DNA evidence proves this.  It is unclear when  the  Sponsor  became  a
    German citizen.  A German identity card has  been  produced  issued  in
    October 2010, but it is not clear whether the Sponsor  obtained  German
    nationality before this, and her witness statement  dated  18  February
    2013 does not confirm when she obtained German nationality.

47. The first issue I consider is whether the Appellant has proved that she
    was a member of the Sponsor's household in Pakistan.   I  do  not  find
    that the burden of proof has been discharged.

48. The Appellant's witness statement dated 18th February  2013  is  brief,
    and contends that the Appellant and Sponsor lived together in Pakistan.
     No further detail is given.  The witness statement of the  Sponsor  of
    the same date is equally brief, and contends that she and the Appellant
    lived together in Pakistan without  giving  any  further  detail.   The
    point is not  addressed  in  the  undated  witness  statements  of  the
    Appellant and her father.

49. The Appellant has admitted in her undated witness statement,  that  she
    was neither truthful nor cooperative when interviewed on 12th July 2012
    about her illegal working.  I find that she was not  truthful  on  that
    occasion, and this adversely affects her credibility.  I  do  not  find
    that there is any reliable  independent  evidence  to  prove  that  the
    Appellant was a member of the Sponsor's household in Pakistan.  I  take
    into account that the Sponsor is the older sister.  The  Appellant  was
    born in 1986, and the Sponsor born 3rd November  1993.   The  Sponsor's
    oral evidence to the First-tier Tribunal was that she and  her  parents
    left Pakistan in 1998 when she was 5 years of age.  I do not find  that
    there is  any  satisfactory  or  adequate  evidence  that  the  Sponsor
    returned to Pakistan before the Appellant left to travel to the  United
    Kingdom in August 2006.

50. I therefore find no satisfactory evidence  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    member of the Sponsor's household between 1998 and 2006.  In any  event
    it is not clear that the Sponsor was in fact a German citizen prior  to
    2006.  I do not accept that the Appellant was a member of the Sponsor's
    household between 1993 when the Sponsor was born,  and  1998  when  the
    Sponsor left Pakistan, and the Appellant  remained  in  Pakistan.   The
    household could not be said to be the Sponsor's household, taking  into
    account her young age.

51. For the reasons given above, I conclude  that  the  Appellant  has  not
    proved that she was residing as a member of  the  Sponsor's  household,
    before coming to the United Kingdom in August 2006.

52. The next issue that I consider is that of prior dependency.  I  do  not
    find  any  satisfactory  evidence  to  prove  that  the  Appellant  was
    dependent upon the Sponsor before coming to the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Sponsor is approximately seven years younger than the Appellant, and no
    satisfactory evidence has been  produced  to  prove  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities, that the Appellant was dependent upon the Sponsor  prior
    to coming to the  United  Kingdom.   None  of  the  witness  statements
    addressed this issue, although it is asserted in  paragraph  6  of  the
    Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  Appellant  was
    dependent upon her EEA Sponsor when she was residing in Pakistan before
    her marriage, but there is no satisfactory  evidence  to  support  this
    assertion.

53. I therefore conclude that as it has not been proved that the  Appellant
    was dependent upon the Sponsor prior to coming to the  United  Kingdom,
    the appeal must fail as regulation 8(2)(a) is not satisfied.

54. In relation to present dependency, I find the burden of proof  has  not
    been discharged.  The Appellant when interviewed, stated that  she  was
    supported by Social Services.  In my view  the  evidence  proves  on  a
    balance of probabilities that the Appellant has been working illegally,
    and was encountered so doing in July 2012.  I am not satisfied that the
    Appellant has proved that she is currently dependent upon the  Sponsor.
    The Respondent accepted in the refusal letter that  the  Appellant  had
    provided some evidence of residing with the Sponsor and I  accept  that
    to be the case, but this would appear to be somewhat academic,  as  the
    appeal cannot succeed because  regulation  8(2)(a)  is  not  satisfied.
    Therefore the appeal under the 2006 Regulations must be dismissed.

55. In relation to Article 8, the  reference  made  by  Miss  Johnstone  to
    jurisdiction refers to Lamichhaine [2012] EWCA Civ 260, which in  brief
    summary indicates that if no One-Stop Notice pursuant to section 120 of
    the 2002 Act was served, an Appellant  may  not  raise  any  Ground  of
    Appeal for leave to remain, different to that which was the subject  of
    the decision appealed against.

56. However in this case it would appear that Article 8 was relied upon  by
    the Appellant when she made her application, as there is  reference  to
    Article 8 in the  Respondent's  Notice  of  Immigration  Decision.   JM
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 is authority for the proposition that once a human
    rights ground has been properly raised, then  the  Tribunal  must  deal
    with it.  Section 86(2)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 confirms that any matter raised as a ground of appeal must  be
    determined by the Tribunal.  As  Article  8  was  referred  to  in  the
    Respondent's  Notice  of  Immigration  Decision,  it  is  in  my   view
    appropriate to make findings upon Article 8.

57.  It  is  not  contended  by  the  Appellant  that  she  satisfies   the
    requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  in  relation  to
    family life, or paragraph 276ADE in  relation  to  private  life.   The
    Appellant has placed no reliance upon the Immigration Rules  that  deal
    with family and private life.

58. I find that the Appellant cannot succeed under Appendix FM and  neither
    can she succeed under paragraph  276ADE.   The  Appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 15th August 2006 and  therefore  cannot  satisfy  the
    requirement in paragraph 276ADE that she has lived continuously in  the
    United Kingdom for least twenty years.  I do  not  find  that  she  has
    proved that she can satisfy paragraph 276ADE(vi) because  she  has  not
    provided evidence that there would be very significant obstacles to her
    integration into Pakistan if required to leave the United Kingdom.

59. There appears to have been no reference in the Appellant's  application
    for a residence card to her having a child although there is  reference
    to this at paragraph 16 of her undated witness statement.  I  therefore
    decided that it is  appropriate  to  consider  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, on the basis that the Immigration Rules  are  not  a
    complete code.

60. I therefore considered the five  stage  approach  advocated  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 which indicates that the following questions  should  be
    considered;

      i) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public  authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or (as the case may be) family life?

     ii) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity  as
         potentially to engage the operation of article 8?

    iii) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

     iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?

      v) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate  public
         end sought to be achieved?

61. The decision in Beoku-Betts  [2008]  UKHL  39  means  that  I  have  to
    consider the family lives of all members of the family,  not  only  the
    Appellant.

62. In considering Article 8 outside the rules I take into account  Agyarko
    and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 440 paragraph 28 which I set out below;

         "28. So far as concerns Mrs Agyarko's claim  under  Article  8  for
             leave to remain outside the Rules, since her family  life  was
             established with knowledge that she had no right to be in  the
             United Kingdom and was therefore precarious  in  the  relevant
             sense, it is only if her case is exceptional for  some  reason
             that she will be able to establish a violation of  Article  8:
             see Nagre, paras.  [39]-[41];  SS  (Congo),  para.  [29];  and
             Jeunesse v Netherlands, paras.  [108], [114] and [122]."

63. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 15th August 2006 with entry
    clearance valid from 21st July 2006 to 21st July 2008 as the spouse  of
    a person present and settled here.  She applied for indefinite leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a victim of domestic violence  on  17th
    July 2008 which application was rejected, and was followed by a further
    application on 29th July 2008.  This was refused on 24th November  2008
    and an appeal was entered, which was dismissed.  The Appellant's appeal
    rights were  exhausted  on  27th  February  2009.   The  Appellant  has
    therefore  been  in  this  country  without  valid  leave  for  a  very
    considerable period of time.

64. I accept that the Appellant has  established  a  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.  I do not accept that she  has  established  a  private
    life either with her adult sister or her father.  Relationships between
    adult siblings or an adult sibling and their parent do  not  amount  to
    family life that engages Article 8 unless something  more  exists  than
    normal emotional ties.  Each case must be decided on its own facts, but
    I do not find that the requisite degree of emotional dependence  exists
    between the Appellant and her sister and the Appellant and her  father.



65. I accept that the Appellant may have established family life  with  her
    child, but I have been provided with no  evidence  as  to  the  child's
    nationality or age, and there  is  only  a  passing  reference  in  the
    Appellant's witness statement to her having a child.  The Appellant has
    not proved that there would be inference with her family life with  her
    child, as if the Appellant was removed, there is a presumption that the
    child would be removed with her.

66. I find that the relevant issue to be  considered  in  relation  to  the
    Razgar principles, is whether the  interference  with  the  Appellant's
    private life is proportionate.  I have to  consider  the  child's  best
    interests as a primary consideration, although these interests  can  be
    outweighed by other considerations.  The Appellant has not provided any
    relevant information in relation to her child.  I can  only  find  that
    the best interests of a  young  child  would  generally  be  served  by
    remaining with her parents, or  at  least  one  parent.   I  have  been
    provided with no information in relation to the child's father.  On the
    scarce information available, I conclude that the best interests of the
    child would be served by remaining with the Appellant.  No evidence has
    been submitted to prove that the child is a British citizen.

67. I must have regard to section 117B of the 2002 Act which confirms  that
    the maintenance of effective  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
    interest.  It is also in the public interest that an individual seeking
    leave to remain can speak English and is financially  independent.   No
    formal evidence has been  submitted  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    ability to speak English, by  way  of  English  language  certificates,
    although it appears that she was  interviewed  in  English  when  found
    working illegally in July 2012.  Having said that, an  interpreter  was
    requested for the Tribunal hearings, before the First-tier Tribunal and
    Upper Tribunal.  I am therefore not satisfied that  the  Appellant  has
    proved that she can speak English, nor  am  I  satisfied  that  she  is
    financially independent.

68. Section 117B(4) states that little weight should be given to a  private
    life established by a person at a time when the person is in the United
    Kingdom unlawfully, and (5) states that little weight should  be  given
    to a private life established by a person at a time when  the  person's
    immigration status is precarious.

69. The Appellant has remained in the United Kingdom  unlawfully,  and  has
    also had a precarious immigration status, and  I  find  it  appropriate
    that little weight should be given to the private  life  that  she  has
    established.  In relation to section 117B(6) there is no evidence  that
    the Appellant's child is a "qualifying child".

70. My conclusion is that the Appellant's Article 8  claim  cannot  succeed
    under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE, nor can it succeed under Article
    8 outside the Immigration Rules.  I find that the weight that should be
    given to the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
    control, outweighs the weight to be given to the wish of the  Appellant
    to remain in the United Kingdom, although she cannot satisfy either the
    2006 Regulations, or the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The  appeal  is  dismissed  with  reference  to  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    19th May 2015




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    19th May 2015
