
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/08017/2014
     IA/08024/2014
     IA/08026/2014
     IA/08027/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16 February 2016                    |On 16 March 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

   kamleshbhai gordhanbhai patel, kokilaben kamleshbhai patel, sujalkumar
                 kamleshbhai, jannakkumar kamleshbhai patel
                         (anonymity orders not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Harding of Counsel instructed by Bhogal
Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     DECISION AND REASONS: ERROR OF LAW


1.   These are linked appeals against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Symes promulgated on 28  July  2015  dismissing  the  Appellants'
    appeals against decisions of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department dated 9 February 2015 that each of the Appellants should  be
    removed from the United Kingdom.


2.   The Appellants are citizens of India.  The  first  two  Appellants  are
    the parents of the  Third  and  Fourth  Appellants.   Their  respective
    personal details are a matter of record  on  the  file  and  I  do  not
    propose to re-state those save to identify that the  two  sons  of  the
    family were born on 26 October 1993 and 14 July 1995 respectively.   As
    such they entered the United Kingdom as children but by the date of the
    Respondent's decisions (and necessarily also at the time of the hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal), they were both adults.


3.   The family members' respective immigration histories are also a  matter
    of record on file and again I do  not  propose  to  set  those  out  in
    detail.  However, for present purposes, it is  relevant  to  note  that
    there is a factual error at paragraph 25 of the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal which suggests that both sons arrived in the UK in  2009.
    In fact the Third Appellant arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2006
    accompanied by his mother.  It was the Fourth Appellant who arrived  on
    his own later in 2009.


4.   In the context of the immigration histories  it  is  also  relevant  to
    observe that, in my judgement, it was appropriate  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to emphasise in his decision the fact that each  of  the
    Appellants had overstayed following  entry  on  visit  visas,  and  had
    collectively made a succession of unsuccessful applications  for  leave
    to remain.  It is not  to  their  credit  that  they  did  not  make  a
    voluntary departure after any of those applications, and it might  also
    give some cause to wonder why the Respondent at no point has sought  to
    enforce removal.  Be that as it may, in my judgment there can be little
    complaint in respect of the Judge's observations at paragraph 30 of the
    decision with reference to section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) to this effect:

         "The family has been present on a precarious as  well  as  unlawful
         basis and so their residence has been of the most precarious  kind:
         applications have repeatedly failed not just with the Secretary  of
         State but also on appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
         Upper Tribunal".




5.   Be that as it may the current applications were made on 27 August  2014
    for leave to remain.  Those applications were supported in  part  by  a
    social work report that appears at Annex B of the  Respondent's  bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The report was  prepared  by  Angeline
    Seymour who gives her qualifications in the opening paragraphs  of  the
    report.


6.   At section 3 of her report Ms Seymour  identifies  the  "Issues  to  be
    Addressed and Statement of Instruction" in the following terms:

         "1.  The memories that Janak and Sujal have of their life in India.


         2.   The life that Janak and Sujal have now in the UK.


         3.   Reasons for the family not being able to return to India.


         4.   The ties and connections that Janak and Sujal have in the UK.


         5.   Janak and Sujal's future education and employment plans.


         6.   Anything else I felt relevant or useful to the court and  Home
             Office in an assessment of the potential effects on the family
             if removed from the UK."



7.   It may readily be seen that the focus of the report was  very  much  on
    the sons of the family albeit that  the  report  also  necessarily  and
    inevitably makes reference to the wider  circumstances  of  the  senior
    members of the family, that is to say the parents.


8.   The report was in part based on a two hour  interview  with  the  Third
    and Fourth Appellants conducted on 6 September 2014.  The report speaks
    at length as to the histories of each of the sons and their  particular
    feelings and presentation at the time of the report in respect  of  the
    prospects of being returned to India.


9.   The Reasons for Refusal Letters (RFRLs) prepared by the  Respondent  in
    respect of each of the sons makes reference to the report  of  Angeline
    Seymour.  However the Appellants' grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal make complaint in  this  regard  in  the  following  terms  at
    paragraph 13:

         "The Respondent  has  failed  to  give  sufficient  weight  to  the
         documentary evidence supplied with the application particularly the
         social  worker  report  prepared  by  Angeline  Seymour   and   the
         psychiatric report prepared by Dr Raj Persaud."




10.  The psychiatric report was in respect of the First Appellant,  that  is
    the mother of the family, and it is not relevant to the issues that are
    before me at the present time.  It is plain however that the  issue  of
    the weight to be attached to the social worker report, and  necessarily
    therefore its contents, were plainly raised in the grounds of appeal to
    the First-tier Tribunal.


11.  Reference is also made to the social work  report  in  the  Appellants'
    skeleton argument that was before the First-tier Tribunal.  Paragraph 9
    of the skeleton argument makes general complaint  that  the  Respondent
    had "completely ignored the  circumstances  of  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants who had no choice in their coming to the UK", and  paragraph
    10 makes a specific  submission  as  to  the  Respondent's  failure  to
    consider the social worker's report adequately - "while [the  Secretary
    of State] mentions the social worker's  report  she  makes  no  further
    comment on it".


12.  It is unfortunate in such circumstances that  there  is  absolutely  no
    reference to the social worker's report in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.


13.  Mr Harding realistically accepts that in all of  the  circumstances  in
    these particular cases he cannot argue  that  the  social  work  report
    would be inevitably determinative in the  Appellants'  favour,  but  he
    appropriately contends that it provided significant details in  respect
    of two of the Appellants and should properly have been addressed by the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.


14.  Ms Fijiwala on behalf of the Secretary of State today acknowledges  the
    Judge's omission, but contends that it was not material.


15.  I am unable to accept that submission.


16.  I acknowledge that there  is  no  actual  mental  health  diagnosis  in
    respect of either the  Third  or  Fourth  Appellant.  Moreover,  as  Ms
    Fijiwala emphasised, by the date of the hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (which post-dated the report by some nine months) there was no
    evidence that either of the sons  of  the  family  were  receiving  any
    assistance for mental health difficulties.  Nonetheless, it seems to me
    that Ms Seymour's references to social isolation  and  the  stress  and
    tension that the sons  were  experiencing  were  relevant  matters  for
    consideration in the context of an evaluation of  the  quality  of  the
    private lives  that  the  Appellants  had  established  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and the extent of the interference with those  private  lives,
    and  in  turn  necessarily  therefore  relevant  to  a  proportionality
    evaluation.  Regrettably no  such  analysis  is  to  be  found  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


17.  The focus of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  appears  to
    be primarily on the ability of the sons to turn the  skills  that  they
    have learnt or otherwise acquired in the United  Kingdom  to  good  use
    upon return to India.   Whilst  that  is  entirely  appropriate  -  and
    particularly  entirely  appropriate  in  the  context  of   considering
    obstacles to return within the parameters of paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Rules - it is not a complete  answer  to  any  proportionality  balance
    outside the Immigration Rules.


18.  Further, in my judgment the lack of any clear analysis of  the  private
    lives of the sons and the lack of any  reference  to  the  social  work
    report is compounded by the somewhat unusual ending to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision.


19.  At paragraph 28 of the decision the Judge accepts that  the  Appellants
    have established private life in the  United  Kingdom  and  essentially
    answers the first four Razgar questions in  their  favour.   The  Judge
    then goes on to set out the provisions of Part 5A of the  2002  Act  in
    respect of public interest considerations. At  paragraph  29  he  makes
    reference in particular to the circumstances  in  respect  of  language
    skills and the mental health of the mother of the family, and  then  at
    paragraph 30 (which I have already  quoted  above)  he  refers  to  the
    precarious and unlawful basis of the residence of  the  family  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The decision effectively ends at that point and, as it
    were, 'leaps' to the section headed 'Notice of Decision', which  simply
    states that the appeals are dismissed under  the  Rules  and  on  human
    rights grounds.


20.  One might have expected there  to  be  some  further  paragraphs  after
    paragraph 30 setting out an actual proportionality balance, and stating
    a specific conclusion in this regard.   Ms  Fijiwala  effectively  very
    fairly acknowledged that this appeared somewhat unusual in  the  phrase
    "I wondered about that myself".


21.  It does seem to me that there is, as I  say,  a  'compounding'  of  the
    failure expressly to consider or analyse the social  work  report  with
    the  way  in  which  this  determination  concludes.   In   all   those
    circumstances I find that the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal  are
    flawed for a lack of adequate reasons amounting to a material error  of
    law, and accordingly the decisions in respect of each of the Appellants
    must be set aside.


22.  I have reached the conclusion that the decisions must be set  aside  in
    respect of each of the  Appellants  because  realistically  it  is  not
    possible to separate  out  the  disparate  strands  of  the  individual
    private lives from a collective evaluation of  the  family  unit.   For
    example, at paragraph 26, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  considers  the
    circumstances of Mrs Patel's return on the basis that  she  would  have
    the  support  of  her  family  members.    Necessarily   therefore,   a
    consideration of the sons' cases which might potentially  result  in  a
    decision that one or other or both should not be removed would have  an
    impact on the analysis of any question of the removal of the parents.


23.  I have considered the appropriate forum for re-making the decisions  in
    the appeals and I am persuaded that the appropriate forum is the First-
    tier Tribunal.  It seems to me that it will  be  necessary  to  receive
    updated evidence and also that all issues in respect  of  each  of  the
    Appellants should be at large.  It may also be said that in effect  the
    Appellants have not had the benefit of a  full  and  fair  decision  in
    respect of their cases in that a significant aspect of  the  supporting
    evidence which was the subject of specific focus both in their  grounds
    of appeal and in the skeleton argument was not addressed.


24.  It is unnecessary to issue  specific  Directions:  standard  directions
    will suffice.


Notice of Decision

25.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained material  errors  of
    law and are each set aside.


26.  The decisions in the appeals are to be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in front of any judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Symes with all issue at large.


27.  No anonymity orders are sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.



Signed:                                 Date: 7 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

