
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08794/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 August 2016                            |On 17 August 2016             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                          BRANDINUER NYIMBA SKOURAS
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Tampuri, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Zambia  who  appealed  against  the
    respondent's decision to remove her from  the  United  Kingdom,  having
    refused leave to remain.  Her appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Astle who in a decision dated 18 November 2015 dismissed
    it.  In so doing the judge found at paragraph 22 of  her  decision  the
    following:-

         "22. I am not in a position, on the basis of  the  evidence  before
             me, to decide whether the substantive provisions  of  Appendix
             FM are satisfied.  Whilst applying for  entry  clearance  from
             Zambia may well involve expense, if the couple can provide the
             necessary evidence, any separation is likely to be brief.  The
             evidence that any such as separation will be proportionate  is
             simply not present and having considered the totality  of  the
             evidence I find that decision is not in breach of Article 8."

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal and this  was  granted  on  4
    July by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Scott-Baker.  Her reasons  for
    so granting were:-

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal against the  decision
             of First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Astle)  who  by  determination
             promulgated on 18 November 2015 dismissed the  appeal  against
             the decision of 19 February 2015 to refuse the application for
             leave to remain the grounds that removal would not  place  the
             United Kingdom in breach of its obligations  under  the  Human
             Rights Act 1998 and  to  give  directions  for  removal  under
             paragraph 10A of Schedule 2 to the Immigration  Act  1971  for
             removal from the United Kingdom.

         2.   The grounds, received in time, assert that the FTT  Judge  had
             acted in  a  manner  which  was  procedurally  unfair  to  the
             appellant as at the hearing she  limited  submissions  to  the
             proportionality of return to Zambia to make an entry clearance
             application; and she had failed to make findings as to whether
             the appellant could meet the requirements of Appendix FM.

         3.   It is clear from [22] of the determination that the FTT  Judge
             declined to make any findings with regard to Appendix  FM  and
             these are necessary in order that  reasoned  findings  can  be
             made with regard to Article 8.

         4.   Accordingly the determination as  drafted  discloses  arguable
             errors of law.

         5.   Permission is granted."

 3. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 4. Mr Tampuri expanded the grounds of  appeal  which  in  essence  can  be
    reduced to  two  arguments.   Firstly,  that  there  was  a  procedural
    unfairness as he asserts that at the conclusion of examination-in-chief
    and cross-examination of  the  appellant  and  her  husband,  and  upon
    hearing submissions from the  respondent's  representative,  the  judge
    stated  that  she  was  satisfied  the  relationship  was  genuine  and
    restricted the appellant's representative to make submissions only  why
    it would not be proportionate for the appellant to return to Zambia  to
    make an entry clearance application therefrom.  By so doing  the  judge
    prevented the appellant's representative from addressing  the  Tribunal
    under the Immigration Rules (Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE) and  the
    human  rights  provisions.   Secondly,  the  judge   failed   to   hear
    submissions on whether the appellant met the provisions of Appendix  FM
    despite the fact that both the decision and the grounds of appeal  made
    significant reference to the Immigration Rules.  At paragraph 22 of the
    decision she failed to make a clear, concise  and  logical  finding  on
    whether or not the appellant met the provisions of Appendix FM.

 5. Mr Kotas submitted that the judge directed  herself  appropriately  and
    that the appellant did not meet the Immigration Rules,  the  judge  had
    considered insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  outside
    the United Kingdom and that in any event this  was  not  an  Article  8
    case.

 6. It is worth recording the factual matrix found by the judge.  She found
    that there was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her husband and that they lived together as  husband  and
    wife.  The appellant did not qualify under the Immigration Rules as  at
    the date of marriage she and her husband had not lived  together  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage for at least  two  years.  They  had  not
    provided  specified  evidence  to  demonstrate  compliance   with   the
    financial requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The judge then turned
    to Article 8 and considered whether there were "compelling reasons  for
    considering Article 8 outside the Rules".  Consideration was  given  to
    the potential for the appellant returning to her country of origin  and
    making an application for entry clearance along with relevant case law,
    including R (On the application of Chen) v SSHD  IJR  [2015]  UKUT  189
    (IAC).

 7. The judge's conclusion can be gleaned from paragraph 21 of the decision
    which states:-

         "In Chikwamba the House of Lords considered what might be described
         as the entry clearance option.  In that  case  there  was  a  young
         child but that is not the case here.  The issue was  given  further
         consideration recently in R (On the application of Chen) v SSHD IJR
         [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC).  Here it is found that in all cases it  will
         be for an  individual  to  place  before  the  Secretary  of  State
         evidence    that    temporary     separation     will     interfere
         disproportionately with protected rights.  It will not be enough to
         rely solely upon the case law concerning Chikwamba. "

 8. I will say now that I do find within this appeal a  material  error  of
    law.  It relates to the second of the two grounds put  forward  and  is
    highlighted by Judge Scott-Baker in her grant for permission to appeal.



 9. It is therefore  perhaps  redundant  to  deal  with  the  first  ground
    alleging procedural unfairness.  That is somewhat fortunate in that  it
    is plain that the representatives have not given consideration  to  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in BW (Afghanistan)  [2014]  UKUT  00568
    (IAC).  Unfortunately Mr Tampuri was the advocate who appeared  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It  is  inappropriate  therefore  for  procedural
    unfairness ground to be argued by  him  before  me,  also  taking  into
    account the additional failures of the provision of a witness statement
    from him.

10. The second ground discloses a material  error  of  law  such  that  the
    decision be re-made afresh.  Paragraph 22 (see above)  of  the  judge's
    decision shows that she declined to make any findings  with  regard  to
    Appendix FM which are necessary in order to make reasoned  findings  on
    Article 8.  There is here a failure  to  properly  engage  with  either
    Appendix FM or Article 8 and make consequent reasoned findings.

11. The making to the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the  First-Tribunal  to  be  dealt  with  afresh,
    pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement  7.2(b)  before  any  judge
    aside from Judge Astle.

12. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Dated:  16 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
