
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08390/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |  Determination Promulgated   |
|On 17 March 2015                              |  On 26 March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                SIMERJIT KAUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Waheed of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Although the Secretary of State  is  strictly  the  appellant  to  this
    present appeal, I have for the sake of consistency continued  to  refer
    to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.  Miss  Simerjit
    Kaur is accordingly referred to throughout as "the appellant".

2.   The Secretary of State has appealed against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge C H Bennett who, in a decision promulgated on 31 October
    2014, allowed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision
    on 11 December 2013 refusing her application for an extension of  leave
    as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  under  the  points-based  system.   The
    essential reason that the respondent had refused  her  application  was
    because she had failed to demonstrate that she was competent in the use
    of the English language  at  the  appropriate  level  by  providing  an
    English language test certificate from  an  approved  English  language
    provider.

3.   In his decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge noted, and accepted  the
    appellant's  explanation,  that  when  she  made  her  application  the
    appellant believed that she had  passed  all  the  necessary  specified
    subjects in the English  language  test  because  she  had  received  a
    certificate to that effect.  It was only when she received the  refusal
    decision that she learnt that the testing authority  had  notified  the
    Home Office that she had "narrowly failed" the examination  in  writing
    in December 2011.

4.   It is accepted by  both  parties  that,  since  receiving  the  refusal
    decision, and before the appeal came on for hearing in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the appellant has  taken  and  passed  in  full  the  English
    language test.  Mr Nath, for the  respondent,  confirmed  that  if  the
    appellant were to make her application today, it  is  likely  that  her
    application would be granted.

5.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the  appellant  did  not  meet
    the strict requirements of the Immigration Rules  in  relation  to  her
    application for further leave to remain. He  nevertheless  allowed  her
    appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  and
    found, at [45], that:

         "(a) the reason she does not qualify is because  of  what  was,  in
             reality, a clearly understandable error on her part,


           (b)    she has now passed the relevant  examination  in  all  the
             four component parts,


           (c)    she wishes to continue with the course, and


           (d)    she had qualified for the requisite number of  points  for
             maintenance in the original application."

    The judge noted that it does not follow that she  still  qualifies  for
    the maintenance points but that that would have to  be  established  on
    any fresh application that she makes.

6.   The judge held that her removal at this time would be an  unlawful  and
    disproportionate interference with the  appellant's  private  life  and
    allowed the appeal on that basis.  At [49]  he  gave  a  direction,  in
    order to give effect to his decision, that  the  appellant  "is  to  be
    granted a period of leave of 45 days to enable  her  to  make  a  fresh
    application for leave to remain under paragraph 245ZX".

7.   The respondent sought permission to appeal.  The  grounds  argued  that
    the judge had failed to consider the public interest considerations set
    out in Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    and further submitted that the appellant should be required  to  return
    to India to make a new application from outside the UK;  there  was  no
    certainty  that  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  would  be  met  and
    accordingly the case of Chikwamba should be distinguished.

8.   On 26 January 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan gave permission  to
    appeal on the basis that it was arguable that the judge had  failed  to
    take into account the public interest element of Section 117B.  It  was
    on this basis that the matter came before me.

9.   Very brief submissions were made to me  by  both  representatives.   Mr
    Nath argued that no mention had  been  made  of  Section  117B  in  the
    judge's decision and there is now statutory obligation for the Tribunal
    to consider public interest  considerations  under  that  Section.   He
    acknowledged that the only issue under Section 117B that is relevant to
    this  appeal  is  117B(1)  which  provides  that  "the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls is in the public interest".

10.  In reply Mr Waheed submitted that the judge had  been  correct  in  the
    way that he  dealt  with  the  Article  8  considerations  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.   It  is  clear,  he  said,  that  the  question  of
    proportionality is dealt with fully by the judge and his findings  were
    reasonable.  He noted that at the First-tier Tribunal the Secretary  of
    State had chosen not to be represented and it could be  said  that  the
    Secretary of State, being unhappy with the decision, simply now  wishes
    to relitigate the matter.

11.  I reserved my decision on the question of whether  there  had  been  an
    error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.  Having reviewed  all
    the documentation and the submissions I have  come  to  the  conclusion
    that there was no error of law in the judge's decision.

12.  The only substantive issue raised  by  the  respondent  in  the  appeal
    before me was the fact that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  not
    considered Section 117B.  That was the only matter that  he  raised  in
    his submissions save to acknowledge that the case of Chikwamba was  not
    relevant.  The Presenting Officer had already conceded,  on  behalf  of
    the respondent, that if the appellant were to make  a  new  application
    now, she was likely to succeed as the English language test certificate
    was valid and acceptable.

13.  In my judgment, this is an appeal that should never have  been  brought
    by the Secretary of State.  I agree with the  submissions  made  by  Mr
    Waheed. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  lengthy,
    detailed and clear and gave good and adequate reasons at length for his
    findings  that  the  appellant  must  succeed  under  Article  8.   The
    direction that he gave at [49] was eminently sensible.  I am  satisfied
    that there was no error of law in his decision.


Notice of Decision

There was no error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
the decision, including the Direction at [49], shall stand.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.



Designated Judge David Taylor
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
26 March 2015

