
IA 08393 2014
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 August 2014                              |On 8 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MONSURAT ADUKE ADELEKE

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble
For the Respondent:    Mr T Ogunnubi (TM Legal Services)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will refer  to  the
      original appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born on 26 May, 1983, as  the
      appellant herein.

   2. The appellant applied on 20 September, 2013 for a  residence  card  as
      the spouse  of  a  Portuguese  national  following  a  Nigerian  proxy
      marriage on 5 February,  2013.  The  application  was  refused  on  30
      January, 2014. The appellant appealed  against  the  refusal  and  her
      appeal came before a First-tier Judge as a paper case on 9 May 2014.

   3. In the grounds of appeal against the decision it was pointed out  that
      the appellant's husband had travelled  to  Nigeria  for  the  marriage
      although the appellant had not. The respondent had  taken  issue  with
      the marriage certificate provided which did not it  was  said  contain
      all the necessary details. However it was submitted  the  Home  Office
      should have requested further information if required.

   4. It was submitted that the documents provided to the judge showed  that
      the marriage was validly registered and  it  was  submitted  that  the
      appellant was entitled to a residence card as a family member  of  her
      husband, an EEA national exercising Treaty rights.

   5. The judge accepted the submissions and found  that  the  marriage  had
      been  properly  and  appropriately  registered  and  was   valid   and
      accordingly allowed the appeal.

   6. The Secretary of State appealed on the basis that the First-tier Judge
      had failed to consider the case of Kareem (Proxy  Marriages-  EU  Law)
      Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24 with reference in particular to what was stated
      at paragraph 68(e) of that case: "the starting point will be to decide
      whether a marriage  was  contracted  between  the  appellant  and  the
      qualifying person according to the national law of the EEA country  of
      the qualified person's nationality." It  was  further  submitted  with
      reference to paragraph 68(g) that "without  independent  and  reliable
      evidence about the recognition of the marriage under the laws  of  the
      EEA country and/or the country where  the  marriage  took  place,  the
      tribunal is likely to be unable to find sufficient evidence  has  been
      provided to discharge the burden of proof. Mere  production  of  legal
      materials from the EEA country or  country  where  the  marriage  took
      place will be insufficient evidence because they will rarely show  how
      such law is understood or applied in those countries. Mere  assertions
      as to the effect of such law  will,  for  similar  reasons,  carry  no
      weight."

   7. It was submitted that the judge  had  erred  in  failing  to  approach
      matters in the light of this guidance.

   8. At the hearing  before  me  Mr  Bramble  relied  on  the  grounds  and
      submitted there was a single issue. He referred  to  the  case  of  TA
      (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 which  confirmed  that  the
      issue of whether  the  marriage  was  valid  had  to  be  assessed  by
      reference to the laws of the legal system of the  nationality  of  the
      relevant union citizen  (paragraph  20).  It  would  be  open  to  the
      applicant to make a fresh application.

   9. Mr Ogunnubi  submitted  the  First-tier  Judge  had  directed  himself
      appropriately in relation to the marriage certificate and the case  of
      TA (Ghana) had been decided after the First-tier Judge had dealt  with
      the case. Neither side had made submissions in relation to Karreem and
      the parties had been content to have  the  matter  determined  on  the
      documents. No false evidence had been submitted. He accepted  that  no
      further evidence had been lodged and there had been no  reply  to  the
      grounds of appeal lodged by the respondent.

  10. I reserved my determination.

  11. It is quite clear that the judge failed to have regard to the case  of
      Kareem which had been reported on 16 January 2014 prior to the  appeal
      being launched and several months before the matter was determined  on
      the papers. The judge did not direct himself by reference to that case
      and this is clearly a material error of law whether or not the parties
      referred him to it. The case has subsequently  been  confirmed  in  TA
      (Ghana).

  12. Of course it would have been open to the appellant to file a reply and
      further evidence as required by Kareem.  However  that  has  not  been
      done. It is as Mr Bramble accepted open to the parties to make a fresh
      application buttressed with the appropriate evidence  as  required  by
      Kareem.

  13. I find the decision of the First-tier Judge was materially  flawed  in
      law. I re-make it. As I was not invited to uphold the decision on  any
      other basis and in the absence of further evidence the appeal  of  the
      Secretary of State is allowed.


  14. The decision of the First-tier Judge is reversed. Mr Adeleke's  appeal
      is accordingly dismissed.


Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               6 August 2014



