
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/08051/2015
                                                               ia/08055/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2016                  |On 27 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                          mr jeevapragash bonyface
                           mrs mathura magilrajah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Slatter of Counsel instructed by Shanthi & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellants against a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Telford who, in a decision promulgated  on  17  February
    2016, dismissed the appellants' appeals.

 2. The first appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 18  April
    1982.  The second  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Germany.   The  first
    appellant entered the UK as a student with  entry  clearance  until  29
    February 2008. On 26 February 2008 the appellant applied for  leave  to
    remain as  a  student  which  was  granted  until  30  April  2009.  An
    application for T1 HS leave to remain was granted until 14 April  2012.
    The appellants married on 27 August 2011.

 3. The Secretary of State made a decision to revoke the appellants'  right
    of residence in the United Kingdom.  The reasons for that decision were
    that the Secretary of State did not consider that the  appellants  were
    in  a  subsisting  relationship  or  that  the  second  appellant   was
    exercising EEA treaty rights in the United Kingdom because she did  not
    accept that the second appellant was working in the United Kingdom.  As
    the second appellant was not exercising treaty rights the Secretary  of
    State considered that the appellants had no  right  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom under the EEA 2006 Regulations.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4.  The  appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision.  The First-tier Tribunal found that  the
    appellants lacked credibility.  The Tribunal found that the  appellants
    were not in a subsisting relationship.   The  Tribunal  considered  the
    evidence of the second appellant's exercise of EEA  treaty  rights  and
    found  that  the  evidence  submitted  did  not  support   the   second
    appellant's claim to be working in the UK.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellants applied for permission to appeal against the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to the Upper  Tribunal.   On  26  July  2016  Judge
    Saffer of the First-tier Tribunal granted the appellants permission  to
    appeal.  The grant of permission sets out that it is arguable that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law regarding the  nature
    of the relationship and the exercising of EEA treaty rights.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

Summary of Submissions

 6. Mr Slatter relied on the grounds of appeal.  The grounds of appeal  set
    out that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law by considering  the
    appeal on the basis of Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights ('ECHR').  Reliance is placed  on  the  case  of  Amirteymour  &
    Others (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 466.

 7. It is asserted in the grounds that the appeal was  not  argued  on  the
    basis  of  retaining  a  right  of  residence  and   that   the   judge
    misunderstood the basis of  the  appeal.   It  is  submitted  that  the
    appeals were brought against the decisions of the respondent to  revoke
    the appellants' residence certificate under Regulation 20(2) of the EEA
    Regulations.

 8. The grounds submit that the  judge  misdirected  himself  in  law  with
    regard to  the  burden  of  proof  in  the  case  of  revocation  under
    Regulation  20(2).   In  particular  it  is  argued  that   the   judge
    erroneously found that the appellant is not  exercising  treaty  rights
    today.   It is asserted that the second appellant was working  at  T.J.
    Morris Limited and that evidence had been submitted included her  terms
    and conditions of employment,  payslips  and  bank  statements  showing
    deposits from her employer.  It is also submitted that the reasoning of
    the judge with regard to the relationship  between  the  appellants  is
    confused and unclear and that there is reference variously to "marriage
    of convenience", "durable relationship"  and  "genuine  and  subsisting
    marriage".  It is submitted that these are all very different concepts.
     It is asserted that the judge had failed to  give  sufficient  reasons
    for finding that the appellants had not  shown  that  they  are  'truly
    together now' and that the judge failed to take adequate or any account
    of material matters in support of the appellants' cohabitation.

 9. Mr Slatter submitted that  it  is  not  clear  from  the  determination
    whether the judge took into account the second  appellant's  employment
    at T.J. Morris.  He submitted that the appeal had been adjourned on  10
    September 2015 to enable the respondent to  make  enquiries  into  that
    employment.  He submitted that  a  witness  statement  from  HMRC  only
    covered the years up to April 2015.   The  second  appellant  had  only
    commenced employment with T.J. Morris on 2  August  2015.   Mr  Slatter
    submitted that the appellant was exercising treaty rights although  she
    is now on maternity leave.  However, that  would  still  amount  to  an
    exercise of treaty rights.  Mr  Slatter  submitted  that  there  was  a
    plethora of evidence of the appellants residing at  a  common  address.
    He referred to various pages of the bundle  of  evidence  submitted  in
    support of the appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He  submitted
    that the judge failed to take the documentary evidence into account  or
    even to engage with that evidence.

10. Mr Tufan submitted with regard to the appeal on Article 8, that  whilst
    it would not be material to the outcome of the  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations it might have effect in relation to any future  claim  that
    the appellants might make with regard to Article 8.  He submitted  that
    with regard to the subsisting relationship issue he accepted  that  the
    case of Diatta v Land Berlin Case 267/83 was relevant so that the  real
    issue in this  case  was  whether  or  not  the  second  appellant  was
    exercising treaty rights at the date of the hearing.

11. After considering  the  evidence  in  the  bundle  which  consisted  of
    payslips from T.J. Morris, bank statements  from  Lloyds  Bank  Limited
    covering the same  periods  and  a  contract  of  employment  Mr  Tufan
    conceded that in light of that evidence the judge had erred in  finding
    that the second appellant was not exercising treaty rights at the  date
    of the hearing.

Discussion

12. In the decision the First-tier Tribunal when considering  the  evidence
    of employment set out:

         "I  am  afraid  that  payslips  unsupported  from  claimed   recent
         employment are not given weight by me as the appellant has been  so
         inconsistent in regard to her evidence that she is incredible.

         There is no HMRC evidence.  No proper  explanation  was  given  for
         this lack of HMRC evidence for the years 2013, 2014, 2015.  I  find
         that obtaining HMRC evidence in these particular  circumstances  to
         be a perfectly reasonable step in terms of evidence  gathering  and
         production."...

13. Whilst it is clear that both appellants had been  inconsistent  in  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge with regard  to  previous
    employment and indeed with regard to their relationship the  judge  has
    failed to engage with the evidence provided in relation  to  employment
    with T.J. Morris.

14. There is in the bundle of evidence  a  number  of  payslips  from  T.J.
    Morris covering  a  three-month  period  and  there  are  corresponding
    payments made into the second appellant's Lloyds Bank account  matching
    the amounts on the appellant's payslips and paid into  the  account  by
    T.J. Morris.  There is also in the bundle a contract of employment  and
    terms and conditions of the second  appellant's  employment  with  T.J.
    Morris.

15. Having accepted the concessions made on behalf of the Respondent - that
    the only issue was the exercise of treaty rights and  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had  erred  in  failing  to  consider  appropriately  the
    evidence - the First-tier Tribunal's decision  discloses  an  error  of
    law. The decision should therefore be set aside.

Re-making the Decision

16. On the basis of the evidence set out above that  the  second  appellant
    was working at T.J. Morris at the date of the hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal and that she is now on maternity leave I  find  that  the
    appellant  is  exercising  treaty  rights  in   the   United   Kingdom.
    Therefore, I find that the decision of the Secretary of State  was  not
    in accordance with  the  law.   The  appellants'  appeals  against  the
    Secretary of State's decisions are allowed.

Decision

17. The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains a material error of law and
    is set aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

18. The appellants' appeals against the Secretary of State's  decision  are
    allowed.

19.  I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.


Signed        P M Ramshaw                        Date 26 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
