
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08377/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th July 2016                    |On 2nd November 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr TIMOTHY [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not Represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the  Secretary  of  State,
       with permission, against a decision of the First tier Tribunal, Judge
       Povey, promulgated on 4th January 2016 following a hearing at Newport
       on 17th December 2015.  In that decision the Judge allowed  Mr  [O]'s
       appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse him  leave
       to remain on Human Rights grounds.

    2. He did so on the basis that  as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  the
       Appellant would have met the requirements of Appendix FM as a partner
       save for the fact that he was in the UK and thus allowed  the  appeal
       on the Chikwamba [2008] UKHL40 principle.

    3. The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission  to  appeal.
       The Secretary of State asserted that the Judge had erred  in  finding
       that the Appellant would have met the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM
       without having considered all  of  the  substantive  requirements  of
       Appendix FM.  In particular there was no assessment of the  financial
       requirements or whether there were insurmountable obstacles to family
       life continuing in South  Africa,  the  country  of  the  Appellant's
       nationality.

    4. For the purposes of continuity and clarity I shall continue to  refer
       to Mr [O] as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
       Respondent in this decision.

    5. I agree that the Judge erred as asserted by the Secretary  of  State.
       The decision and reasons is a short document and the judge  found  at
       paragraph 23 that the interference in the private and family life  of
       the appellant was disproportionate for the following reasons:-

           "23.1  At the date of his application, the Appellant  could  not
           satisfy the Immigration Rules regarding his relationship with Mr
           [T]. At that time, they had only been  cohabiting  just  over  a
           year. The Rules require cohabitation  for  at  least  two  years
           prior to application before someone  can  be  considered  as  an
           applicant's partner under Appendix FM.  However,  the  Appellant
           and Mr [T] have now co-habited for  over  two  years.  Were  the
           Appellant to submit an application today for leave to remain  as
           Mr [T]'s partner, there appears to be no obvious reason why  the
           same would not now meet the requirements of Appendix FM  to  the
           Rules."

    6. The Judge gives no reasons for his finding that the  Appellant  would
       now meet the requirements of Appendix FM save for the length  of  his
       relationship  with  his  partner.  The  Rules  contain  a  number  of
       requirements in addition to meeting the definition of  "partner"  and
       on that basis the decision cannot stand and I set it aside.

    7. The Appellant appeared in person accompanied by his  partner  and  no
       one could give any reason why I should not proceed to  re-decide  the
       appeal.

    8. The original application made by the Appellant was on the basis of UK
       ancestry under  paragraph  189  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  He  had
       previously been granted leave  to  enter  and  remain  under  the  UK
       ancestry rules  as  a  dependent  of  his  mother.  However,  as  the
       Secretary of State pointed out in the refusal, as an adult he  needed
       to satisfy the rule on his own account and he could not do so,  being
       unable to provide evidence that a grandparent was born in the  United
       Kingdom.

    9. The Secretary of State considered his private life and found that  he
       did not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the rules and
       refused the application. That decision was  taken  on  12th  February
       2015. By the time the matter came to appeal the Appellant was arguing
       both family and private life.

   10. The Appellant is and has been in a relationship  with  Mr  [T]  since
       2011. The facts as found by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  have  not
       been challenged. They are that the Appellant  was  granted  leave  to
       enter the UK on 26th January 2007 as a dependent of his mother  until
       January 2010. He was 17 when he arrived in the  UK  on  5th  February
       2007 and has been in the UK ever since. His leave was extended  until
       2015.

   11. In 2011 the  Appellant's  mother  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
       remain. She has remarried and is settled in the UK. The Appellant and
       his mother are close. The Appellant's father lives  in  South  Africa
       but they are not close and he is unaware that his son is gay.

   12. As indicated above the Appellant's application for leave to remain on
       the basis of UK ancestry was refused.

   13. The Appellant and Mr [T] began to cohabit in December 2013. Mr [T] is
       British and has lived throughout his life in the UK  and  his  family
       are all in the UK.

   14. The genuineness of the relationship between the Appellant and Mr  [T]
       was accepted both before the First-tier Tribunal and before me by  Mr
       Duffy.

   15. The appeal has changed its nature completely since the  date  of  the
       refusal and is now put solely on the basis of the Appellant's  family
       and private life. In order to succeed on that basis  he  must  comply
       with the requirements of Appendix FM.

   16. Additionally, the appellant's  personal  circumstances  have  changed
       considerably throughout the course of this appeal.

   17. He was diagnosed as HIV positive in  2013.  He  remained  well  until
       December 2015 when he became very unwell and blood tests indicated an
       extremely high viral load. His mobility was severely affected and  an
       MRI scan of his brain revealed that the HIV  virus  had  entered  his
       brain and damaged the part which controls muscle  memory  and  muscle
       tone. While there was only a small  amount  of  damage  it  left  the
       Appellant very weak and unable to walk. He is on antiretroviral drugs
       and also on antibiotics. Due to his mobility issues he was unable  to
       continue to reside in the studio flat he shared with Mr [T]  and  was
       obliged to move back into his mother's home. He is unable  to  manage
       stairs. Initially he was unable to do anything for himself but he  is
       now very much better than  he  was  initially.  Although  he  is  not
       currently living in the studio flat with his partner they do see each
       other every day. Additionally, the Appellant has been unable to  work
       since then and he is being supported financially by his  partner  and
       his mother.

   18. His partner Mr [T] is a senior branch manager of two estate  agencies
       in Bournemouth. He is an employee. The home they shared is  a  rented
       studio flat and they lived together from December 2013 until December
       2015. Their relationship is unchanged but  the  Appellant's  physical
       issues have made it necessary for him to reside on a temporary  basis
       with his mother.

   19. The Appellant expressed his gratitude to the NHS for the treatment he
       has received since the end of 2015 telling me quite candidly that had
       it not been for the NHS he would not have been appearing in front  of
       me. He indicated that while treatment for HIV is available  in  South
       Africa, it is at considerable cost which he would not have the  means
       to access.

   20. Turning to the requirements of Appendix FM and the  requirements  for
       limited leave to remain as a partner, the first question  is  whether
       the Appellant meets the definition of "partner" for the  purposes  of
       Appendix FM. This is set out in GEN.1.2 (iv) which  defines  partner,
       so far as relevant to this appeal, as "a person who has  been  living
       together with the applicant in a relationship  akin  to  marriage  or
       civil partnership for at  least  two  years  prior  to  the  date  of
       application". This continuing relationship involves a couple who have
       lived together for 3 years. I find therefore the  Appellant  in  this
       case does meet the definition of "partner", save for  the  fact  that
       they had not been living together for two years prior to the date  of
       application.

   21. The relationship requirements for leave to remain as  a  partner  are
       contained in section E-LTRP.1.2 to E-LTRP1.12.

   22. The Appellant's partner is a British citizen.  They are both over the
       age of 18 and are not within a  prohibited  degree  of  relationship.
       They have met and their relationship is genuine and subsisting.  They
       intend to live together permanently in  the  UK  and  there  is  good
       reason currently why they are not living under the same roof  but  it
       has  no  impact  on  their  continuing  intention  to  live  together
       permanently. All the  requirements  therefore  of  E-LTRP.1.2  to  E-
       LTRP1.12 are met.

   23. As regards the immigration status requirements in E-LTRP.2.1 and 2.2,
       the Appellant is not in the UK as a visitor, with a period  of  leave
       of six months or less, nor has he temporary  admission  or  temporary
       release and is not in breach of the immigration laws.

   24. The next requirements are the financial requirements contained in  E-
       LTR P.3.1 to E-LTR P.3.4 which I will come back to.

   25. Finally there is an English language requirement and South Africa  is
       not one of the countries named as exempting him from the  requirement
       and I have no evidence that he has been educated to degree  level  in
       English. He is not  exempt  from  the  English  language  requirement
       therefore  unless  paragraph  Ex.1  applies.   In   considering   the
       requirements of Ex.1, I find that Ex.1 (b) applies. Ex.1(b)  requires
       the Appellant  to be in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
       partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, settled in the  UK
       or in the UK with refugee legal humanitarian  protection,  and  there
       are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with  that  partner
       continuing outside the UK.

   26. In this case, given the state of the Appellant's health and the  fact
       that he does not have the finances to  support  his  ongoing  medical
       care in South Africa then the prognosis for  his  survival  would  be
       poor and on that basis there are indeed insurmountable  obstacles  to
       his family life with his partner continuing in South Africa.

   27. The remaining question,  referred  to  above  is  that  of  finances.
       Neither the Appellant nor his partner had come to court with  any  of
       the documentation to show that they meet the financial  requirements.
       I therefore gave permission, with the consent of Mr  Duffy,  for  the
       Appellant to supply, within 14  days,  appropriate  documentation  to
       show he meets the requirements of Appendix FM.

   28. Those 14 days have long passed and no evidence has been provided.

   29. The Appellant does not therefore meet the requirements of Appendix FM
       and given all the matters I have taken  into  account  in  connection
       with Appendix FM there are no other matters  not  already  considered
       that would leave to considering the appeal  outside  the  Immigration
       Rules.

   30. Accordingly, in redeciding the appeal it is dismissed



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed  such  that
the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  is
dismissed.

There has been no application for  an  anonymity  direction  and  I  see  no
reason to make one and I do not do so.


Signed   Date 31st August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
