
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber   Appeal Number: IA/08420/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 5th October 2018                       |On 15th October 2018                     |
|                                          |                                         |
|                                          |                                         |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                 Afzal Iqbal

                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance.

For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant, a Pakistan  national  born  on  14th  August  1990,  was
    granted permission to appeal a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M A Khan, which dismissed the appellant's appeal, on human rights
    grounds, against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  11th
    February 2015 (served on 13th February 2015) to refuse to vary leave to
    remain on the basis of the appellant's private life.

 2. The Secretary  of  State's  decision  considered  the  application  for
    variation of leave dated 29th October 2014.  It noted the applicant had
    applied on the basis of his private life for leave to remain.   He  had
    requested 3 months leave to remain outside the rules to enable  him  to
    gather documents to make a further student application.   The  decision
    applied paragraph 276ADE, considered there  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to his return to Pakistan following his entry to  the  UK  on
    11th January 2011.  He had the option of leaving the UK  and  making  a
    new application for entry clearance  from  abroad.  It  was  considered
    there was no provision within the rules for this application and  there
    were no exceptional circumstances.  He  retained  social  cultural  and
    linguistic links with Pakistan.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the matter on  the  papers  as
    requested by the appellant and promulgated a decision on 25th  February
    2016. He noted it was  for  the  appellant  to  establish  he  met  the
    requirements of the Rules and that the decision was in  breach  of  his
    human rights.  The judge recorded the following

    (i)    the appellant arrived on a student visa in 2011.

    (ii)         the appellant made an application for leave to  remain  in
    the UK under Article 8 of the ECHR to extend his leave in order to make
    a further application as a student.  He asserted  he  was  waiting  for
    some documents to make his student application and he asserted, in  his
    appeal, that the Secretary of State had not considered his  time  spent
    in the UK.

    (iii)   The judge set out the respondent's reasons for  refusal  (cited
    at [2] above)- there were no exceptional circumstances.

    (iv)     His leave expired on 31st October 2014.

    The judge found

    (i)     the appellant's private life consisted of his studies.  On  the
    evidence the appellant could  return  to  Pakistan  and  make  a  fresh
    application from there [23].

    (ii)         he had only been absent from Pakistan for 3  years  (there
    was no asylum claim).  His private life could continue in Pakistan.

    (iii)    there were no exceptional circumstances and  the  decision  of
    refusal was proportionate. His leave was precarious, and he had  always
    been aware of the same. The judge applied Razgar and Section 117 of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Application for Permission to Appeal


 4. The application for permission made stated  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law, the applicant had established a private  life,
    he was awaiting documentation and  in  the  interests  of  justice  the
    appeal should be allowed.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by UTJ Coker on  1st  August  2018  in
    these terms:

    'the grounds seeking permission to appeal do not assist.  They  do  not
    identify an arguable  error  of  law  but  refer  to  the  respondent's
    decision being wrong.

    Nevertheless, it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal judge  failed
    to identify the nature of the decision the subject of appeal  and  thus
    fail to apply the  correct  assessment  of  proportionality.   I  grant
    permission'.

    Judge Coker gave directions that both parties should file documentation
    relied on.

The Hearing


 6. At the hearing, Mr Melvin submitted  that  the  decision  disclosed  no
    error of law.

Conclusions


 7.  Both  parties  complied  with   the   direction   to   serve   further
    documentation. The appellant failed to attend the hearing,  but  I  was
    satisfied that he had been given  the  date,  time  and  venue  of  the
    hearing;   indeed,   the   appellant   submitted   documentation    for
    consideration on the 2nd October 2018 and requested that the matter  be
    dealt with on the papers. I considered that it was in the interests  of
    justice to proceed.  I can only consider documentation that was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal when considering  whether  the  judge  made  an
    error of law.

 8. The judge did engage with the correct decision that is of 11th February
    2015.  The appellant applied outside the Immigration  Rules  for  three
    months leave to gather documentation.  Although the First-tier Tribunal
    judge at one point in the decision made reference to an application for
    indefinite leave to remain, it is clear on  careful  reading  that  the
    judge realised that the  application  was  to  remain  for  only  three
    months.  That application was made on 29th October 2014 and refused  in
    February 2015.  This was beyond  the  three  months  requested  by  the
    applicant to gather documentation.  The matter was  not  determined  by
    the First-tier Tribunal  until  25th  February  2016.   (There  was  no
    explanation why this has taken over 2 years to come  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal).

 9. That said although the judge concluded there was no  interference  with
    the appellant's private life he went on to consider the matter  on  the
    basis of proportionality of the decision and, as he was obliged to  do,
    considered the  application  under  Article  8  via  the  lens  of  the
    immigration rules. He also applied Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  which  he  is  obliged  to  do  when
    considering the balancing exercise in relation to proportionality.

10. The real target of complaint is the decision of the Secretary of  State
    refusing his application.  No error of law, as Judge Coker stated,  was
    identified by the grounds.  The judge considered the relevant  material
    and undertook  a  balancing  exercise  with  reference  to  Article  8.
    Nothing was submitted, and the appellant did not attend to  demonstrate
    why there were very significant obstacles to his return to Pakistan and
    make a further application for entry clearance.  The  judge  considered
    Article 8 and gave a succinct judgment on the key elements.

    As set out in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT
    00085 (IAC)

    'Although there is a legal duty to give  a  brief  explanation  of  the
    conclusions on the central issue on  which  an  appeal  is  determined,
    those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole  makes
    sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge'.

    The grounds are essentially a disagreement with  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal which discloses no material error of law and  shall
    stand.  The appeal is dismissed.





Signed            Helen  Rimington                    Date      8th  October
    2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



