
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08872/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 7th January 2015                           |On 8th January 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mr NNAEMEKA PEACE ANUNA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Heller, Counsel, instructed on behalf of
Sunrise Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Majid)  who   in   a   determination
    promulgated on 25th September 2014 allowed the appeal of the Respondent
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  to  issue  a
    residence card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, as amended
    (the Regulations).

 2. For sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant Mr Anuna, a citizen of Nigeria, born on  2nd  April  1980
    was last admitted to the United Kingdom on 28th March 2013 on  a  visit
    visa valid from 19th July 2012 to 19th July 2017.  On 19th July 2013 he
    married an EEA national and  on  21st  August  2013  he  submitted  his
    current application which was for the issue  of  a  Residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right of residence under European  Community  law  as
    the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. On 25th January 2014 a decision was made to  refuse  that  application.
    The notice of immigration decision dated 20th  January  2014  gave  two
    reasons for the refusal of the application; namely that it  was  stated
    that the marriage was one of convenience and  secondly,  that  the  EEA
    family member, in this case  the  Appellant's  spouse,  had  failed  to
    provide evidence that they were  a  qualified  person  as  set  out  in
    Regulation 6 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 5. Detailed reasons for refusing the application were set out in a reasons
    for refusal letter dated 14th December 2013.  In  that  letter  it  was
    further stated that to qualify for a residence card as a spouse  of  an
    EEA national, the Appellant must prove that  the  marriage  is  lawful,
    genuine and subsisting and was not  solely  for  immigration  purposes.
    The letter went on to make reference to  the  contents  of  a  marriage
    interview that took place whereby the Appellant  and  his  spouse  were
    asked a number of questions.  That interview took place in Liverpool on
    20th January 2014.  A copy of that marriage interview is set out in the
    Respondent's bundle.  The letter set out a number of matters  that  the
    Respondent relied upon in support of the refusal  of  the  application.
    The refusal letter went on to consider the material  provided  for  the
    issue of a residence card under Regulation 6 and the exercise of treaty
    rights.  The letter went on to also make reference to  any  application
    to be made under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 6. The Appellant submitted Grounds of Appeal against that decision of  the
    Secretary of State which led to the appeal coming before the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Majid) on 19th  September  2014.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 25th September 2014 the judge allowed the  appeal  under
    the Regulations finding at [21] that the marriage was genuine and  also
    allowed the appeal  under  the  ECHR,  although  not  specifying  which
    Article [C25 and 26].

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision on two
    substantive grounds.  The first ground  asserted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to make a finding on a material issue, noting that the Secretary
    of State had provided two reasons in the refusal  letter,  namely  that
    the marriage is one of convenience, and secondly that  the  Appellant's
    spouse, the EEA national had not demonstrated that she  was  exercising
    treaty rights and that the judge had failed to  make  any  findings  on
    that issue as to whether or not the Appellant's spouse  was  exercising
    the treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  The second ground related  to
    a failure to provide reasons concerning the issue of the marriage.  The
    Secretary of State had taken issue with the  core  of  the  Appellant's
    account and that the marriage interview set out what was described as a
    "plethora of discrepancies".  The reasoning of the judge to simply rely
    on the spouse's assertion that she had reservations about the interview
    and  that  they  were  living  together  prior  to  the  marriage,  was
    insufficient in the light of  the  discrepancies  that  were  set  out.
    Furthermore, the grounds also make it plain that the Secretary of State
    sought permission on the basis of the judge's findings  [26]  that  the
    appeal was allowed under an Article of the ECHR.  It was submitted that
    no reasons had been provided as  to  which  Article  of  the  ECHR  the
    Appellant met nor were there any reasons given as to why the  Appellant
    should meet any such Article of the ECHR.

 8. On 10th November 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Robertson) granted
    permission to the Secretary of State.   Thus  the  hearing  was  listed
    before the Upper Tribunal.   Mr  Kandola  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State and Miss Heller, who appeared before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, appeared for Mr Anuna.  It was not necessary to  call  on  Mr
    Kandola in respect of the grounds advanced on behalf of  the  Secretary
    of State as Miss Heller confirmed the instructions that had  previously
    been set out in writing that it was conceded on behalf of the Appellant
    that the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Majid)  erred  in  law  in  two
    important respects.  First of all by failing to make  any  findings  on
    whether or not the Appellant's spouse was exercising treaty rights  and
    secondly by giving inadequate reasons  for  finding  the  marriage  was
    "genuine and subsisting" as opposed to a marriage of convenience.   The
    request was made for the matter to be remitted for a de novo hearing at
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. In the light of the concession made on behalf of the Appellant,  it  is
    now common ground before me between the  parties  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  made  material  errors  of  law  and  that  in   those
    circumstances the decision must be set aside.  In those  circumstances,
    it is necessary only briefly to explain why the Tribunal finds that  to
    be the case and to identify the nature of those errors.

10.   I am satisfied that the concession  was  properly  made  and  as  the
    grounds plainly set out,  there  were  two  issues  for  the  judge  to
    resolve.  The judge did not make any findings of fact as to whether  or
    not the Appellant's spouse, the EEA  national,  was  exercising  treaty
    rights  which  had  formed  part  of  the  reasons  for  refusing   the
    application by the Secretary of State.  That was a  material  error  of
    law.  As to the second error, again it is plain from the refusal letter
    that there was an issue as to the marriage itself.   Whilst  the  judge
    purported to deal with that part of the refusal,  paragraphs  [21]  and
    [22] did not adequately engage with the evidence that had been provided
    by both parties and in particular the discrepancies relied upon by  the
    Secretary of State in the marriage interview that had taken place.   It
    is wholly unclear what the judge made of those  discrepancies  or  what
    weight the judge gave to them and in those circumstances,  as  conceded
    on behalf  of  the  Appellant,  the  judge  did  not  provide  adequate
    reasoning for  the  decision  reached.   Furthermore,  the  judge  also
    purported to allow the appeal under an Article of  the  ECHR.   As  the
    grounds submit it  is  unclear  as  to  which  Article  the  judge  was
    referring to although  it  seems  to  me  that  the  judge  was  making
    reference to Article 8 of the ECHR by the reference  to  that  at  [25]
    however it is unclear from the determination what the judge's reasoning
    was  to  support  the  appeal  being  allowed  under  Article   8   and
    particularly against the background of the  refusal  letter  in  itself
    where the Respondent had made no decision  on  the  Appellant's  family
    life.

11.  Therefore  it  is  common  ground  between  the   parties   that   the
    determination should be set aside and that a new hearing be convened to
    hear the case de novo.  In the light of the nature  of  the  errors  of
    law, and the issues identified,  factual  findings  are  required  upon
    those issues and to that end oral evidence will be  required  from  the
    relevant parties.  In those  circumstances  I  am  satisfied,  as  Miss
    Heller submits, that the appropriate course is to remit the case to the
    First-tier Tribunal to a different judge to consider the oral  evidence
    of the parties, and to make factual findings necessary on the  relevant
    issues taking into account  the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal,  both
    documentary and oral. In addition Miss Heller indicated there would  be
    some  updating  of  the  documents  which  would  be  provided   in   a
    supplementary bundle. In those circumstances this is a case that  falls
    within the practice statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).

12.   Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside,  none
    of the findings of fact shall stand and the case is to be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  hearing  in  accordance  with  Section
    12(2)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act at paragraph  7.2
    of the practice statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).

13. The Tribunal makes the following direction:-

    The Secretary of State shall file and serve upon the Tribunal  and  the
    other party a typed copy of the  marriage  interview  that  took  place
    between the parties within fourteen days of the date this determination
    is served.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside  and
the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  set  out  in  the
preceding paragraphs.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 7/1/2015



Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
