
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08448/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th October 2013                            |On 24th October 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                              SIMON IGBINEDION
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Welsh, Counsel, instructed by French & Company
For the Respondent:    Mr S Spence, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Bircher
    made following a hearing at North Shields on 11th June 2013.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigerian  born  on  3rd  June  1984.   He
    entered the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student on 18th January  2011  and
    submitted an application for further leave to remain on 2nd July  20123
    on the basis of his marriage to Angela  Onkutwlie  Mokgwathi,  who  has
    refugee status in the UK.

 3. The Respondent was not satisfied  that  each  of  the  parties  to  the
    marriage intended to live permanently with the  other  as  his  or  her
    spouse but the judge found the Appellant and his wife  to  be  entirely
    credible and was satisfied that this was a  subsisting  marriage.   She
    dismissed the appeal on the grounds that the sponsor had only leave  to
    remain until 9th July 2015 and was therefore not  settled  in  the  UK.
    She also dismissed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 4. The Appellant made a number of  challenges  to  the  determination,  in
    detailed grounds, which do not need to be recited here.  When  granting
    permission to appeal Designated Judge Campbell observed that the  judge
    had also erred in failing to conclude that the decision  to  refuse  to
    vary leave was unlawful and had failed to  apply  Adamally  and  Jaferi
    [2012] UKUT 00414.

 5. At the hearing Mr Spence conceded that there were  multiple  errors  in
    this determination.

 6. This application was made on 2nd July 2012, a week before the change in
    the Immigration Rules, on 9th July 2012 impeding  the  decision  in  FH
    (Post-flight spouses) Iran [2010] UKUT 275 to provide for the admission
    of post-flight spouses of refugees with limited leave.

 7. Given that the changes in the Rules, one week  after  the  application,
    and before the date of decision, meant that the Appellant could  fulfil
    the requirements therein, Mr Spence said that he could not submit  that
    there was a legitimate aim in refusing the  application  on  Article  8
    grounds.

 8. Accordingly,  whilst  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the  applicable
    requirements of the Rules,  he  succeeds  on  human  rights  grounds.He
    enjoys family life with his wife in the UK.   Removal  would  interfere
    with his right to family life and the Respondent does not identify  any
    legitimate aim which could be served by his removal.

Decision

 9. The decision of the judge is set aside.  It is remade as follows.   The
    Appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


Signed
                                Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

