
[pic]
IAC

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08694/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 February 2016                   |On 9 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mrs ANUM ATIF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Brazini, Counsel, instructed by Oliver &
Hasani Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the Ms Atif's appeal under the Immigration
    Rules.  Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make no anonymity order.  No order was  made
    by the First-tier Tribunal and there were  no  issues  before  me  that
    might require such an order.  Although the Secretary of  State  is  the
    appellant before me, I refer to the parties as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan arrived in the United Kingdom on
    20 August 2013 with entry clearance as the spouse of  a  tier  1  (post
    study work) migrant.  Her application to vary her leave on the basis of
    her private and family life was refused  on  19  February  2015  and  a
    decision made to remove her  by  way  of  directions.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal heard her appeal  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on 17  July  2015  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on  21  July  2015,  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal McCarthy allowed the appellant's appeal under  paragraph  EX.1
    of Appendix FM.

 3. The respondent appeals, with leave, on the basis  that  the  Judge  had
    found it unreasonable to expect the appellant's British  Citizen  child
    to return to Pakistan because the youngest child would be  deprived  of
    the ability to [be] breastfed.  It was submitted that this approach was
    flawed as the ability for the child to be breastfed  clearly  does  not
    rely on the child's presence in the UK.  It was argued that there  were
    no other factors identified by the First-tier Tribunal that would  have
    led to a conclusion that to expect the child to return with his  mother
    was not disproportionate.

 4. Although Mr Duffy initially attempted  to  argue  that  the  Judge  was
    incorrect in his interpretation of Ruiz Zambrano (European citizenship)
    [2011] EUECJ C-34/09 [2011] Imm  Ar  521  and  relied  on  the  Judge's
    finding that Ms Atif cannot meet the requirements of Regulation 15A  of
    the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  EEA
    Regulations) (as her husband is an exempt person) he conceded that  was
    not a ground of appeal before me.

 5. Mr Duffy conceded that there was an error in the  respondent's  grounds
    of appeal in that it was argued there that the Judge had found that  it
    was not unreasonable for the appellant's child to  return  to  Pakistan
    with his mother and therefore breastfeeding could continue  there.   Mr
    Duffy was unable to point me to any such finding.

 6. The Judge identified that as the appellant's second child is a  British
    citizen and  therefore  the  Judge  had  to  consider  under  paragraph
    EX.1(a)(i)(cc) of Appendix FM, whether it would be reasonable to expect
    the child to leave  the  UK.   The  Judge  identified  three  potential
    scenarios which he had to  consider:  the  first  was  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the family group to return to  Pakistan  together;
    the second was for the child's father  (who  has  indefinite  leave  to
    remain) to remain in the UK with his British citizen  some  whilst  the
    appellant and her daughter return to Pakistan; and the  third  was  for
    the family group to remain in the UK.

 7.  In  relation  to  the  first  scenario  the   Judge   considered   the
    jurisprudence including of Ruiz Zambrano (above) and that  it  was  not
    proportionate to expect a Union citizen child to give up  their  rights
    as a Union citizen, including the right to live within the EU, if 'such
    decisions deprive those  children  of  the  genuine  enjoyment  of  the
    substance of the rights attaching  to  the  status  of  European  Union
    citizen'. As  already  stated  the  Judge  noted  (at  [22])  that  the
    appellant was not entitled to rely (nor had she appealed on that basis)
    on  the  derivative  rights  of  residence  provisions  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 8. However the Judge found at [21] that 'the expectation of  removing  the
    family en bloc would amount to the youngest child being deprived of his
    rights as a Union citizen'.  Therefore relying on Ruiz Zambrano, as set
    out at [20] of his decision, it was clear that Judge found that it  was
    not proportionate to expect the British citizen child to leave the  UK.
    That was a finding open  to  him  and  the  appellant's  representative
    placed reliance on  the  Upper  tribunal  case  of  Sanade  and  others
    (British children - Zambrano- Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC)  that  it
    was not possible to require the family as a unit to relocate outside of
    the EU or to submit that it would be reasonable for them to do so.

 9. Therefore, contrary to the submissions  in  the  respondent's  grounds,
    breastfeeding could not continue in Pakistan, as the Judge  found  that
    removal of the British citizen child would not be reasonable. Mr  Duffy
    accepted that this was the case.

10. The Judge went on to consider the second scenario  which  was  for  the
    child to remain with his father in the UK but discounted  this  as  the
    appellant was currently  breastfeeding  her  son  and  the  appellant's
    removal would bring this to an end.  The Judge considered  that  it  is
    necessary  to  balance  the  need  to  maintain  effective  immigration
    controls and to protect the economic wellbeing of the UK,  which  would
    outweigh the need to keep the  family  unit  together  because  of  the
    factors set out in MM (Lebanon) & Ors [2014]  EWCA  Civ.   However  the
    Judge found that such separation would bring breastfeeding  to  an  end
    which would be contrary to the best interests of the youngest child and
    made  the  removal  of  the  appellant  disproportionate  in  all   the
    circumstances.   That was a finding properly open to the Judge.  It  is
    not a case of the best interests being considered as  a  'trump  card',
    contrary to ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 (paragraph  41)  as  the  Judge
    properly considered the factors in favour of the appellant's removal.

11. Mr Duffy also conceded that in any event even if I was wrong and  there
    had been an error, the  respondent  was  unlikely  to  succeed  on  any
    remaking.

12. I am not satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Judge  discloses
    any material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.  The making  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on a point of law and  shall
stand.

No anonymity direction was sought or made.


Signed   Date: 4 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
