
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08451/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2016                              |On 9 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Wajahat Assad
     (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Preston, Immigration Legal Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Wajahat Assad, was born on 23 April 1990 and is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  He appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Pickup) against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  17
    February 2015 to refuse his application to vary his leave to remain and
    to remove him from the United Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal,  in  a
    decision promulgated  on  3  July  2015,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. In essence, there is one ground  of  appeal.   The  appellant  did  not
    attend the First-tier Tribunal hearing nor  was  he  represented.   The
    judge  recorded  at  [5]  that,  "despite   reminders   sent   to   the
    representatives there is no appeal bundle on the  appellant's  behalf."
    The judge proceeded to hear the appeal in the appellant's absence.  The
    respondent (in her Rule 24 response)

         The Presenting Officer's own record of the hearing:

             'no  one  attended  the  hearing  the  former  reps   withdrew
             representation prehearing  and  no  evidence  offered  by  the
             appellant.  I relied on the RFRL [reason for refusal  letter].
             On  return  to  the  office,  the  appellant  had  filed  some
             documents which simply denied the assertions made in the  RFRL
             that he was working in breach [of his conditions of  leave  to
             remain].'

    The appellant asserts that he had submitted a bundle of documents on  1
    July 2015 (the date of the hearing) but this had not been placed before
    the judge.  Permission has been granted on that basis.

 3. The appeal is wholly without merit.  The appeal was listed at  10  a.m.
    on 1 July 2015.  The appellant's bundle of documents appears  from  the
    papers in the court file to have been faxed to the Tribunal  office  in
    Manchester on that date but at 13:16 hours.  It was for  the  judge  to
    decide the order in which he heard the cases before him that  day.   It
    appears that he has determined the appellant's appeal before the bundle
    of documents was received.  The date  of  promulgation  is  immaterial;
    there was no evidence at all that the bundle of documents came into the
    judge's hands before he had sent his decision  for  promulgation.   For
    administrative reasons, there  is  often  a  delay  between  the  judge
    "signing off" a decision and the actual date  of  promulgation  to  the
    parties.  I am entirely satisfied that the judge did not  overlook  the
    appellant's  documents  because  they  were  not  before  him  when  he
    determined the appeal.

 4. In any event, the documents add nothing to the appellant's  case.   The
    appellant had been found by the respondent working in contravention  of
    his leave conditions.  It is also incontrovertibly the  case  that  the
    appellant did not have a valid  CAS  (Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
    Studies) issued by an authorised educational  sponsor.   The  appellant
    acknowledges that fact but complains that he was not given 60  days  to
    look for another sponsor.  Even by reference to the  documents  in  the
    appellant's bundle of 1 July 2015, he had  not  found  another  sponsor
    and, in any event, the respondent made it  clear  that  she  would  not
    exercise her discretion outside the Rules and extend the 60 day  period
    to the appellant because he had been found  to  be  in  breach  of  his
    conditions of leave to remain.  The appellant, therefore, had no  valid
    CAS and he had no 60 day period within which to find a new  sponsor  so
    his appeal was bound to fail in any event.

Notice of Decision

 5. This appeal is dismissed.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 20 April 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 20 April 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

