
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08237/2008


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 September 2014                        |On 12 November 2014        |
|and 4 November 2014                        |                           |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                                   MR A L
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
                            For the Appellant: Mr K Mak a solicitor
           from MKM Solicitors
          For the Respondent: Mr T Wilding a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 5 April 1980. He
      appeals against the respondent's decision of 1  May  2008  to  make  a
      deportation order against him.  The  reasons  for  this  decision  are
      contained in a letter dated 30 April 2008.  The  respondent  concluded
      that it was conducive to the public good to make a  deportation  order
      against the appellant pursuant to section 3 (5) (a) of the Immigration
      Act 1971 as amended. The index offence leading to the decision was the
      appellant's conviction at Bournemouth Crown Court on 3  December  2004
      of possessing a class A  controlled  drug,  cocaine,  with  intent  to
      supply. He was sentenced to 6 years imprisonment.


   2. The appellant has other convictions. On 2 July 2001  at  Inner  London
      Crown Court he was convicted on two counts of  possessing  a  class  A
      drug, heroin, with intent to supply and three counts  of  supplying  a
      class A drug, also heroin. He was sentenced to 54 months  imprisonment
      on these charges to run concurrently.


      Immigration history


   3. There is a lengthy immigration  and  appeals  history.  The  appellant
      arrived in the UK in 1991 when he was 11  years  old.  He  joined  his
      parents. His siblings are also living in this country.  The  appellant
      and his parents and siblings were granted indefinite leave  to  remain
      on 20 September 2000. His parents were naturalised as British citizens
      on 8 March 2004. His siblings have also become British  citizens.  The
      appellant has not become a British citizen.


      Appeal history


   4. The respondent served a notice of decision to deport the appellant  on
      8 February 2007. He appealed and his appeal was heard by  a  panel  of
      the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal ("the  first  panel")  on  16  May
      2007. By a determination promulgated on 14 June 2007  his  appeal  was
      allowed in circumstances and for reasons  to  which  I  will  need  to
      return. The respondent applied for reconsideration which  was  ordered
      on 27 June 2007. The reconsideration came  before  Senior  Immigration
      Judge Spencer 3 October 2007. On that day the respondent withdrew  the
      decision of 8 February 2007. The judge recorded that the appeal should
      be treated as withdrawn since the decision against which it was bought
      had been withdrawn.


   5. The respondent issued the new decision, to make a  deportation  order,
      on 1 May 2008. That is the  decision  which  is  the  subject  of  the
      present appeal. The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard  by  a
      panel of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal ("the second  panel")  on
      23 June 2008. The appellant's appeal was dismissed in a  determination
      promulgated on 1 June 2008.


   6. The appellant applied for  reconsideration  which  was  refused  by  a
      Senior Immigration Judge on 17 July 2008. The  appellant  renewed  the
      application to the High Court and reconsideration was  ordered  on  13
      November 2008.


   7. The reconsideration came before Senior Immigration Judge Taylor  on  7
      January 2009. She found that the second panel had  erred  in  law  and
      adjourned for a second  stage  reconsideration.  That  reconsideration
      came before a panel of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal ("the third
      panel") on 10 September 2009. In a  determination  promulgated  on  19
      November 2009 this panel dismissed the appellant's appeal  both  under
      the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.


   8. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal
      which was refused by a Senior Immigration Judge on 6 January 2010. The
      appellant renewed  the  application  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  where
      permission to appeal was granted. There has now been a  consent  order
      in the Court of Appeal dated 25 November 2010 accompanied by an agreed
      statement of reasons. The determination of the third panel promulgated
      on 19 November 2009 dismissing the appellant's appeal  was  set  aside
      and the case remitted to the Upper Tribunal for reconsideration of all
      issues. None of the findings of fact made by the third  panel  are  to
      stand but the findings of fact made by the  first  panel  set  out  in
      paragraph 42 of the determination of the third panel are  "subject  to
      the appropriate preservation".


   9. Following the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  the  appeal  was  not
      listed for hearing in the Upper Tribunal until 9  September  2014.  Mr
      Mak submits and Mr Wilding does not dispute  that  during  the  period
      between November 2010 and July 2014 when notice of hearing was  issued
      by the Upper Tribunal the appellant's present  and  former  solicitors
      were in contact with the Upper  Tribunal  on  a  number  of  occasions
      pressing for the case to be listed for  hearing.  Eventually,  it  was
      discovered that the Tribunal file had been destroyed and  efforts  had
      to be made to reconstitute it. Mr Mak submits that during this  period
      the respondent did nothing to press for the appeal to be heard.


      The hearings before me


  10. The appeal came before me on 9 September 2014. Mr Mak appeared for the
      appellant and Mr Wilding for the respondent.  There  was  insufficient
      time for the hearing to be completed that day  and  I  adjourned  part
      heard after hearing evidence from the appellant, his  mother  and  his
      father. I gave directions which, with a little slippage of time,  have
      been complied with by both parties.  The  hearing  continued  and  was
      completed on 4 November 2014.


      Documentary evidence and authorities


  11. I now have a composite bundle prepared by the  appellant's  solicitors
      which, I am told, contains all the  relevant  material  together  with
      written submissions from the appellant, new  witness  statements  from
      the appellant's partner and his daughter the  Immigration  Directorate
      Instructions chapter 13: criminality guidance in Article 8 ECHR  Cases
      (version 5.0 28 July 2014), the current version  of  part  13  of  the
      Immigration  Rules   dealing   with   deportation,   the   appellant's
      authorities bundle, the respondent's skeleton argument, ZZ  (Tanzania)
      v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1404, OH (Serbia) v SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ  694,
      JO (Uganda) and JT (Ivory  Coast)  v  SSHD  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  10,  MM
      (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 135, YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA
      Civ 1292 and SS (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550.  There  were
      further witness statement submitted by the appellant in his  "Remitted
      Hearing" bundle.


  12. I have heard oral evidence from the appellant, his mother, his father,
      his brother K and his current partner R. They were examined in  chief,
      cross examined and, in some cases, re-examined. I asked some questions
      for the purpose of clarification. Their evidence  is  set  out  in  my
      record of proceedings.


      Submissions


  13. Mr Wilding relied  on  his  skeleton  argument.  In  relation  to  the
      fairness/abuse of process point he submitted that  Senior  Immigration
      Judge Taylor's decision was determinative. The first panel allowed the
      appellant's appeal on the basis that  the  respondent's  decision  was
      incorrect rather than  on  the  merits  based  on  the  evidence.  The
      respondent remade the decision on 30 April 2008. The Court  of  Appeal
      specifically did not grant permission on the fairness/abuse of process
      point. It was no longer open to  the  appellant  to  argue  this.  His
      submission was in three parts and in the alternative. Firstly,  I  was
      bound by the decision of Senior Immigration  Judge  Taylor.  Secondly,
      even if her decision was  not  binding  on  me  I  should  follow  her
      reasoning in reaching the  same  conclusion.  Thirdly,  the  Court  of
      Appeal had not allowed the ground of appeal which would permit this to
      be argued any further.


  14. In relation to the Article 8 grounds, Mr Wilding also  relied  on  his
      skeleton. He accepted that the appellant had benefited by the delay to
      the extent that family ties had grown stronger and he had  stayed  out
      of trouble for longer. There had not been the sort of delay  reflected
      in EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41. Paragraphs 399 and 399A were not
      available to the appellant because  of  the  provisions  of  paragraph
      398(a). Even if he could show  that  he  could  bring  himself  within
      exceptions 1 and/or 2 in section 117C of the Immigration Act  2014  he
      still needed to go  on  and  show  that  there  were  very  compelling
      circumstances over and above these. He had failed  to  do  so.  I  was
      referred to LC (China) at paragraph 24 and ZZ (Tanzania) at paragraphs
      34 and 35.


  15. In reply to my question as to the respondent's position regarding  the
      credibility of the witnesses,  Mr  Wilding  said  that  there  was  no
      criticism he could properly make of their evidence. He  accepted  that
      nothing had happened to call into question the findings of  the  first
      panel preserved by the Court of Appeal including the  conclusion  that
      the appellant posed in low risk of reoffending. I was asked to dismiss
      the appeal.


  16. Mr Mak relied on his written submissions which I will refer to as  his
      skeleton argument. He did not agree with Mr Wilding's  submission  and
      argued that the first panel had allowed the appellant's appeal on  the
      merits. He took me to what he said were the relevant passages  in  the
      determination and submitted that there were findings both  that  there
      were exceptional circumstances and that it would not be in the  public
      interest to remove the appellant. He accepted that in 2007 at the time
      Senior Immigration Judge Spencer  recorded  that  the  respondent  had
      withdrawn  the  decision  the  then  unified  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal had no power to prevent this from being done. I asked Mr  Mak
      whether, if it was the appellant's position  that  he  had  no  remedy
      before the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal he could have  applied  for
      judicial review. Mr Mak said that he could not have done so,  although
      he was not able to tell me why this was the case.


  17. Mr Mak relied on Chomanga (binding  effect  of  unappealed  decisions)
      Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 312 (IAC). He  argued  that  had  the  respondent
      sought to withdraw her  decision  under  the  current  Upper  Tribunal
      procedure rules it would have been an abuse of process. In reply to my
      question, he accepted that, under the  current  procedure  rules,  the
      Upper Tribunal had a discretion as to whether or  not  to  permit  the
      Secretary of State to withdraw a decision  (specifically  to  withdraw
      her case). Mr Mak argued that the unfairness/abuse  of  process  point
      also assisted the appellant in relation to his Article 8 grounds.


  18. In relation to the Article 8 grounds, Mr Mak said that the  references
      to the Immigration Rules in his skeleton  were  the  current  ones  in
      effect since July 2014. He accepted that paragraphs 398 and  399A  did
      not apply but it was nevertheless important to establish  whether  the
      appellant met these criteria. Mr Mak submitted that he did.  It  could
      not be said that there was a strong public interest in deportation  in
      the light of  all  the  appellant's  circumstances,  the  respondent's
      actions and the serious delay. Whilst the delay between  the  decision
      of the Court of Appeal and the rehearing was  not  the  fault  of  the
      respondent the respondent could have but had  not  pressed  the  Upper
      Tribunal to give  a  hearing  date.  The  appellant's  solicitors  had
      started chasing the Upper Tribunal in February 2011. He accepted  that
      I needed to apply EB Kosovo principles in relation to any delay.


  19. Mr Mak submitted that the  appellant  had  always  observed  his  bail
      conditions. He had not been permitted to work until  sometime  in  the
      summer of 2014. He argued that in all the circumstances the  appellant
      had established that there were very  compelling  circumstances  which
      outweighed the public interest in deportation. The public interest had
      diminished with the reflection of time (ZZ Tanzania paragraph  28).  I
      was asked to allow the appeal.


  20. In reply Mr Wilding accepted  that  the  abuse  of  process/unfairness
      point had been touched on by Senior  Immigration  Judge  Spencer.  The
      principles  set  out  in  Chomanga  were  not  relevant.  He  was  not
      suggesting that the appellant's son and daughter should go with him to
      Nigeria. Their mothers  could  continue  to  care  for  them  in  this
      country. The Immigration Directorate Instructions at paragraph 2.5 set
      out what the respondent meant by "unduly harsh". There was no merit in
      the point that the Secretary of State should  have  chased  the  Upper
      Tribunal a hearing date.


  21. I reserved my determination.


      Findings of fact


  22. The preserved findings of the first panel set out in paragraph  42  of
      the determination of the third panel are;


         i. The appellant has provided considerable emotional support to his
            sick daughter (paragraph 13 of that determination).


        ii. The offences committed "a long time ago" by the appellant in his
            youth are irrelevant to the present decision (paragraph 24).


       iii. the appellant has strong ties in the United Kingdom, he and  his
            family having lived together here since he was 10  or  11  years
            old (paragraph 28.


        iv.  Despite  his  incarceration  the   appellant   has   maintained
            significant telephone contact with his daughter and would  wish,
            when not detained, to undertake a greater role in her upbringing
            (paragraph 30).


         v.  The  proposed  deportation  would  render  the  resumption  and
            development of the appellant's relationship  with  his  daughter
            that would have ordinarily taken place  in  the  United  Kingdom
            impossible because his daughter could not visit him  in  Nigeria
            (paragraph 31).


        vi. The proposed deportation would severely  emotionally  effect  of
            the  appellant's  daughter  and  he  has,  notwithstanding   his
            incarceration  maintained  a  "close"  relationship   with   her
            (paragraph 32).


       vii. That the appellant is close to his parents and siblings and  his
            deportation  would  interrupt  that  close  relationship.   They
            provide him with supportive  and  positive  influences  and  his
            removal will "take him away from that support".


      viii. Because of the exceptional and effective family support and more
            importantly the fact that the appellant is now willing to accept
            it the risk of him  reoffending  is  low  (paragraph  36).  (The
            emphasis is taken from the original).


  23. I adopt these findings. However, they are  findings  which  were  made
      following a hearing in May 2007. Whilst correct at that time  some  of
      these circumstances  have  evolved  and  changed  and  there  are  new
      factors. Mr Wilding did not suggest that the appellant or any  of  the
      other witnesses were not  credible.  I  find  the  appellant  and  his
      witnesses to be credible, both those who gave oral evidence and  those
      who submitted  witness  statements.  The  evidence  contained  in  the
      statements of those who did not give evidence is consistent with  that
      of those who did.


  24. The appeal history is  as  I  have  set  out  as  is  the  appellant's
      immigration history and that of  his  family.  I  make  the  following
      additional findings of fact.


  25. Having served his sentence the appellant was in immigration  detention
      until he was released on bail in May 2010. There have been strict bail
      conditions including weekly reporting and living with his parents.  He
      continues to live with them in south London. He has not  been  allowed
      to work until sometime in the summer of  2014  and  is  not  currently
      working. It is not clear whether  he  has  been  able  to  obtain  the
      documentation he needs if he is to do legitimate work. He is supported
      by his family. The appellant says that he would  like  to  work  as  a
      personal trainer and to earn in  order  to  support  himself  and  his
      children.


  26. The appellant has two children by different mothers.  His  daughter  A
      was born on 5 March 1998. His son I was born on 20 October 2007.  Both
      were born in the UK and are British citizens. Each of them lives  with
      her or his mother and the appellant is no  longer  in  a  relationship
      with either mother.


  27. The appellant sees his daughter A as often as he  can,  usually  every
      other week. She suffers from sickle cell anaemia and from time to time
      when she has to be admitted to hospital he spends a lot of  time  with
      her in hospital including staying there. She is now 16 and has started
      attending college. She does not want to socialise with him as much  as
      she once did but the appellant goes to her house every other week  and
      she comes to his parents' house. She lives in Hackney  about  an  hour
      away by train. Her mother has two other children, a daughter  aged  11
      and a son aged nearly 2. His relationship with  her  mother  broke  up
      before A was born. A has a close  relationship  with  the  appellant's
      parents. The appellant speaks to her on the telephone  and  they  send
      messages to each other most days. There is a  witness  statement  from
      her in which he says that she needs him and does not want  him  to  be
      deported. She missed him a great deal when he was away (in prison) and
      pleads for him to be allowed to stay. There  is  a  witness  statement
      from A's mother which, whilst dated May 2008,  confirms  the  relevant
      elements of the appellant's evidence at that time.


  28. The appellant's son I lives with his mother in Southend but stays with
      the appellant and his parents every other weekend and for six weeks in
      the summer holidays. His mother has three other children,  twins  aged
      five and a son aged nearly 2. The appellant has been to I's school and
      attended parent teacher meetings. He has a good relationship with  his
      son who sat through most of the second hearing before  me.  He  enjoys
      good health. The appellant speaks to him on the telephone  most  days.
      The witness statement from I's mother is also dated May 2008 but  also
      confirms the relevant elements of the  appellant's  evidence  at  that
      time


  29. The oral evidence from the appellant's parents and  brother  confirmed
      the closeness of  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
      children, his evidence as to the extent  of  contact  with  them,  the
      duration of the periods during which they visited or stayed  in  their
      home and that they were close to them. The family living in  the  same
      home is the appellant, his parents, one brother who gave oral evidence
      and a sister who did not. The brother K, living in the same home,  has
      a child of his own aged 18 months who does  not  live  with  him.  The
      appellant has two other siblings not living at  home,  a  brother  who
      lives most of the time with his girlfriend and a sister who is married
      and living elsewhere. They are a  close  family.  The  appellant,  his
      mother and other members of his family are in touch with  the  mothers
      of his children and the relationships with them, if  not  close,  work
      satisfactorily as do the arrangements for him to see his children.


  30.  The appellant's mother said and I accept that if the appellant had to
      go to Nigeria the family could not or would not go with him  but  they
      would do all they could to support him. They would send him money  but
      did not think that it would be enough. They no longer had  any  family
      in Nigeria and the last time she had  been  there  was  in  2003.  His
      father was last there about 18 months ago and hopes to go  again.  The
      appellant's father came to the UK in 1985 and his mother in 1987.  All
      of the family are working either full or  part-time,  apart  from  the
      appellant.


  31. The appellant's partner R is a British citizen.  She  has  been  in  a
      relationship with the appellant for about a year having met him a  few
      months before that. He told her about  his  criminal  record  and  his
      appeal against deportation. She entered into the relationship with her
      eyes open. She has a full-time job and lives with her  mother,  father
      and two sisters. She has no children. She said that were  it  not  for
      the fact that the appellant had to live at home because  of  his  bail
      conditions they would be living  together.  She  wants  to  share  her
      future with the appellant and  has  a  loving  relationship  with  his
      family.


  32. It has not been suggested and I accept that the appellant has not been
      back to Nigeria since he came to the UK when he was 11.


  33. The index offence was the appellant's conviction on  3  December  2004
      for possessing a class A controlled  drug,  cocaine,  with  intent  to
      supply. He was sentenced to 6 years imprisonment. The  previous  drug-
      related conviction was on 2 July 2001 when he  was  convicted  on  two
      counts of possessing and three counts of supplying  a  class  A  drug,
      heroin. He  was  sentenced  to  54  months  imprisonment.  The  Parole
      Assessment Report dated April 2007 records that the appellant had five
      previous  convictions  one  of  which  was  the  earlier  drug-related
      conviction. He had previous  convictions  for  robbery  and  a  sexual
      offence involving a 15-year-old girl. I bear in mind that one  of  the
      preserved findings is that; "The offences committed "a long time  ago"
      by the appellant in his youth are irrelevant to the present decision".
      However, I consider it relevant to note that the appellant admitted to
      the probation officer that he had been involved in supplying drugs for
      several years.  The  probation  officer  accepted  that,  despite  two
      adjudications against him, the appellant's conduct during  his  prison
      sentence had been good and that he had spent  his  time  productively,
      being given a position of trust.




      The unfairness/abuse of process point.


  34. In his Notice under Rule 17 (3) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
      (Procedure) Rules 2005 ("the 2005 Procedure Rules") Senior Immigration
      Judge Spencer correctly records, as Mr Mak accepts, that Rule 17(2) of
      the 2005 Procedure Rules provided that an appeal should be treated  as
      withdrawn if the respondent notified the Tribunal that the decision to
      which the appeal related had been withdrawn. The 2005 Procedure  Rules
      in force at that time gave the Senior Immigration Judge no  discretion
      in the matter. Once the respondent withdrew the decision that was  the
      end of the matter and of the appeal brought by the appellant.  If  the
      appellant considered that this was unfair or an abuse of process  then
      his remedy would have been to make an application for judicial review.
      He did not do so.


  35. The later Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,  which  were
      not in force  at  the  relevant  time,  provide  that  notice  of  the
      withdrawal of a party's case will not take  effect  unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal  consents  to  the  withdrawal  except  in  relation  to   an
      application for permission to appeal. The fact that a  Tribunal  might
      have been in a position to make a  different  decision  at  some  time
      after the decision in this appeal is nothing to the point. EG  and  NG
      does not assist the appellant. The determination of  the  first  panel
      was not an unappealed decision of the Tribunal which  was  binding  on
      the parties. It could not be an unappealed decision  in  circumstances
      where, in accordance with the 2005 Procedure  Rules,  the  appeal  was
      correctly treated as having been withdrawn.


  36. Furthermore, in her reasons for the decision that there was  an  error
      of law in the determination, Senior Immigration Judge  Taylor  stated,
      at paragraphs 17 to 22;


         "17. I do not accept that  the  conduct  of  the  respondent  on  3
         October 2007 amounted to an abuse  of  process  for  the  following
         reasons.


         18. Firstly, the Immigration Rules  specifically  provide  for  the
         possibility that the respondent might withdraw his decision in Rule
         17 (2) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005. Where provision is  made  in  the  Rules  for  withdrawal  is
         difficult to see that a decision to do so is an abuse of process.


         19. As we are all aware in this jurisdiction, withdraws do  happen,
         even at a late stage in the proceedings.


         20. The respondent had made a decision which was based on the wrong
         premise, namely that the court had recommended  deportation.  There
         was good reason to withdraw, namely that the  decision  upon  which
         the appeal was brought was flawed.  It  cannot  be  said  that  the
         withdrawal was capricious.


         21. Indeed it is not argued that  the  original  decision  was  not
         flawed. The complaint is in the timing. Clearly the late withdrawal
         of a  decision  causes  inconvenience,  is  a  waste  of  time  and
         resources, and distressing for an appellant  who  might  have  been
         expecting the appeal to go ahead and for it  to  be  resolved.  The
         respondent should organise its affairs so that it  does  not  cause
         inconvenience, not only to the parties, but to the Tribunal.


         22. However the respondent's conduct does not amount to abuse."


  37. I  find  that  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Taylor's  decision  finally
      disposed of the point. However, if I am mistaken and it does not  have
      this effect then I would  adopt  her  reasoning  and  reach  the  same
      conclusion.


  38. Paragraph 8 of the agreed Statement of Reasons  before  the  Court  of
      Appeal records that; "The appellant did not seek to rely on his  first
      ground of  appeal  which  argued  that  the  respondent's  conduct  in
      relation to the withdrawal of the deportation order at the first stage
      reconsideration hearing on 3 October 2007 and the failure to take into
      account the findings of the determination of 14 June 2007 when  making
      the deportation order again on 1 May 2008 amounted to an abuse of  the
      process of the Tribunal. In any event permission  to  appeal  on  this
      ground was refused and the respondent is of the view that  this  issue
      should not be raised before the Tribunal upon remittal by this Court."


  39. I find that the appellant has not suffered unfairness and  that  there
      has been no abuse of process. Alternatively, the question was resolved
      by Senior Immigration Judge Taylor and  cannot  be  reopened.  In  the
      further alternative, the order of the Court of Appeal means  that  the
      issue cannot be raised before me.


      Article 8


  40. Paragraphs A362, 398, 399 and 399A of the  current  Immigration  Rules
      provide that;


         "Where Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under Part
         13 of these Rules, the claim under  Article  8  will  only  succeed
         where the requirements of these rules as at 28 July 2014  are  met,
         regardless of when  the  notice  of  intention  to  deport  or  the
         deportation order, as appropriate, was served.


         A398. These rules apply where:
         (a) a foreign  criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that  his
         deportation would be contrary to the United  Kingdom's  obligations
         under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;
         (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made against
         him to be revoked.
         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and
         (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
         (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;
         or
         (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of  the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for  the
         law,
         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and
         (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
         (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the  7
         years immediately preceding the date of the  immigration  decision;
         and in either case
         (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in  the  country
         to which the person is to be deported; and
         (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  remain  in  the  UK
         without the person who is to be deported; or
         (b) the person has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and
         (i)  the  relationship  was  formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
         (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status  was
         not precarious; and
         (ii) it would be unduly harsh for  that  partner  to  live  in  the
         country  to  which  the  person  is  to  be  deported,  because  of
         compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those   described   in
         paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and
         (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the UK
         without the person who is to be deported.


         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -
         (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
         life; and
         (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and 8
         (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  his  integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.


         The provisions of the Immigration Act 2014 set out where the public
         interest lies in paragraphs 117A, 117B, 117C and 117D as follows;


         117A Application of this Part
         (1) This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine
         whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
         (a) breaches a person's right to respect  for  private  and  family
         life under Article 8, and
         (b) as a result would be unlawful under  section  6  of  the  Human
         Rights Act 1998.
         (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must
         (in particular) have regard-
         (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
         (b) in cases concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals,  to
         the considerations listed in section 117C.
         (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).


         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases
         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.
         (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-
         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (4) Little weight should be given to-
         (a) a private life, or
         (b) a relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
         established by a person at a time when the person is in the  United
         Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.
         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.


         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals
         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
         (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.
         (4) Exception 1 applies where-
         (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most  of
         C's life,
         (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United  Kingdom,
         and
         (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  C's  integration
         into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
         (5) Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.
         (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are  to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.


         117D Interpretation of this Part
         (1) In this Part-
         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;
         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
         who-
         (a) is a British citizen, or
         (b) has lived in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous  period  of
         seven years or more;
         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
         (a) is a British citizen, or
         (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of the
         Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).
         (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
         (a) who is not a British citizen,
         (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
         (c) who-
         (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  12
         months,
         (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm,
         or
         (iii) is a persistent offender.
         (3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject  to  an
         order under-
         (a) section  5  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Insanity)  Act  1964
         (insanity etc),
         (b) section 57  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Scotland)  Act  1995
         (insanity etc), or
         (c) Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland) Order  1986
         (insanity etc),
         has not been convicted of an offence.
         (4) In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced  to
         a period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-
         (a) do not include a person who has received a  suspended  sentence
         (unless a court subsequently orders that the sentence or  any  part
         of it (of whatever length) is to take effect);
         (b) do not include a person who has been sentenced to a  period  of
         imprisonment of that  length  of  time  only  by  virtue  of  being
         sentenced to consecutive sentences amounting in aggregate  to  that
         length of time;
         (c) include a person who is sentenced to detention, or  ordered  or
         directed to be detained, in an  institution  other  than  a  prison
         (including, in particular, a hospital or an institution  for  young
         offenders) for that length of time; and
         (d) include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment or detention,
         or ordered or directed to be detained, for an indeterminate period,
         provided that it may last for at least that length of time.
         (5) If any question arises for the purposes  of  this  Part  as  to
         whether a person is  a  British  citizen,  it  is  for  the  person
         asserting that fact to prove it."

  41. In this appeal I find that the appellant has raised Article 8  grounds
      in the context of deportation under Part 13  of  the  Rules  with  the
      consequence that his claim under Article 8 can only succeed where  the
      requirements of these rules as at 28 July 2014 are met even though the
      deportation order was served on him before  then  (YM  (Uganda)).  The
      Rules on deportation represent  a  complete  code  on  Article  8  (MF
      (Nigeria)) and must now be read in the light of the provisions of  the
      Immigration Act 2014.


  42. Because of Paragraph  398(a)  the  deportation  of  the  appellant  is
      conducive to the public good and in the public interest because he has
      been convicted of an offence for which he  has  been  sentenced  to  a
      period of at least four years imprisonment. I  must  consider  whether
      paragraphs 399 or  399A  apply  and  if  so  whether  there  are  very
      compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraph
      399 or 399A which outweighed the public interest in deportation.


  43. In relation to paragraph 399 I find that, even though he does not live
      with them, the nature and extent of the appellant's relationship  with
      his  two  children  amounts  to  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship. Both children are British citizens His daughter was born
      on 5 March 1998. His son was born on 20 October 2007. The  immigration
      decision in this appeal was made on 1 May 2008. His daughter has lived
      in the UK continuously for at least seven years immediately  preceding
      the date of the immigration decision but his son has not. I find  that
      it would be unduly harsh for either child to be expected  to  live  in
      Nigeria. Taking into account  all  my  findings  of  fact  as  to  the
      relationship between the appellant and his children  I  find  that  it
      would not be unduly harsh for them to remain in the UK without him.  I
      accept that both of them are close to him, neither wants him to  leave
      and he makes a valuable contribution to both their lives. On the other
      hand, there is no reason why their good relationship with his  parents
      and other members of his family should not continue if he  leaves  the
      UK. The appellant is not their primary carer and  both  of  them  live
      with their mothers and siblings. His relationships with their  mothers
      have come to an end and there is no suggestion that  either  child  is
      likely to live with him all or most of the time in the future. Some of
      his communication with his daughter is by electronic  means  and  that
      could  continue.  He  could  in  the  future  use  similar  means  for
      communicating  with  his  son.  I  accept  that   these   methods   of
      communication are not as good as face-to-face contact.


  44. I accept that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
      with his partner who is settled and  living  here  and  is  a  British
      citizen. That relationship was formed when the appellant  was  present
      in  the  UK  lawfully  but  his  immigration  status  was  undoubtedly
      precarious and she was well aware of this. In the circumstances it  is
      not necessary for me to consider the further requirements of 399(b)(i)
      or (ii).


  45. Paragraph 399A does not apply because,  having  been  sentenced  to  a
      period of imprisonment of at least four  years,  the  appellant  comes
      within 398(a), not 398 (b) or (c).


  46. Under the provisions of the Immigration Act 2014 I must  consider  the
      provisions of section 117B which applies in all cases and  117C  which
      applies in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals.  In
      this context; the "public interest question"  means  the  question  of
      whether an interference with the  appellant's  right  to  respect  for
      private and family life is justified under Article 8 (2).


  47. In relation to section 117B it is the  case  that  the  appellant  can
      speak English and he has always been in the UK lawfully. As to section
      117C he is a foreign criminal and the deportation of foreign criminals
      is in the public interest. Because he has been sentenced to  a  period
      of imprisonment of at least four years the  public  interest  requires
      deportation unless there are very compelling  circumstances  over  and
      above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2. I find that  Exception  1
      does not  apply  because,  whilst  the  appellant  has  been  lawfully
      resident in the UK for most of his life and is socially and culturally
      integrated in the UK there would not be very significant obstacles  to
      his integration in Nigeria. I reach that conclusion because, whilst he
      has not been there since he was 11 years of age he lived  there  until
      then and would  have  grown  up  with  the  culture,  environment  and
      language. Whilst he does not have any  close  family  in  Nigeria  his
      parents have been back to Nigeria and his father expressed the wish to
      make another visit. He has  been  supported  by  his  family  in  this
      country. I accept that they do not want him to go back to Nigeria  but
      they are prepared to provide him with financial support if he does.  I
      do not accept that this would be inadequate. He is healthy  and  would
      be returning on his own with the freedom of action that would  entail.
      I do not accept that he speaks only English and does not speak any  of
      the languages spoken in Nigeria. His skills  in  speaking  a  language
      common in Nigeria may be rusty but he would have spoken language  used
      in that country at least until he was 11. As to Exception 2, whilst  I
      accept that the appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
      with his partner she is not a qualifying partner  for  the  reasons  I
      have given. He has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
      his two children but, again for the reasons I have given,  the  effect
      of his deportation on them would not be unduly harsh.


  48. The appellant was convicted of both possession and dealing in Class  A
      drugs not once but on two occasions. On the first he was sentenced  to
      54 months imprisonment and on the second to 6 years.  The  seriousness
      of these offences is, because of the length of the  sentence  for  the
      index offence, at the top end of the scale set out in the Rules. There
      is a considerable public interest in his deportation. Furthermore,  he
      admitted to the  probation  officer  that  he  had  been  involved  in
      supplying drugs for several years. I accept that he had not reoffended
      since 2004 and that he  poses  a  low  risk  of  reoffending.  He  has
      observed his bail conditions over  a  long  period.  There  have  been
      periods of delay for which he has not been responsible. Indeed,  those
      representing him have pressed for his appeal to be heard and this  has
      taken longer than it should have done. I do not accept that there  has
      been unreasonable delay by  the  respondent  or  that  the  respondent
      behaved unreasonably in not pressing the Upper Tribunal  to  list  the
      appeal for hearing earlier.  Whilst  the  delay  has  meant  that  the
      appellant has had a longer period of uncertainty and has not been able
      to work it has also enabled him to commence, continue or  develop  his
      relationships with his children, partner and family and to enjoy those
      relationships.


  49. I find that there the appellant cannot bring himself within  Exception
      1 or Exception 2. Even if he had been able to do so he has  not  shown
      additional very compelling circumstances.


  50. I find that the deportation of the appellant would not be contrary  to
      the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention.
      There are no very compelling circumstances in relation to his  private
      and family life which outweigh the public interest in his deportation.


  51. I make an anonymity direction in order to protect the interests of the
      appellant's children. I make an order under rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
      publication of any matter likely to lead  members  of  the  public  to
      identify the appellant, his children, and  any  other  member  of  his
      family or anyone in a relationship with him.


  52. Previous decisions in this appeal having been set aside I  remake  the
      decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal on Article 8 human  rights
      grounds.


.............................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
       Date 10 November 2014
