
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08329/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 14 March 2016                     |on 8 July 2016                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     N D
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kirk instructed by Asylum Aid
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. On the 29 December 2014 the Court of Appeal sealed an  order  leading
       to this matter being remitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  further
       hearing. There are preserved findings set out in paragraph 59 of  the
       determination of Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt and Deputy Upper  Tribunal
       Judge M Hall in the following terms:

           "The findings of the Panel, which are preserved,  are  that  the
           Appellant would be returned to the DRC with no political profile
           as a person opposed to the regime there. He would  therefore  be
           returned as an individual who has been resident  in  the  United
           Kingdom  since  1997,  and  whose  asylum  claim  has  not  been
           believed, and who has been forced to leave the United Kingdom."

    2. The scope of this hearing has been previously defined as being (a) to
       consider evidence  not  previously  considered  in  relation  to  the
       appellant's sur place activities in the United  Kingdom  and  (b)  to
       make findings upon the risk on return to the  DRC  in  light  of  the
       decision in the case of BM and Others (returnees - criminal and  non-
       criminal) DRC CG [2015] 00293 (IAC) in  which  it  was  held  that  a
       national of the DRC who has acquired the status of  foreign  national
       offender in the United Kingdom is  not,  simply  by  virtue  of  such
       status, exposed to a real risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm  or
       treatment proscribed by Article 3  ECHR  in  the  event  of  enforced
       return to the DRC.

Background


    3. The appellant is national of the DRC born in the 1960's.  He  entered
       the United Kingdom from Calais on 1 March 1997  and  claimed  asylum.
       His application was refused on 29  November  2000  against  which  he
       appealed. Before the appeal process was completed the appellant  made
       a fresh claim for  asylum,  on  11  February  2002.  The  appeal  was
       dismissed on 8 October 2002 and the fresh claim for asylum refused on
       3 April and 29 May 2003. A  subsequent  appeal  was  dismissed  in  a
       determination dated 8 December 2003.

    4. On 13 January 2004 the appellant applied for leave to remain  outside
       the Rules which was refused on 8 March 2004 with no right of  appeal.
       A further application made on the 6 April 2006 was refused on 25  May
       2006.

    5. On 29 November 2007 the appellant was convicted of possessing a false
       identity with intent to commit fraud  and  sentenced  to  ten  months
       imprisonment and recommended for deportation.  A  number  of  further
       submissions followed which were treated as applications to revoke the
       deportation order which were refused. The  decision  dated  28  March
       2012 conferred a right of appeal which was dismissed on the 3  August
       2012 by a panel of the First-tier Tribunal.

    6. The appellant initially claimed to be  a  member  of  the  Union  for
       Democracy and Social Progress (UDPS) having joined that  organisation
       in 1980. He claimed to have led a strike of sugar workers between  12
       and 14 October 1996 in the DRC and to have been arrested as a  result
       and accused of organising an illegal strike. He claimed to have  been
       detained and ill-treated but to have been able to escape from  prison
       and travel to Kinshasa  and  from  there  to  France  from  where  he
       travelled to the United Kingdom. The appellant further  claimed  that
       his wife and children had  been  murdered  as  a  result  of  adverse
       interest in him by the authorities in the DRC.

    7. In 2007 the appellant  joined  the  Patriots  Alliance  for  the  Re-
       foundation  of  the  Congo  (APARECO)  and  claimed  he   will   face
       persecution on return to the DRC as a result  of  his  membership  of
       both UDPS and APARECO.

    8. The First-tier Panel hearing  the  appeal  in  2012  noted  that  the
       appellant had not been believed in his three  previous  appeals,  and
       that none of these decisions had been successfully challenged. Having
       considered the evidence the Panel made the preserved findings set-out
       above in relation to the lack of credibility in the claim.

    9. The appellant claims to be at risk on return in this  appeal  on  the
       basis of his continued membership of APARECO with whom he  claims  to
       have a role within the party as the person in charge of protocol  for
       the  Nottingham  branch.  The  appellant  claims  to  assist  in  the
       organisation  and  mobilisation  of  people  for  events  the   party
       organises and assisting with seating persons who attend the meetings.
       He also claims to 'vet' people attending to ensure they are members.

   10. The appellant has attended a number of meetings and events  which  he
       claims have included a sit down protest outside the  embassy  of  the
       DRC in the UK in summer 2014, a further protest at the same  site  in
       September 2015, and demonstrations listed on the APARECO website.  In
       June 2015 the appellant states he attended the national conference in
       Newcastle of which he has provided a number of copy photographs and a
       conference in London on 2 November 2015 where he assisted in  setting
       up the meeting and attendees with their seating.

   11. In his witness statement the appellant claimed the  last  meeting  he
       attended was on the 14 November 2015 at Nottingham.

   12. The appellant sums up his profile in the following terms:

           "I consider myself an activist. I expose myself at ever  meeting
           as someone who helps in organising and so I am well known within
           the party.  I  am  also  well  aware  that  when  we  have  held
           demonstrations the Embassy has come out and taken photographs of
           us.  Finally I am on the APARECO website, there is photos of  me
           attending the meetings.  It is for these reasons I believe  that
           the DRC government will know that I am an activist  against  the
           regime."

   13. The appellant seeks to rely  upon  the  evidence  of  a  witness  who
       describes himself as the new President of the organisation in the  UK
       and who claims to have known the appellant since  2013.  The  witness
       was appointed to his current post in 2015. An issue arose in relation
       to a written document  the  witness  was  consulting  when  providing
       replies to questions put in cross-examination but this  was  resolved
       without issue in the early stages of his evidence.

   14. The witness stated he had seen the  appellant  at  demonstrations  in
       London, Nottingham and Manchester.

   15. The witness was asked about the lack of any reference in his  witness
       statement to the appellant attending meetings, which contradicted his
       claim now made that he had seen the appellant  there,  to  which  the
       reply was "I am not a lawyer I just answer your questions". This  was
       the same answer given  when  a  similar  issue  arose  later  in  the
       evidence and did not satisfactorily address the questions put and  is
       considered evasive.

   16. The witness confirmed that the structure of the Nottingham branch was
       that of a President, Vice President and the members.

   17. The witness was asked about a contradiction in his evidence  when  he
       was claiming that he could not recall if the appellant was present at
       a particular event  but  also  claiming  that  he  could  recall  the
       attendance.

   18. In his oral evidence the appellant was asked what he  meant  when  he
       stated that he  mobilised  people.  His  response  was  to  claim  he
       mobilised people to join their group to fight together.

   19. The appellant was unable to recall dates he attended  demonstrations,
       claiming his inability to recollect was due  to  his  depression  but
       that every time there was a demonstration he attended. The  appellant
       claims to have joined the group in London in 2007 and transferred  to
       Nottingham in 2012. He claims to have been a member initially but  an
       active member since 2015. He relied upon this fact as an  explanation
       for the lack of evidence of his attending demonstrations  since  2010
       before the First-tier Tribunal.

   20. In relation to the Nottingham branch the appellant claimed there  are
       a number of 'executive' posts such as treasurer  and  vice  treasurer
       although not all were available. Such posts were not  advertised  but
       could be created when a person joined the branch. Appointment was  by
       nomination of the President.

   21. The appellant claimed to have started working in his role in 2015. He
       was required to attend an interview and training for the role.

   22. The appellant was asked about what was put to him as a  contradiction
       in his evidence, where he had stated he was  well  known  within  the
       party in his witness statement but in his oral evidence that  he  has
       known in passing by those in London. The appellant maintained he  was
       well known but his explanation was not convincing.

   23. The appellant accepted that the pictures on the  web  site  that  had
       been provided did not identify him or show  he  had  any  significant
       role in the party  and  that  the  pictures  were  of  the  appellant
       attending meetings not demonstrations.

The law


   24. Although there are a  number  of  adverse  credibility  findings  and
       numerous attempts by the appellant to secure a right to remain in the
       United Kingdom his claim to be at risk as a result  of  events  since
       the rejection of his previous claims  cannot  be  dismissed  on  that
       basis alone although reliance on a claim, the core of which has  been
       found not to be credible, is relevant.

   25. Paragraph 339P states:

           "A person may have a well-founded fear of being persecuted or  a
           real risk of suffering serious harm based on events  which  have
           taken place since the person  left  the  country  of  origin  or
           country of return and/or activates which have been engaged in by
           a person since he left the  country  of  origin  or  country  of
           return,  in  particular  where  it  is  established   that   the
           activities   relied   upon   constitute   the   expression   and
           continuation of convictions or orientations held in the  country
           of origin or country of return."

   26. In Danian v SSHD (2002) IMM AR 96 the Court of Appeal said that there
       is no express limitation in the Convention  in  relation  to  persons
       acting in bad faith, despite Counsel's attempt in Danian to have  one
       implied. In the court's opinion the answer to the 'riddle' lay in the
       judgement of Millet J in Mbanza (1996) Imm AR 136. Millet J said "The
       solution does not lie in propounding some broad principle of abuse of
       the system....but in bearing in mind the cardinal principle  that  it
       is for the applicant to satisfy the SSHD that he has  a  well-founded
       fear of persecution for a Convention reason.  Whether he  can  do  so
       will largely turn on credibility and an applicant who has put forward
       a fraudulent and baseless claim for asylum is unlikely to  have  much
       credibility left."  The court referred to a  letter  from  the  UNHCR
       which stated that regard  should  be  had  to  whether  the  person's
       actions had actually come to the notice of  the  authorities  in  his
       home country and how they would  view  such  actions.   It  does  not
       matter whether an appellant  has  cynically  sought  to  enhance  his
       asylum prospects by creating the very risk he then seeks to rely  on,
       although bad faith is relevant when evaluating the merits/credibility
       of the claim, as explained in Danian. However, as Bingham J also said
       in Danian - the actual fear has to be shown to be genuine and not one
       that was manufactured by conduct designed to give plausibility.

   27. In YB (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008]  EWCA  Civ  360  the  Court  of  Appeal
       sounded a note of caution in relation to the  argument  that,  if  an
       appellant was found to have  been  opportunistic  in  his  sur  place
       activities, his credibility  was  in  consequence  low.   Credibility
       about what, said the  Court  of  Appeal?   If  he  had  already  been
       believed ex hypothesi about his sur place activity, his motives might
       be disbelieved, but the consequent risk on return from  his  activity
       sur place was essentially an objective question.

   28. SS (Iran) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 310 the  Iranian  Kurdish  applicant
       had become more involved  in  Komala  since  coming  to  the  UK  and
       attended a demonstration.  He claimed that this would  have  come  to
       the attention of the Iranian authorities through a photograph  posted
       on the internet and a film of the demonstration broadcast on  Swedish
       television.  The Senior Immigration Judge did  not  accept  that  his
       activities  would  have  come  to  the  attention  of   the   Iranian
       authorities.  Although allowing the  appeal  on  other  grounds,  the
       Court of Appeal said that the Senior Judge was entitled to reach this
       particular conclusion as the claimant had failed to  prove  that  his
       presence and activities in London would be known to  the  authorities
       in Iran.  There had to be a limit as to  how  far  an  applicant  for
       asylum was entitled to rely on publicity about his activities in  the
       UK against the government of the  country  to  which  he  was  to  be
       returned.  It was not enough for the applicant  simply  to  establish
       that he was involved in activities which were relatively  limited  in
       duration and importance  without  producing  any  evidence  that  the
       authorities would be concerned about them or even that they  were  or
       would be aware of them.

   29. In EM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD (2009) EWCA Civ 1294 the Court of Appeal held
       that, when an asylum  seeker  claims  that  her  activities  in  this
       country will have  brought  her  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
       authorities in her own country, the judge will have to gauge,  having
       regard to all the relevant material,  whether  those  activities  are
       likely to have been monitored and, if so, whether they will  actually
       get her into trouble.   ....In most cases  the  issue  of  disclosure
       would be a matter of inference and degree.  There  would  rarely,  if
       ever, be case specific evidence that the Appellant's activities  were
       known to the CIO and it would therefore normally  be  unrealistic  to
       divorce the issue of whether those activities had become known to the
       regime from the question of whether they would be of real concern  to
       it.  The more significant the political activity, the more likely  it
       was that it would become apparent.  The Court of  Appeal  upheld  the
       Immigration Judge's decision dismissing the appeal  of  an  applicant
       who joined the Wolverhampton branch of the MDC and attended the vigil
       outside the Zimbabwean embassy.

   30. In BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT
       36 (IAC) the Tribunal held that, given the large numbers of those who
        demonstrate here and the publicity which demonstrators receive,  for
       example on Facebook, combined  with  the  inability  of  the  Iranian
       Government to  monitor  all  returnees  who  have  been  involved  in
       demonstrations here, regard must be had to the level  of  involvement
       of the individual here as well as any political  activity  which  the
       individual might have been involved in Iran before seeking asylum  in
       Britain.  It  is  important  to  consider  the  level  of   political
       involvement before considering the    likelihood  of  the  individual
       coming to the attention of the authorities and the priority that  the
       Iranian  regime  would  give  to  tracing  him.  It  is  only   after
       considering those factors that the issue of whether or not there is a
       real risk of his facing persecution on return can  be  assessed.  The
       following are relevant factors to be considered when  assessing  risk
       on return having regard to sur place activities  (a)  Nature  of  sur
       place activity. Theme of demonstrations - what do  the  demonstrators
       want (e.g. reform of the regime through to  its  violent  overthrow);
       how will they be characterised by the regime? Role in  demonstrations
       and political profile - can the person  be  described  as  a  leader;
       mobiliser (e.g. addressing the crowd), organiser  (e.g.  leading  the
       chanting); or simply a member of the  crowd;  if  the  latter  is  he
       active or passive (e.g. does he carry a banner); what is his  motive,
       and is this relevant to the profile he will have in the eyes  of  the
       regime.  Extent of participation - has the person attended one or two
       demonstrations or is he a regular participant? Publicity attracted  -
       has a demonstration attracted media coverage in the United Kingdom or
       the home country;  nature  of  that  publicity  (quality  of  images;
       outlets  where  stories  appear  etc)?   (b)   Identification   risk.
       Surveillance of demonstrators - assuming the regime aims to  identify
       demonstrators against it how does it do so,  through,  filming  them,
       having agents who mingle in the crowd, reviewing images/recordings of
       demonstrations etc? Regime's capacity to identify individuals -  does
       the regime have advanced technology (e.g.  for  facial  recognition);
       does it allocate human resources to fit names to faces in the  crowd?
       (c) Factors triggering inquiry/action on return.  Profile  -  is  the
       person known as a committed opponent or someone  with  a  significant
       political profile; does he fall within a category  which  the  regime
       regards as especially objectionable? Immigration history  -  how  did
       the person leave the country (illegally; type of visa); where has the
       person been when abroad; is the timing  and  method  of  return  more
       likely to lead to inquiry and/or being detained for more than a short
       period and ill-treated (overstayer; forced return)? (d)  Consequences
       of identification. Is  there  differentiation  between  demonstrators
       depending on the level of their  political  profile  adverse  to  the
       regime? (e) Identification risk on return. Matching identification to
       person - if a person is identified is that information systematically
       stored and used; are border posts geared to the task?

Discussion


   31. The previous determinations are relevant as a starting point  as  per
       the Devaseelan principles. In  Devaseelan  (2002)  UKIAT  00702,  the
       Tribunal was concerned with a human rights appeal which  followed  an
       asylum appeal on the same issues.  The Tribunal said  that,  in  such
       circumstances,  the  first  Tribunal's  determination  stands  as  an
       assessment of the claim the Appellant was making at the time of  that
       first determination.  It is not binding on the second  Tribunal  but,
       there again, the second Tribunal is not hearing an appeal against it.
        The Tribunal set out various  principles:  the  first   decision  is
       always the starting point; facts since then can always be considered;
       facts before then but not relevant to the first decision  can  always
       be considered; the second Tribunal should treat  with  circumspection
       relevant facts that had not been  brought  to  the  first  Tribunal's
       attention; if issues and evidence on the first and second appeals are
       materially the same, the second Tribunal should treat the  issues  as
       settled by the first decision rather than allowing the matter  to  be
       re-litigated.  The Tribunal also gave a caveat and  said  that  there
       will be occasional cases  where  the  circumstances  surrounding  the
       first appeal were such that it would be right for the second Tribunal
       to look at the matter as if the first determination  had  never  been
       made.

   32. In the determination of the First-tier panel, dated 15  August  2012,
       the following findings were made:

           "18.   The letter [dated 22 July 2008 purportedly written  by  a
                senior representative of the UDPS] makes no reference to the
                appellant having led a 2 day strike in 1996. The letter does
                not state when the appellant is supposed to have  begun  his
                UK-based  UDPS  activities.   If  the  appellant  had   been
                actively involved with the London branch of the UDPS we find
                he would have mentioned  it  when  he  appeared  before  the
                Adjudicator Mr F E P Meadows on14 November 2003. If  he  was
                not yet a  member  in  2003  we  find  that  he  would  have
                mentioned his activates to the panel in April 2008, as  part
                of his asylum claim and/or as part of  his  claim  to  enjoy
                private life in the UK. It is clear from  the  determination
                of the panel that he did not make any mention at all of  any
                UK based political activities.  We note  that  the  Tribunal
                found no merit in the  appeal  before  them.   We  place  no
                weight on this letter.

           19.     The  appellant  also  sought  to  rely  upon  a   letter
                purportedly written by the president of APARECO UK which  is
                dated 16 November 2010 and which stated that he has attended
                all the events and meetings  organised  by  their  political
                organisations since his enrolment  on  2  March  2007  as  a
                member and that we was involved in the  mobilisation  within
                the Congolese community in the UK. The writer concluded that
                the leader of their organisations who lives  in  France  has
                faced attempts on his  life  and  that  their  meetings  and
                activities are monitored by spies of which the Kabila regime
                has many in London.  As a result members are at serious risk
                if they are  returned.  The  appellant  also  submitted  his
                membership card.

           20.    We find that the appellant failed to inform the panel  in
                April 2008 about his membership of APARECO  UK  even  though
                the significance of his membership of this organisation must
                have  been  clear  to  both  him  and  those  advising   and
                representing  him.  We  note  that  there  are   photographs
                depicting him at demonstrations.  He us looking directly  at
                the person taking he photograph.  If he was an active member
                we find he would have given full  details  in  his  evidence
                before the panel and again  as  part  of  his  asylum  claim
                and/or as part of his claim to enjoy private life in the UK.
                 Even if the Kabila regime has planted spies in  London  who
                attend demonstrations we  find  that  the  participation  of
                someone who has no political profile in the  DRC,  who  left
                the country in March 1997, and who has done nothing more  on
                the basis of the evidence before us than to join a party  in
                the hope of creating a political profile  for  himself,  the
                attend the occasional meetings, and to attend demonstrations
                where he poses with a placard for his photograph to be taken
                and placed in his bundle will not  ignite  interest  in  him
                where none existed before."

   33. This finding is to the effect that the appellant  may  have  involved
       himself in activities with the groups he claims, not as a result of a
       genuinely held political belief but as a  result  of  an  attempt  to
       secure status in the United Kingdom.

   34. Following guidance provided in BA (Iran) the following  matters  must
       be considered:

       Nature of sur place activity: - it is not disputed the appellant  has
       attended meetings. He claims to  have  attended  demonstrations.  The
       photographs provided show him in attendance at the former. The  theme
       of the meetings, it is  presumed,  is  to  discuss  the  business  of
       APARECO UK which is a political opposition organisation. In  relation
       to the role played by the appellant he claims to have a  position  of
       responsibility and profile that puts him at risk, as a result, but  I
       find this not to be  made  out.  The  evidence  in  relation  to  the
       appellant's role was not convincing as noted above.  The  appellant's
       claims to have been a member of the party and to only have assumed an
       active role from 2015, after the dismissal of his previous claim  for
       asylum suggests the real motive for the same is an attempt to enhance
       what was found to be a weak claim. Even if the appellant does  assist
       in seating on the day and checking that those attending  are  members
       this has not been shown to be the role of a  person  with  a  profile
       that creates a real risk on return, per se. I do not  find  that  the
       appellant has established to the lower standard  applicable  that  he
       has a significant and visible profile within APARECO (UK).  There  is
       insufficient evidence to  support  a  finding  that  the  appellant's
       conduct and activities at meetings and/or demonstrations are those of
       a person who is, or will be perceived  as,  a  leader,  mobiliser  or
       organiser. The appellant has established he is an attendee who  helps
       out at a low level and no more.

       In  relation  to  the  identification   risk,   -   Surveillance   of
       demonstrators - assuming the regime aims  to  identify  demonstrators
       against it how does it do so, through, filming  them,  having  agents
       who   mingle   in   the   crowd,   reviewing   images/recordings   of
       demonstrations etc? Regime's capacity to identify individuals -  does
       the regime have advanced technology (e.g.  for  facial  recognition);
       does it allocate human resources to fit names to faces in the crowd?

       It was not disputed before the Tribunal that the staff at the Embassy
       of the DRC in the UK photograph those demonstrating outside it and it
       is suggested by the appellant that agents of the regime  mingle  with
       the crowds and attend meetings and demonstrations to spy  on  members
       of opposition groups. If this is so it has not been shown that in the
       DRC  itself  there  is  a  sophisticated  facial  recognition  system
       available that  will  allow  those  photographed  in  the  UK  to  be
       identified on return, automated or manual. Even if this was the case,
       mere attendance at an event is not  sufficient.   In  BM  and  Others
       (returnees - criminal and non-criminal)  DRC  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00293
       (IAC) it was held that a national of the DRC  who has  a  significant
       and visible profile within APARECO (UK) is, in the event of returning
       to his  country  of  origin,  at  real  risk  of  persecution  for  a
       Convention reason or serious harm or treatment proscribed by  Article
       3 ECHR by virtue  of  falling  within  one  of  the  risk  categories
       identified by the Upper Tribunal  in  MM  (UDPS  Members  -  Risk  on
       Return) Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2007]  UKAIT  00023.   Those
       belonging to this category include persons who are, or are  perceived
       to be, leaders, office bearers or spokespersons.  As a general  rule,
       mere rank and file members are unlikely to fall within this category.
       However, each case will be fact sensitive, with particular  attention
       directed to the likely knowledge and perceptions of DRC state agents.



       The appellant has not  established  that  he  fits  within  the  risk
       profile above and so even if he has been seen at meetings it will not
       have been as a person with a significant profile. The appellant is  a
       rank and file member who states he has additional responsibilities of
       seating attendees and checking membership, not of leadership or as an
       office holder or spokesperson of sufficient  influence  of  perceived
       importance to create a real risk.

       In relation to the meetings and demonstrations the  appellant  claims
       to have attended, I find he has not established a credible  claim  to
       have undertaken a role or projected a profile that may  be  perceived
       by the authorities in the DRC as an organiser even if what he  claims
       is true. I accept the photographic evidence shows the appellant as  a
       member of the crowd at a meeting in Newcastle. It has not  been  made
       out that  the  appellant  will  be  perceived  as  an  activist.  The
       appellant has not made out that this motive is credible or  that  his
       activities represent genuinely held political beliefs. I  find,  even
       when applying the lower standard of proof, that they  are  a  further
       attempt to secure a right  to  remain  in  the  UK.  The  appellant's
       participation in events is limited as demonstrated by the  chronology
       above.

       Factors triggering inquiry/action on return. As stated above I do not
       find the appellant has established a credible profile that will place
       him at risk on return. The appellant has not established that  he  is
       known as a committed opponent or someone with a  significant  adverse
       political profile. The appellant has not established  that  he  falls
       within  a  category  which   the   regime   regards   as   especially
       objectionable.

       Immigration history - The appellant has been in the UK for  a  number
       of years. If not removed by the anniversary of his entry to the UK in
       2017 he may have the required 20 years in the UK  to  enable  him  to
       succeed under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

       The lack of credibility in the appellant's earlier  claims  is  noted
       above. The appellant has not established that his method  of  leaving
       the country, place of residence in the UK, or timing  and  method  of
       return is more likely to lead to inquiry and/or  being  detained  for
       more than a short period and his being ill-treated.

       Consequences of identification. The appellant has failed to make  out
       that a person with  his  profile  will  face  a  real  risk  even  if
       identified on return. See BM above.

   35. In relation to APARECO the Tribunal in BM found:

       "87.   We address the discrete question of  risk  to  those  who  are
           considered to be opponents of the Kabila  regime  by  reason  of
           their sur place activities in the United Kingdom.  In addressing
           and determining this question, we make  the  following  specific
           findings:

           (i)    APARECO is a cohesive, structured organisation which  has
                its main base in France and strong basis  in  certain  other
                European countries, including the United Kingdom.   It  also
                operates in Canada and the United States.

           (ii)   APARECO is implacably opposed to the regime of  President
                Kabila which has governed DRC during the past  decade.   Its
                overarching aims are the defeat of this regime and  the  re-
                establishment of the state on a different basis.

           (iii)  APARECO has no overt presence in DRC, where  it  operates
                underground.

           (iv)   The external  opposition  of  APARECO  to  the  governing
                regime of DRC is overt  and  visible.  Its  highest  profile
                activities unfold  in  public  places,  accessible  to  all.
                Activities  of  this  nature  are  accompanied  by   advance
                publicity.

           (v)    In common with many  comparable  regimes  throughout  the
                world, both present and  past,  the  DRC  Government  has  a
                strong  interest  in  opposition  organisations,   including
                APARECO.  Such  organisations  are  monitored  and  data  is
                recorded.  This includes information about the identities of
                the most prominent members of such organisations, that is to
                say their leaders, office holders and spokespersons.

            vi) The monitoring of APARECO (UK) is likely to be undertaken by
                and on behalf of the DRC Embassy in  London.   This  is  the
                agency with the most obvious motivation to carry out and co-
                ordinate  such  scrutiny.    Such  scrutiny  is  likely   to
                generate  periodic  reports  to  the  DRC   Government,   in
                particular its ANR and DGM agencies.

           (vii)  It  is  likely  that  the  leaders,  office  bearers  and
                spokespersons of APARECO  (UK)  are  known  to  the  DRC  UK
                Embassy and the DRC Government, in particular ANR and DGM.

   36. In relation to risk on return as a failed asylum seeker, it  has  not
       been found that a failed asylum seeker per se it at  risk  on  return
       for that reason alone. In BM it was held that a national of  the  DRC
       whose attempts to acquire refugee status in the  United  Kingdom  and
       who has been unsuccessful is not, without more,  exposed  to  a  real
       risk of persecution or serious harm or proscribed treatment  contrary
       to Article 3 ECHR in the event of enforced return to DRC.

   37. The appellant has failed to discharge the burden of proof upon him to
       the required standard in relation to Ground 1 to show a credible real
       risk on return, actual or imputed.

   38. In relation to Ground 2, no real risk is made out. The appellant is a
       failed asylum seeker who is also a foreign criminal. The  finding  in
       BM is that a national of the DRC  who  has  acquired  the  status  of
       foreign national offender in the United Kingdom  is  not,  simply  by
       virtue of such status, exposed to  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
       serious harm or treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR in  the  event
       of enforced return to the DRC. The appellant has  not  established  a
       fact sensitive element  to  his  case  that  warrants  this  Tribunal
       departing from this finding of no real risk.

   39. Having conducted a careful fact specific analysis  of  the  evidence,
       including that produced and relied upon by the appellant, I  find  he
       has failed to prove his case. I dismiss the appeal.

Decision

   40. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   41. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7 July 2016
