
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/08104/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 27 May 2016                      |On: 7 June 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                          SAGAR CHANDRAKANT PANCHAL
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  Mr A Maqsood, counsel
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated  on  9  October
         2015, of First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan  (hereinafter  referred
         to as the judge).

Background

      2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom with leave to enter  as  a
         student on 1 October 2009, valid  until  21  September  2011.  That
         leave was extended in the same capacity  until  18  November  2014,
         when the appellant applied for further leave to remain outside  the
         Immigration Rules on the basis that  he  had  been  diagnosed  with
         Bell's palsy as well as an ear problem, which  prevented  him  from
         studying. The appellant wished to remain in the United  Kingdom  in
         order to continue studying once he had received  medical  treatment
         and his medical condition improved.

      3. On 16 February 2015, a decision was made to remove the appellant. A
         refusal letter of the same date stated that the appellant's medical
         condition   was   not   considered   to   amount   to   exceptional
         circumstances.

      4. At the hearing before the judge, the appellant did not  attend  and
         nor was he represented.  The appeal proceeded by way of submissions
         on behalf of  the  respondent  alone.  The  judge  found  that  the
         appellant's medical condition  did  not  meet  the  high  threshold
         required in relation to Article 3 ECHR. Furthermore, he found  that
         the appellant could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE
         of the Rules and that the appellant's time in  the  United  Kingdom
         had been precarious.

      5. In the grounds seeking permission, the appellant  argued  that  the
         judge had stated that he heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant
         when this was not the case. The appellant added that  he  had  been
         unable to contact the tribunal or a lawyer about his appeal because
         he was unwell and receiving medical treatment in  hospital  at  the
         time of the hearing. He submitted that the appeal should have  been
         adjourned in any event because of the indication in the papers that
         he had ongoing health concerns.

      6. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  PJM  Hollingworth  granted  permission,
         finding that it was arguable  that  an  error  of  law  had  arisen
         regarding the scope of evidence considered by the judge. Permission
         was not expressly refused on the other grounds.

      7. The respondent's Rule 24 response opposed  the  appeal  and  stated
         that the judge properly directed  himself.  The  respondent  argued
         that it was clear that the appellant did not attend the hearing and
         nor had he requested an adjournment. It was said that  the  judge's
         reference to oral evidence was a "slip of the pen." It was  further
         submitted that the erroneous reference to oral evidence  could  not
         make the decision untenable. The appellant  was  said  to  have  no
         prospect of success as a former Tier 4 migrant who wished to remain
         in the United Kingdom for medical treatment, outside the Rules.  It
         was open to the judge to dismiss the appeal.

The hearing

      8. At the hearing before me, Mr Maqsood confirmed he  was  relying  on
         the two issues raised in the grounds, that of whether oral evidence
         was considered and secondly, that the appeal  ought  to  have  been
         adjourned.

      9.  At  this  juncture,  I  advised  the  parties  that  the   judge's
         handwritten note of the hearing indicated that he proceeded in  the
         absence of the appellant and heard submissions  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent.

     10. Mr Maqsood conceded that it was difficult to see how the error  the
         judge made in referring to oral evidence could  have  affected  his
         decision.  Nonetheless,  he  argued  that  the  judge  should  have
         adjourned the appeal of his  own  volition  on  the  basis  of  the
         information  sent  with  an  adjournment  application  made  on  23
         September 2015. His  reasoning  was  that  the  judge  should  have
         realised that the appellant may not have been able  to  attend  the
         hearing for the same reasons set out in the application. He invited
         me to afford the appellant an opportunity to be heard. In terms  of
         materiality, it  may  have  been  that  the  judge's  private  life
         findings would have been different had the appellant been  able  to
         attend.

     11. In reply, Mr Walker reiterated that the first  ground  concerned  a
         slip of the pen.  The  appellant's  adjournment  request  had  been
         refused and he was served with notice of  the  hearing.  He  argued
         that had  the  appellant  been  present,  it  would  have  made  no
         difference as the judge made clear findings as to his circumstances
         and private life.

     12. Mr Maqsood argued, in  response,  that  the  appellant  would  have
         provided evidence about what he had accomplished with his  studies,
         had he attended the hearing. He would have expanded on the  grounds
         set out in his application for further leave to remain as to why he
         could not return to India.

Decision on error of law

     13. The judge  recognised  at  the  outset,  as  stated  on  page  one,
         paragraph  2  of  his  decision  that  the  appellant  was  not  in
         attendance and was not legally represented. His note of the hearing
         reinforces that point. Indeed, the appellant agrees that he was not
         present. Yet, at [10] of the decision, the judge erroneously states
         that the appellant's case was set out in his application form,  the
         documentary evidence and "his oral evidence." Given  the  foregoing
         points, it is obvious that the judge made  a  typographical  error,
         most likely having inserted a standard paragraph at  this  part  of
         the decision. I do not find that this mistake amounts to a material
         error of law, given that the  judge  considered  all  the  evidence
         which was before him and this did not include the appellant's  oral
         evidence.

     14. The second ground relates to the alleged failure by  the  judge  to
         adjourn the  appeal  absent  an  application  to  do  so.  Such  an
         application was made two days before the hearing. The  application,
         drafted by legal representatives, stated  that  the  appellant  was
         unable to attend their office or the tribunal owing to "a condition
         of his eyes." An  accompanying  letter  from  a  doctor's  practice
         stated that the appellant "doesn't feel he will be able  to  travel
         (to the hearing) due to his poor vision and would like a new date."
         The writer states that the appellant was advised to seek assistance
         at an eye hospital. That application was refused because, "The GP's
         note does not say that in his  medical  opinion  the  appellant  is
         unfit for the hearing - it merely says the appellant feels he  will
         be unable to travel. This is not a medical opinion."

     15. No additional medical evidence was before  the  judge  which  might
         support the appellant's claim to be unfit to attend the hearing and
         nor was a further application  made  for  an  adjournment.  Despite
         being legally represented  by  Maxim  Law  since  March  2015,  the
         appellant failed to provide any documentary evidence in support  of
         his appeal. The judge therefore considered the matter on the  basis
         of evidence contained in the appellant's  application  for  further
         leave to remain. That evidence included details of the  appellant's
         eye condition, for which he wished to receive medical treatment  in
         the United Kingdom. The  judge  fully  considered  the  appellant's
         health conditions as well as his studies at [11,12, 22-25]  of  the
         decision and concluded that there were no compelling  circumstances
         to justify a grant of leave to remain outside the  Rules;  that  he
         could not meet the requirements of the Rules and that  his  removal
         was a proportionate response. The presence of the appellant at  the
         hearing would have made no difference  to  these  findings  as  the
         facts were before the judge in the papers before him.

     16. No anonymity direction was made by the  judge  and  I  can  see  no
         reason for making one now.

Conclusions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.

I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:  Date: 5 June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
