

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/08465/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House without a hearing   |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 November 2013                            |On 11 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                               MUHAMMAD SHAHID
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ferguson  promulgated  on  26  August  2013
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on  1
    March 2013 to refuse to vary his leave to remain and  to  make  removal
    directions pursuant to  section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006. I granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 16 October 2013 on limited grounds:-

      The renewed grounds of appeal, which incorporate the initial  grounds,
      are without merit. It is accepted that the  appellant  does  not  come
      with the provisions of the immigration rules and it  is  not  arguable
      that the First-tier Tribunal erred with respect  to  the  decision  in
      Hayat [2011] UKUT 444, given that decision was reversed by  the  Court
      of Appeal.


      It is not properly arguable that the judge erred  in  concluding  that
      the requirements of the immigration rules were  not  met,  nor  is  it
      arguable, given the decision in MF (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1191,
      approving the decision of Sales J in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720,  that  the
      judge erred in his approach  to  article  8;  the  references  to  the
      appellant's  potential  earnings  and  actual  earnings  [5]  are  not
      arguably relevant.


      It is, however, arguable that the Judge erred in  failing  to  address
      the appeal against the  decision  of  the  respondent  to  remove  the
      appellant by way of directions under section 47  of  the  immigration,
      Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 and I grant permission on that limited
      ground.


      It is my provisional view, in the light of the  decision  in  Adamally
      and Jaferi [2012] UKUT 00414, that  the  determination  of  the  Judge
      Ferguson did involve the making of an  error  of  law  in  failing  to
      address the appeal against the section 47 decision. It is also my view
      that accordingly, the appeal should be allowed to the extent that that
      part of the determination is set aside and remade, allowing the appeal
      against the section 47 decision on  the  basis  that  it  was  not  in
      accordance with the law.


      It is proposed to take such a course of  action  without  any  further
      hearing unless the Upper Tribunal receives by 4pm on 1  November  2013
      detailed and cogent written submissions to the contrary.


 2. There has been no response from the appellant and  the  respondent  has
    consented to the proposed course of action. In the circumstances, I  am
    satisfied that, for the reasons set out above, that  the  determination
    of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law in
    that the judge failed to address the section 47 decision, and that part
    of his determination requires to be remade.  I  therefore  remake  that
    part of his decision,  allowing  the  appeal  against  the  section  47
    decision on the basis that it was not in accordance with the law.

Summary of conclusions

     1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
        an error of law that part of the decision relating to  the  section
        47 removal decision and I set that part aside.

     2. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal against the section 47
        removal on the basis that it was not in accordance with the law.

     3. I uphold the remainder of the decision.


Signed                       Date:  5 November 2013


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
