

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal
Numbers: IA/08269/2015

                                                      IA/08279/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 12 January 2016                     |          On 22 February 2016        |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      DHARMATHILAKA NAYANANDA SIRESENA
                         VISHVAMITTHA MUTHUKUMARANA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr R Soloman, Counsel instructed by Shanthi & Co
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The  Appellant  in  this  case  is  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    Respondents were the Appellants before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In
    this decision I shall be referring to the Appellant in this  appeal  as
    the Secretary of State and to the Respondents as the Claimants.

2.   The Claimants applied for indefinite leave to remain as they wished  to
    live with their daughter so that she could look after them due to their
    ill-health.  They arrived in the United Kingdom as visitors  on  2  May
    2014 with entry clearance valid until 2 November 2014.  An  application
    for  further  leave  to  remain  was  made  on  13  October   2014   on
    compassionate grounds due to ill-health.  The application  was  refused
    by the Secretary of State in a decision dated 12 February 2015  on  the
    basis they did not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  for
    family life under Appendix  FM  and  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances requiring consideration of their case under Article 8  of
    the European Court of Human  Rights  outside  the  Rules  (ECHR).   The
    Claimants appealed against that decision and their appeal  was  allowed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heatherington in a decision promulgated on
    20 July 2015.  He allowed their appeal outside  the  Immigration  Rules
    under Article 8 ECHR.

3.   The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes  on  2
    November 2015 on the basis that the Judge's whole approach to Article 8
    was arguably flawed.  He arguably failed to take as  a  starting  point
    that the Claimants did not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules for a variation of their leave and there was a serious evidential
    issue over whether they would meet the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules for a grant of entry clearance as adult dependent relatives since
    their case before him would appear to conflict with the evidence relied
    on in their applications as visitors.  Further, the family life  relied
    upon could only have been of short duration since in its  current  form
    it could only have been created since the arrival of the  Claimants  as
    short-term  visitors  and  arguably  that  this  had  been  overlooked.
    Moreover the ability of the extended  family  to  care  for  the  first
    Claimant in Sri Lanka was arguably flawed as was the  approach  to  the
    availability of medical care in Sri Lanka.  Moreover  paragraph  42  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision demonstrated a failure to adequately
    engage with Section 117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) and the guidance to be found in AM  (Malawi)  v
    SSHD [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC).  Overall he concluded it was arguable that
    the decision displayed a freewheeling  approach  to  Article  8  and  a
    failure to adequately apply existing jurisprudence.  He concluded  that
    all grounds could be argued.

4.   The Secretary of State drafted grounds as follows.   The  first  ground
    is that the First-tier Tribunal failed to give any consideration to the
    public interest.

5.   The second ground  was  that  his  consideration  of  Section  117  was
    incomplete and inadequate.

6.   The third ground was a finding that there was a protected  family  life
    between the Claimants and sponsor prior to the entry of  the  Claimants
    as visitors in 2014 was unreasoned and  unsustainable  given  that  any
    protected family life was  voluntarily  surrendered  when  the  sponsor
    relocated to the United Kingdom.

7.   Ground 4 asserts that  his  finding  that  the  difference  in  medical
    treatment between the United Kingdom and Sri Lanka  engaged  Article  8
    was legally unsound.  Inadequacy of medical treatment was incapable  of
    engaging Article 8 and the case of GS (India) & Others v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40 is relied on.

8.   Ground 5 is that the finding that the Claimants  met  the  requirements
    of  the  Rules  for  an  out-of-country  application  was  inadequately
    reasoned.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  would  have  had  to  have  been
    satisfied that there was no access to the required care in the  country
    of origin even with the practical and financial help of the sponsor  in
    the United Kingdom and he had not properly reasoned or applied his mind
    in  relation  to  this.   Likewise  his  findings   that   there   were
    unacceptable risks in returning to Sri Lanka to make an application had
    failed to take into account any assistance, practical or financial from
    the sponsor.

9.   The Claimants filed a Rule 24 response in which  it  is  asserted  that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  err  in  the  decision,  considered
    adequately the public interest in the Article 8 assessment and directed
    itself properly in law.  It  is  also  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal considered and directed itself  in  relation  to  Section  117
    appropriately at paragraph 42 of the decision and found on the evidence
    that the family life between the Claimants and sponsor pre-existed  the
    Claimants' arrival in the UK.  Further, the finding  that  the  support
    and treatment was available to the  Claimants  in  the  United  Kingdom
    compared to what was available in  Sri  Lanka  was  serious  enough  to
    engage Article 8 was made after consideration of evidence  relating  to
    support and assistance from the sponsor in the United Kingdom  and  was
    not limited to an assessment of the medical care in Sri Lanka  and  the
    United Kingdom.  It is submitted that evidence had  been  submitted  in
    relation to the Claimants'  ability  to  satisfy  the  requirements  in
    relation to adult dependent relatives and none of this  was  challenged
    by the Secretary of State and the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  positive
    credibility findings on all of the written and oral evidence.   It  was
    implicit that all of the requirements of E-ECDR save  for  the  out-of-
    country requirement were met.  In summary it submitted that the  First-
    tier Tribunal conducted a  thorough  and  reasoned  assessment  of  the
    appeal, considered the challenges of the Secretary of State who was not
    represented at the hearing, and also directed itself properly.

The Hearing

10.  At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal I heard  representations  from
    Mr Kotas in the  following  terms.   He  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that he challenged  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
    application would succeed under the Rules.  In his approach  to  family
    life and in finding that there were more  than  normal  emotional  ties
    there had been a conflation of two tests.  He had not made a finding in
    relation to the adult dependent relative Rules that there was no person
    who could have provided care.  There was a list of  family  members  in
    the United Kingdom and there had been no consideration  as  to  whether
    there would be private support available to the Claimants in Sri Lanka.
     Whilst there had been no recourse to public funds that had to  be  fed
    into the question of whether  private  support  was  available  in  Sri
    Lanka.

11.  The first point in his consideration of Article 8 was  that  there  was
    no express consideration of the public interest in immigration  control
    and he had not grappled with the fact that they arrived on visit  visas
    in relation to Section 117 of  the  2002  Act.   There  were  no  minor
    children in this case and family life here was established whilst their
    stay was precarious.  There was no "Nagre"  exceptionality  identified.
    The First-tier Tribunal also made  a  comparison  with  regard  to  the
    disparity in medical treatment between the United Kingdom and Sri Lanka
    and Mr Kotas referred me to the case of Akhalu v  SSHD  (health  claim:
    ECHR Article 8) [2013] UKUT 400 (IAC), paragraph 40 which was  endorsed
    in the case of GS where it was said that where an Article 8 health case
    may succeed it was only in  cases  where  there  was  another  relevant
    factor, for example firm family ties  where  there  was  dependence  on
    family life coupled with medical evidence.  The  family  arrived  on  a
    visit visa and family life was in fact established  in  the  UK  rather
    than prior to their arrival.

12.  Mr Solomon relied on the Rule 24  response.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    had given full consideration to the public interest.  In  paragraph  34
    he referred to Section 117 and he set out in an annex to  the  decision
    the relevant requirements of that Section.   In  paragraph  38  of  the
    decision  again  he  addressed  the  public  interest  and   adequately
    addressed at paragraph 42 and at page  7  the  financial  requirements.
    Whilst there was no reference to English language it was  not  material
    as it did not apply to those over 65.   The  Claimants  were  not  here
    unlawfully and the lack of reference was not material  because  Section
    117B(4) applied to private rather than family life and the  appeal  was
    allowed on the basis of family life.  The considerations in relation to
    precariousness applied only to private life and therefore  the  absence
    of findings was not material.

13.  With regard to the Secretary of State's ground 3 the finding on  family
    life was well-reasoned and sustainable and the judge correctly directed
    himself on the law and continued into paragraph 41 and on page 7 of the
    decision to conclude that it was  a  close-knit  family  and  that  the
    Claimants depended upon the UK sponsors.  The Claimants'  daughter  was
    their main carer and the First-tier Tribunal had  found  that  she  had
    made a contribution to their improvement in terms of health.  The First-
    tier Tribunal concluded that the relationship between the Claimants and
    their daughter was more akin to that of  child  and  parent  and  those
    findings were sustainable as well as the findings in  relation  to  the
    disease and the physical and emotional care that was provided.  He  had
    made  findings  in  relation  to  pre-existing  family  life  and  that
    financial support was provided since arrival to the United Kingdom  and
    there was regular Skype contact whilst the Claimants were in Sri  Lanka
    and therefore a pre-existing family life.  What was important  to  note
    was the decline in the medical condition of  the  first  Claimant.   Mr
    Solomon invited me to agree that there was no error with regard to  the
    finding in terms of the pre-existence of family life.

14.  In relation to GS (India) it was wrong to say that  that  case  decided
    that inadequacy of medical treatment could never engage Article  8.   I
    was referred to paragraphs 86 and 87 of that decision  and  Mr  Solomon
    submitted what we had not had in the instant case were  clear  findings
    in terms of family life.  The Judge was not wrong to  take  account  of
    that and he did so holistically.  The Judge clearly had  very  much  in
    mind the adult dependent relative provisions of  the  Rules  and  there
    were two limbs in those provisions namely the requirement of  long-term
    personal care and the requirement that care was not affordable but that
    was a matter that could be put aside.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  gave
    adequate reasons as to why care was not available at  paragraph  42  of
    the decision and as to the fact the  first  Claimant  rebelled  against
    medical care and could only be managed by his daughter  and  would  not
    engage with strangers. That adequately  dealt  with  the  potential  of
    domestic workers being available for support.

15.  He also dealt with the availability of care in  Colombo  and  the  fact
    that there were no other family members available  to  look  after  the
    Claimants and therefore adequately reasoned why he concluded apart from
    the requirements of entry clearance that the adult  dependent  relative
    provisions could be met.  He had Chikwamba v SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  40  in
    mind and applied the proposition  correctly.   There  was  no  material
    error of law.

16.  In reply Mr Kotas said  that  at  paragraph  43  of  the  decision  the
    findings may have been predominantly in relation  to  family  life  but
    there was also private life and therefore those sections of Section 117
    were engaged.

17.  I  raised  the  issue  of  the  Judge's  failure  to  engage  with  the
    provisions of Appendix FM-SE.  Mr Solomon submitted that the  situation
    was different with regard  to  partners  where  explicit  evidence  was
    required under that Appendix.  With regard to adult dependent relatives
    there was no challenge in the grounds in relation to that Appendix  and
    clear findings were made by the judge.  This part of the Rules was met.



18.  With regard to the "through the lens argument" the Judge  took  account
    of why the claim did not succeed under the Rules and earlier on in  his
    determination set out the reasons for the decision.   He  honed  in  on
    paragraph 23 and reached his findings in the context of the Rules.  The
    assessment through the lens  of  the  Rules  was  more  appropriate  in
    relation to cases where the Rules were a complete code.   He  submitted
    that even if there was an error in terms of  private  life  there  were
    clear findings regarding family life and this was a family  life  case.
    Both representatives agreed that if I were to  find  an  error  of  law
    depending on whether there were findings preserved, the  matter  should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal if the hearing  were  to  be  de
    novo. If there were limited  findings  of  fact  required  the  hearing
    should be in the Upper Tribunal.

Discussion and Findings

19.  I consider that the Respondent's first ground, namely that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal failed to give any consideration to the public  interest,
    is not made out. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  directed  himself  at
    paragraph 37 that he was required to have regard to the requirements of
    section 117 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He also stated  at
    in the same paragraph:

     If applicants do not qualify under the Rules or outside the Rules on a
   genuinely exceptional basis they will not receive any form of leave  and
   be expected to leave the UK.


20.  He directed himself at paragraph 38 that:

     The failure to qualify for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules
    tends to suggest that the public interest requires refusal of leave  to
    vary, unless some counterveiling factors  are  present  which  are  not
    already taken into account under the Rules.


21.  That statement of the public interest was taken directly from the  case
    of Sunasse, R (on the application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and
    Asylum Chamber) & Anor, [2015] EWHC 1604.  It is clear that the  First-
    tier Tribunal appreciated that the public interest was expressed in the
    Immigration Rules as he quotes the  relevant  passage  from  the  above
    Judgment at paragraph 38 of the decision.

22.   However,  although  appreciating  the  weight  to  be  given  to   the
    Immigration Rules as an expression of the public interest, he failed to
    adequately reason his  finding  that  the  Claimants  met  all  of  the
    requirements for an out  of  country  application  as  adult  dependant
    relatives at paragraph 42 (vii) of the decision. He finds at  paragraph
    42 (vii) that the second Claimant would be  unable  to  cope  with  the
    first Claimant on the flights and generally with  his  care;  that  the
    first Claimant had rebelled against seeking medical help in Sri  Lanka,
    that the only available support in Sri  Lanka  for  Alzheimer's  is  in
    Colombo which is a round trip of 190 miles and that in  Sri  Lanka  the
    Claimants have no family member able to assist them.  Although  he  has
    made factual findings he failed to address or give  reasons  why  these
    factual findings lead to a conclusion that the  Claimants  are  unable,
    even with the practical and financial help of the  sponsor,  to  obtain
    the required level of care in  Sri  Lanka  because  it  is  either  not
    available and there is no person who can reasonably provide it or it is
    not affordable (E-ECDR.2.5).

23.  The First-tier Tribunal made no findings on the  whether  the  required
    level of care could, with the financial assistance of  the  sponsor  be
    obtained or as to its affordability or availability.  Although  support
    for Alzheimer's sufferers may have only been available in  Colombo  the
    first Claimant was living at home and the First-tier Tribunal  did  not
    consider the availability of paid domestic assistance. I do not  accept
    Mr Solomon's submission that it follows from the First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings that the first Claimant had rebelled against medical  help  in
    Sri Lanka that it could be characterised as unavailable.

24.  As the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  that  the  Claimants  met  the
    requirements of the Rules (save for the  entry  clearance  requirement)
    was inadequately reasoned it follows his conclusion as to the weight to
    be attached, or not attached, to the public interest  in  removing  the
    Claimants which led from this finding must be flawed.

25.  The grounds also argue that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  that
    there  was  a  protected  family  between  the  Claimants  and  sponsor
    predating the entry of the Claimants as visitors in 2014 was unreasoned
    and unsustainable given that any protected family life was  surrendered
    when the sponsor re-located  to  the  UK.     The  First-tier  Tribunal
    found,  at  paragraph  42  (viii)  (b)  in  his  consideration  of  the
    requirements of section 117B of the 2002 Act that family  life  between
    the Claimants and the sponsors  was  not  established  in  the  UK.  He
    repeated that finding at paragraph 43. He  gave  no  reasons  for  that
    finding. According to the Claimants' daughter's statement she  came  to
    the UK in 2006 as an adult. The First-tier Tribunal does  not  set  out
    what evidence was relied on to  conclude  that  more  than  the  normal
    emotional ties existed between the adult sponsor and her adult  parents
    between her departure in 2006 and their arrival in 2014. In the absence
    of evidence and reasoning the finding is not sustainable. It  is  clear
    that this finding was material as it affected the weight which he  gave
    to the strength of family life ties in assessing the proportionality of
    the Respondent's decision.

26.  The First-tier Tribunal made the following finding at paragraph  43  of
    the decision:

    I find that the  support  and  also  the  treatment  available  to  the
    appellants in the United Kingdom, compared to what is available in  Sri
    Lanka, is sufficiently serious to engage Article 8.

27.  The  Respondent  argues  that  that  finding  is  unsound  because  the
    difference in medical treatment between  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    United Kingdom is incapable  of  engaging  Article  8.  The  Respondent
    relies on paragraph 111 of GS (India) v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40.  Mr
    Solomon argued that it was wrong to say that  that  case  decided  that
    inadequacy of medical treatment could never engage Article 8 and relied
    on paragraphs 86 and 87 of the same judgment.

28.  Mr Solomon is right to say that the Court of Appeal  concluded  in  GS,
    having discussed previous jurisprudence on the point, that  it  is  not
    the case that Article 8 can never be engaged by the health consequences
    of removal from the UK. However, the Court concluded that  the  absence
    or inadequacy of medical treatment in the country of return  cannot  be
    relied on to engage Article 8. However, where Article 8 is  engaged  by
    other  factors,  the  fact  that  the  claimant  is  receiving  medical
    treatment in this country which may not be available in the country  of
    return may be a factor in the proportionality exercise; but that factor
    cannot be treated by itself giving rise to a breach  since  that  would
    contravene the "no obligation to treat" principle (paragraph 111).

29.  It is clear from the finding of the First-tier Tribunal set  out  above
    that he found that it was the absence of treatment in Sri  Lanka  which
    engaged Article 8. He says so in terms. That was  therefore  clearly  a
    misdirection. Although Mr Solomon argues that it was a factor  that  he
    took account of in the proportionality exercise that is not the  manner
    in which he directed himself.

30.  In any event, it is also clear, that having found that  the  Claimants'
    removal would interfere with their family and private  life  (paragraph
    43), he was obliged to have regard  to  section  117  B  because  their
    private life was established here whilst their  status  was  precarious
    (AM (S 117B) Malawi v SSHD [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)).  He  did  not  have
    regard to this factor and this was a material error of law.

31.  In the circumstances therefore I find that there  are  material  errors
    of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  Having  regard  to
    Part 7.2 (a) of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and  Asylum
    Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper-Tier Tribunal, the  extent
    of judicial fact finding is such that this matter should be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Conclusions:
The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I set the decision aside.

I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Anonymity
The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  order  for  anonymity  and  no
application has been made for such an order.

Signed                                  Date




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray


