

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/08654/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 4 May 2016                                 |On 11 May 2016               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 E A ALAUSA
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mrs S Saddiq, Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr A Devlin, Advocate; Cardinal, Solicitors, Croydon


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The parties are as described above, but  for  continuity  and  ease  of
    reference the rest of this decision describes them as they were in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 21  December  1970.   No
    anonymity order has been requested or made.

 3. The case has a muddled history.  This appears to be the  responsibility
    of the appellant and of his past and present solicitors,  changing  the
    basis of the case dramatically  and  at  short  notice,  and  providing
    instructions to Counsel who respectively  appeared  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and in the Upper Tribunal at the last moment.

 4. The application which gives rise to the proceedings was made on 17  May
    2014.  It was for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  10  years
    continuous lawful residence in the UK, within  the  immigration  rules.
    That application, as later recognised by subsequent solicitors, had  no
    merit.

 5. The respondent refused the application by decision  dated  19  February
    2015, which runs as follows.  The appellant claims to have entered  the
    UK in July 1993, although he had previously claimed to have entered  in
    October 1995.  In September 2010 he sought indefinite leave  to  remain
    on the basis of 14 years residence, which was refused in December 2010.
      He  cannot  meet  the  requirement  of  10  years  continuous  lawful
    residence, and fails in terms of  the  rules  in  other  respects.   He
    raised no circumstances regarding private and family life  which  might
    have warranted a grant of leave to remain outwith the  requirements  of
    the rules.  He mentioned having an unmarried partner, but  provided  no
    details.  He stated that he had a daughter in the UK,  Lara  Yoyinsola,
    who was British, but his representatives said  that  they  provided  no
    evidence in these respects because he was not applying on  that  basis.
    The respondent was aware that the appellant previously used  fraudulent
    documents and was prepared to accept documentation now provided  dating
    from 2002 onwards, but not earlier.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on 27 February  2015,
    stating the hopeless grounds that his  documents  proved  that  he  had
    resided in the UK for 20 years and the respondent should have exercised
    discretion differently.

 7. In a letter dated 21 May 2015 addressed to the First-tier Tribunal  the
    appellant, through his present  representatives,  sought  radically  to
    amend his grounds of appeal.  It was accepted that his residence in the
    UK had not been lawful.  Although no evidence had been provided to  the
    respondent regarding family life, the tribunal was  asked  to  consider
    whether the decision was a  disproportionate  breach  of  rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR on the basis that the appellant had an  unmarried
    partner, Adebunkonola Alausa, and a daughter, Lara Yoyinsola.  Contrary
    to the impression  given  by  previous  agents  his  daughter  was  not
    British, but the child's mother was unwilling to return to Nigeria  due
    to fear that she and the child might be subjected to FGM.

 8. Another matter first emerges  at  this  stage,  not  mentioned  in  the
    amended grounds of appeal, but in a statement  by  the  appellant.   He
    says that he has an ex-wife (not named in the statement) with  whom  he
    has a child, [OEMA], born on [ ] 2004.  He  was  "told  they  moved  to
    America but it was lately I realised they are  back  in  the  UK."   No
    further details are given.

 9. Mr Devlin said that although there have been inconsistent claims  about
    whether the appellant has a  child  who  is  either  a  UK  citizen  or
    entitled to become a UK citizen, that was no part of any  argument  now
    advanced.



10. Perusing the papers on file after the hearing, I find attached  to  the
    amended grounds of appeal a  photocopy  of  the  birth  certificate  of
    [EOMA] (not the order of names in the appellant's statement) born on  [
    ] 2004 at Croydon; mother Aderemi Adetokunbo Aramide Adejokun (if  this
    is the appellant's former  wife,  she  does  not  appear  to  be  named
    anywhere else in the papers); father Olatunji Abiodun Alousa  (not  the
    name the appellant has used  throughout  these  proceedings,  which  is
    Emmanuel Abiodun Alousa).  The father's place  of  birth  is  given  as
    Nigeria and the mother's as St Pancras (presumably in  London).    This
    might suggest a UK citizen child, but under the other circumstances  of
    the case, the nationality of the child is ultimately irrelevant.

11. Judge Kempton allowed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds by
    decision promulgated on 29 September 2015.

12. The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal make  two  essential
    points.

13. The first is based on SS (Congo) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387, [2015] Imm
    AR 5.  The judge said at paragraph 28, "Ultimately, I will  allow  this
    appeal on the basis of the appellant's private life in the UK" but  she
    did not consider matters through the lens of the rules,  in  particular
    appendix FM, and did not identify any  compelling  circumstances  which
    would need to be identified to support a  claim  for  leave  to  remain
    outside the rules (SS at paragraph 33).

14. The second point particularly challenges paragraph 28 where  the  judge
    said:

       "Such an  interference  [removal  of  the  appellant]  would  not  be
       proportionate to the legitimate public  end  sought  to  be  achieved
       namely  immigration  control  taking  into  account  the  issues   of
       relevance and Section 117B [in part 5 of the 2002 Act].   The  public
       might, it could be argued, be somewhat dismayed if the appellant were
       to be returned to Nigeria, given all the letters of support and  that
       he has a child and partner who live with him in the UK,  albeit  that
       have no right to be here either."

15. This is said to misunderstand the provision in section 117B(1) that the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the   public
    interest; to omit the considerations under section 117B(4) and (5),  in
    failing to accord  little  weight  to  a  relationship  formed  with  a
    qualifying partner while a person is in the  UK  unlawfully,  or  to  a
    private life established by a person at a  time  when  his  immigration
    status is precarious; and in terms of section 117B(3), it  is  perverse
    to benefit the appellant for illegally working in the UK.

16. Mrs Saddiq made submissions  along  the  lines  of  the  grounds.   She
    referred to paragraph 26, where the judge said that the appellant had a
    relationship with a child who although not British might soon  be  able
    to apply for a  passport.   There  was  no  evidence  to  justify  that
    observation, which appeared to have been given some weight.  There  was
    no identification of compelling circumstances.   The  judge  failed  to
    take proper account of the fact that the appellant's partner and  child
    have no entitlement to be in the UK and should be  expected  to  leave.
    There was no evidence of any relationship with the  older  child.   The
    determination should be set aside.  On the facts as  they  had  emerged
    before the First-tier Tribunal, it was plain that the outcome should be
    reversed.

17. Mr Devlin argued that on neither of the two main points in the  grounds
    did the judge did not fall into any material error of  legal  approach.
    In view of my findings  below,  and  with  no  disrespect  to  a  well-
    constructed argument, I need summarise it only briefly.

18. On the first issue, the submission was that there is no need  to  quote
    law  or  set  out  formal  tests  so  long  as  the  substance  of  the
    jurisprudence is applied, and a decision is reached on  proportionality
    which does, in effect,  identify  compelling  reasons.   Although  this
    might not be the best drafted decision, there was no error  of  law  in
    finding a disproportionate  violation  of  Article  8,  simply  through
    absence of recital.

19. Mr Devlin pointed out that s. 117B is set out in full at paragraph 9 of
    the decision.  He submitted that all the  relevant  factors  were  then
    given specific consideration at paragraph 24.  He next sought  to  show
    that sections 117B(4) and (5) are to be interpreted  consistently  with
    the longstanding jurisprudence on  "precarious"  cases,  and  that  the
    requirement to give little weight to  private  life  and  relationships
    flew off where children were involved, as in this case.   He  supported
    this in particular by reference to SS at p.  1047,  paragraph  29,  the
    words in parenthesis - "(where no children  are  involved)"  -  and  to
    Agyarko v SSHD [2016] 1WLR 390, pp. 395 to 396, paragraphs H-A, and  p.
    402,  paragraph  A,  identifying  as   a   crucial   factor   regarding
    relationships formed in  circumstances  of  known  precariousness  that
    there were no children.

20. I am content to take it for present purposes that Mr Devlin's  argument
    is in both aspects correct.  However, applying these principles to  the
    present decision fails to show that it is  sustainable.   The  decision
    falls into errors under both heads of  the  SSHD's  grounds  of  appeal
    which are so fundamental that the outcome cannot stand.

21. The first error is at paragraph 24, where the judge says:

       "... [the appellant] has a relationship with the child but she is not
       a qualifying child, as she is not British, although she may  soon  be
       able to apply for a passport.  She has been having treatment  in  the
       UK for vision problems and I think it was  the  appellant's  position
       that this was being paid for. "

22. Plainly enough, the judge thinks that the appellant has a  relationship
    with a child who although not presently a qualifying child in terms  of
    Part 5A of the 2000 Act may soon become one, and that this tends in his
    favour.

23. At first sight this seems to relate to the older child,  which  is  how
    both representatives approached this  passage  at  the  hearing.   That
    cannot be right, however, because the child having treatment for vision
    problems is the younger child.

24. The appellant at one time contended through his agents that  the  older
    child was British, but has more recently said that she is  not.   There
    was nothing before the First-tier Tribunal to suggest that,  if  not  a
    citizen, she was about to become one.  As to that child,  however,  the
    crucial point is that the appellant did not produce any evidence  of  a
    relationship with her.  He says that he has heard that she is  back  in
    the UK, but gives no address.  The matter is scarcely mentioned in  the
    witness statements.  The decision records that the appellant said  that
    he would like to establish  contact  but  could  not  afford  to  raise
    proceedings.  However, there was nothing to indicate that he had sought
    to  initiate  contact  informally,  that  legal  proceedings  would  be
    required, or that he has had any communication at all for several years
    with either mother or child.

25. A qualifying child in terms of  paragraph  117D(1)  is  one  who  is  a
    British citizen or has lived in the UK for a  continuous  period  of  7
    years or more.  The evidence left it obscure whether  the  older  child
    might  be  a  qualifying  child,  although  it  was  accepted  on   the
    appellant's behalf both in the First-tier Tribunal  and  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal that she is not.  More crucially, there is  no  evidence  that
    the appellant has "a genuine and subsisting parental relationship" with
    that child, so this aspect simply could not operate in the  appellant's
    favour.

26. The passage at paragraph 24 is even odder if the judge had the  younger
    child in mind.  There is nothing to hint that  she  might  be  able  to
    apply for a passport.

27. The second and more fundamental error is  that  the  appeal  could  not
    rationally be allowed on the basis of relationships with a partner  and
    child who have no right to be in the UK.

28. The appellant's partner, the mother of the  younger  child,  is  not  a
    British citizen or settled in the  UK.   She  cannot  be  a  qualifying
    partner for purposes of part 5A of the 2002 Act.   The  judge  says  at
    paragraph 26 that the appellant's private life was inextricably  linked
    with his family life and that they were almost one and the same  thing,
    and although she says at  paragraph  28  that  she  allows  the  appeal
    ultimately on the basis of private life, she says in the next  sentence
    that his family life is based on a relationship with a  person  without
    status in the UK and their child similarly without status.

29. The appellant's partner is another long term overstayer.  The  evidence
    recorded at paragraph 16 is that she and the appellant were  advised  3
    years ago that an asylum application should be made, but they  did  not
    do so for lack of funds and because the appellant could deal only  with
    his own position at the time.  He did not wish her to apply  while  his
    own position was unresolved (paragraph 22).  However, there is no  good
    reason for the appellant's partner not making promptly any claim  which
    might be open to her.   There is a legal duty on her to do so, and  she
    ought to have pursued the  matter,  if  believed  to  be  of  any  real
    substance, long before now.  Funds are not required.

30. The correct way to take  relationships  with  partner  and  child  into
    account must be in the light that they are able freely to leave the  UK
    and ought willingly to do so, in compliance with immigration law.

31. At best there might be a short term article 8 case against  removal  of
    someone whose partner and child  have  made  claims  to  remain,  which
    remain unresolved.  That does not apply here.  The relationships  which
    led the judge to allow the appeal could not give the appellant a  right
    to remain in the UK.

32. Mrs Saddiq's submission was that the decision should be  reversed.   Mr
    Devlin took the position that the determination should stand.  He  made
    no submission in the alternative on what the outcome should be.   There
    has been no application to introduce further evidence, or to  have  any
    further hearing either in the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.   There  is  no  suggestion  of  any   material   change   of
    circumstances since the hearing in the FtT.   I  therefore  proceed  to
    make a fresh decision, based on the  known  facts  of  the  appellant's
    family and private life, which are not in any serious dispute.

33. Examining the evidence to ensure that nothing material is overlooked in
    remaking the decision, I note that the  certificate  of  birth  of  the
    younger child gives her mother's occupation as a  stockbroker  and  her
    father's occupation as an estates consultant, naming  him  as  Emmanuel
    Olatunji Alausa.  This is a third variation, but I accept  despite  the
    discrepancies that the appellant is the father of both children.

34. The appellant does not contend that he has any right to remain  in  the
    UK within the terms of the immigration rules.

35. The appellant has been in the UK for a number of years.  The respondent
    did not accept evidence going back beyond 2002.  He variously claims to
    have been here since 1993 or 1995.  He speaks  English.   There  is  no
    evidence that he has been a burden on tax payers for  his  subsistence,
    although no doubt he has caused some public expense.  He has worked and
    paid taxes, although having no permission  to  work,  and  using  a  NI
    number which he was not entitled to have.  He has obtained a  mortgage,
    based on what representations it may be better not to inquire.

36. No doubt there are favourable things to be said about  the  appellant's
    private life, but even at their  highest  they  must  be  given  little
    weight, because that private life was established over a period when he
    was in the UK unlawfully.

37. The appellant has no relationship with a qualifying partner.

38. It is possible, although far from clear, that he has one child who is a
    qualifying child, but no evidence that he has any  relationship  or  is
    likely to develop any parental relationship with that child.

39. The younger child is not a qualifying child.  In any event, it would be
    reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK.

40. The case has only one rational answer.  There are no private and family
    life circumstances which call for a grant of leave outside the terms of
    the immigration rules.  It is not disproportionate  to  the  article  8
    rights of any persons concerned to  expect  the  appellant's  departure
    from the UK.

41. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.   The  following
    decision is substituted: the appellant's appeal, as originally  brought
    to the First-tier Tribunal, is dismissed on all available grounds.


            [pic]


            6 May 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




