
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08588/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th October 2013 and 3rd January 2014       |On 15th January 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                                BUJAR MULGECI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Ficklin, instructed by Howells Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, on 25th October and Mrs R Pettersen on
3rd January, Home Office Presenting Officers.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Scobbie
    made following a hearing at North Shields on 24th May 2013.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Albania born on 25th February 1986.

 3. His immigration history is as follows.  He applied for asylum in the UK
    on 7th September 2001 and was granted exceptional leave to remain until
    24th February 2004. On 20th February 2004 he applied for further  leave
    to remain which was refused on 25th November  2004.   On  3rd  February
    2005 he married his former EEA national spouse and applied for an  FMRS
    which was issued until 19th September 2005.  On 16th April 2005 and  on
    21st August 207 he applied for a residence card.

 4. On 29th November 2010 he was divorced  from  his  former  EEA  national
    spouse.  On  1st  November  2012  he  and  his  Albanian  partner  were
    encountered by Humberside police and he was issued with an  IS151A.  On
    5th March 2013 a decision was made to refuse  to  grant  him  permanent
    residence (retained right of residence).

 5. The notice of refusal to issue a permanent residence card  states  that
    the Appellant had applied for permanent residence on the basis that  he
    had resided in the UK in accordance with the  2006  Regulations  for  a
    continuous period of five years, but he had not  completed  five  years
    residency in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  and  his
    application was refused under Regulation 15(1)(f).

 6. The reasons for refusal letter, also dated the 5th March  2013,  states
    that in order to qualify for a retention of a right of residence  under
    Regulation  10(5)  the  Appellant  has  to  have  met   the   following
    requirements:

      i) The marriage has to have lasted for three years immediately  before
         the initiation of divorce proceedings, the parties to the  marriage
         have to have resided in the UK for at least  one  year  during  the
         duration of the marriage, the EEA  national  has  to  have  been  a
         qualified person exercising  treaty  rights  at  the  time  of  the
         divorce and the Appellant must either be  a  worker,  self-employed
         person or self-sufficient person in the UK.

 7.  The  documentation  which  the  Appellant  had  produced   failed   to
    demonstrate that the former EEA national  spouse  had  been  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK and was a qualified person at the time  of  the
    divorce.

 8. The Appellant appealed and in the grounds of appeal  asserted  that  he
    satisfied the requirements for a  retained  right  of  residence  under
    Regulation 10(5).

The judge's determination

 9. The judge recorded that the Appellant accepted at the hearing  that  he
    did not acquire a retained right of residence upon divorce  became  the
    EEA national former spouse was not exercising treaty rights in  the  UK
    at the date of the termination of the marriage.

10. However, he stated that the Appellant argued that:

         "If the ex-wife had established five years as a  qualifying  person
         before March 2009 his ex-wife is entitled to  permanent  residence.
         If she has established this five years after the date  of  marriage
         the Appellant automatically gets a right  of  permanent  residence.
         The argument is that the date by  which  the  Appellant  will  have
         achieved the five years is February 2010.  This  is  prior  to  the
         date of divorce which took place in December 2010."

11. The judge said that he had some difficulty with some  of  the  evidence
    produced indicating that the ex-wife had been a worker for a  period of
    five years but this did not matter because he had only lived  with  her
    between December 2004 and April 2008.  He therefore did not reside with
    her for five years.  He  dismissed  the  appeal  with  respect  to  the
    Regulations.

12. With respect to Article 8 he said that the Appellant had been here  for
    twelve years and had been of  good  character  and  made  a  successful
    business  for  himself  with  four  employees  but  there  was  nothing
    particularly unusual about the circumstances and the Immigration  Rules
    "have to be given a fair  degree  of  prominence".  He  concluded  that
    removal would be proportionate.

The Grounds of Application

13. The grounds of application state as follows:

         "19. The Appellant's  case  was  that  he  had  obtained  permanent
             residence in the UK on the basis of his relationship  with  an
             EEA national who had herself obtained entitlement to permanent
             residence after five years as a worker in accordance with  the
             Regulations.  As set out in Amos v Secretary of State for  the
             Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 552, where the spouse  of  the
             EEA national such as  the  Appellant  has  obtained  permanent
             residence under Regulation 15  of  the  Immigration  (European
             Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (as  opposed  to  a  retained
             right of residence under Regulation 10) prior to  divorce  the
             divorce does not affect that right.  Amos states:

         "20.     ... A divorced spouse must establish that he  or  she  has
             the  right  of  residence  in  question  before  the  question
             whether, notwithstanding the divorce, it has been retained  by
             virtue of first Article 13 can  be  determined.   His  or  her
             right of permanent residence is the subject of Article 16.2 or
             Article 18."

14. It was argued that paragraph 18 (quoted above) of the determination  is
    in error.  It is settled law and was submitted at the hearing on behalf
    of the Appellant that the benefit of rights of residence in the EEA for
    a spouse of an EEA  national  lasts  until  the  marriage  is  formally
    lawfully dissolved and is not dependent upon residence together in  the
    same domicile. Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; Regulation  15(a)(iii)(c)  [2006]
    EEA Regs) 2013 UKUT 00089 makes this clear:

         "59. ... Our start point must be the ruling of the Court of Justice
             in Diatta v Land Berlin case 6-267/83 (1985) (EUECJR) in which
             the court has continued to endorse  in  subsequent  case  law.
             This case establishes that a spouse continues to enjoy  an  EU
             right of residence as the family member  of  a  Union  citizen
             notwithstanding the fact that the couple may be leaving  apart
             or their relationship be problematic."

15. The fact that the Appellant's wife moved out of  the  marital  home  in
    April 2008 is irrelevant to the application of EEA law.  In EEA law the
    Appellant continued to benefit from the  legal  relationship.   If  his
    wife had obtained entitlement to permanent residence in  the  UK  after
    five years as a qualifying person at the latest by May 2009,  then  the
    Appellant would have obtained  it  as  well  as  after  five  years  of
    marriage to her in February 2010.  His wife's absence from  the  UK  at
    that point (November 2009 to February 2010) would  have  no  effect  on
    his  entitlement,  because  they  were  still  married  and   permanent
    residence, once acquired, requires a two year absence to break.

16. By failing to make findings on whether the Appellant's wife had been  a
    worker for five years and what date that had been  achieved  the  judge
    erred in law, because from those findings, would flow  the  Appellant's
    entitlement to permanent residence.

17. It was also argued that the judge's  consideration  of  Article  8  was
    inadequate.  Submissions had been made that  removal  was  not  in  the
    interest of an effective immigration policy because it would result  in
    harm to the UK in the form of the loss of a  professional business  and
    the associated jobs.  It was also submitted that as the  Appellant  had
    come here as a 15 year old in 2001 and most of  his time here had  been
    lawful as per Maslov serious reasons were required  to  expel  him  but
    there was no consideration of any of this in the determination.

18. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge  Garratt  on  21st
    August 2013 for the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

19. Mr Ficklin relied on his grounds and in particular paragraph 59 of  the
    decision in Ahmed as cited there.  He repeated that  by  February  2010
    the evidence showed that the EEA wife had obtained permanent  residence
    in the UK as a qualified person and since the couple were not  divorced
    until December 2010 the Appellant would have also obtained  entitlement
    to permanent residence in the UK by that date. The marital relationship
    had legal effect until the date of the divorce.

20. He accepted that the Appellant could not meet Regulation 10(5)  because
    the decision in Ahmed required the EEA national spouse to be exercising
    treaty rights at the date of the termination of the marriage which  she
    was not.  However Ahmed was solely concerned with  retained  rights  of
    residence whereas it was the Appellant's argument that he  had  already
    obtained permanent residence by the date of the divorce.

21. The Czech Republic joined the EU on  1st  April  2004  and  if  it  was
    accepted that the former EEA spouse was employed in any  capacity  from
    that date she was exercising treaty rights.

22. Mr Diwncyz did not oppose the submission.

Decision and Directions

23. The decision of the judge is set aside for the following reasons.

24. It was incumbent upon him to make findings on whether the EEA  national
    spouse was exercising treaty rights in the UK  for  a  period  of  five
    years.  Her case is that she was  exercising  treaty  rights  from  1st
    April 2004 until 9th November 2009 when she left for three months.

25. Second, the judge erred by failing to properly engage with the argument
    that the fact that the couple did not live together for five years  was
    irrelevant since by the date of the divorce the Appellant  was  already
    entitled to permanent residence.

26. Third,  the  consideration  of  Article  8  did  not  engage  with  the
    submissions before  him that little weight  should  be  placed  on  the
    identified legitimate aim because it would  be  to  the  UK's  economic
    detriment were the Appellant to be removed and fourthly,  that  serious
    reasons were needed to justify his removal in the light of the time  he
    has spent here as a child.

27. No skeleton argument had been produced for this hearing and Mr  Diwncyz
    was not in a position to deal with the points being  made.  Furthermore
    there was no schedule of the EEA national's work in  the  UK  from  her
    arrival until November 2009.

Directions

      1) This matter is to be listed for a CMR hearing before Mrs  D  Taylor
         at Bradford in eight weeks.  The Appellant and his  representatives
         do not need to be present.

      2) Within 21 days of this hearing the Appellant must file and serve  a
         skeleton argument setting out all of the points which he raises  in
         support of  the  submission  that  he  meets  the  requirements  of
         Regulation 15(1)(b).

      3) The Appellant must file and serve copies  of  all  the  authorities
         upon which he wishes to rely.

      4) The Respondent, within 14 days thereafter, is to serve  a  skeleton
         argument and specifically to state whether it is accepted that,  if
         it is established, that the Appellant is entitled to succeed on the
         basis  that,  if  his  former  wife  had  obtained  entitlement  to
         permanent residence in the UK  after  five  years  as  a  qualified
         person by May 2009, then the Appellant would have  obtained  it  as
         well after five years of marriage to her in February 2010.

      5) The Appellant must file and serve a detailed schedule  of  the  EEA
         national's work in the UK from her arrival here until November 2009
         or any later period if the Appellant wishes to rely on  it,  within
         21 days of this hearing, together with two bundles of  all  of  the
         evidence of the EEA national's exercise of treaty rights in the UK.



      6) The Respondent is to be in a position to state at the  CMR  hearing
         whether any periods of work set out in the Appellant's schedule are
         disputed i.e. whether it  is  accepted  that  the  EEA  spouse  was
         exercising treaty rights as claimed for the period stated.

      7) Depending on the Respondent's views this matter may be concluded at
         the CMR hearing without a further hearing.  If not, it will be  set
         down for a further hearing possibly before a panel  of  two  Upper-
         tier Judges.


                             THE RESUMED HEARING


28. Following the directions which were sent out following the  hearing  on
    25th October 2013, the Appellant supplied a skeleton  argument  setting
    out his  submission  that  the  Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 15(1)(b) and a schedule of the Appellant's  former  spouse's
    work and exercise of treaty rights in the UK.

29. She is a citizen of the Czech Republic which acceded to the EU  in  May
    2004.  The Appellant argues that both any period of time that  she  was
    working in the UK prior to the accession of the  Czech  Republic  would
    count towards her period of continuous residence  for  the  purpose  of
    permanent residence but in any event,  since  she  was  working  for  a
    continuous period of five years between May 2004 and May 2009  she  did
    not need to rely upon her earlier period of economic activity.

30. As stated above, the Appellant argues that he became a family member of
    an EEA national upon marriage in February 2005 and  remained  a  family
    member  until  his  divorce  in  December  2010.  By   February   2010,
    notwithstanding the fact that the former spouse had moved  out  of  the
    family home in April 2008, and indeed  had  departed  from  the  UK  in
    November 2009, the Appellant could be said to have "resided in  the  UK
    with the  EEA  national  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  for  a
    continuous period of five years".

31. The EEA national had acquired a permanent right of residence in the  UK
    by the date of her departure in November  2009  because  she  had  been
    exercising treaty rights in the UK for  a  continuous  period  of  five
    years under Regulation 15(1)(a). She was only absent from  the  UK  for
    the last three months of a period in which the appellant lived  in  the
    UK as her family member, in  accordance  with  the  Regulations,  which
    would not disrupt her  continuity  of  residence  for  the  purpose  of
    qualifying for a right of permanent residence.

32. Mrs Petterson said that,  having  had  an  opportunity  to  review  the
    skeleton  argument  and  to  consider  the  documentary  evidence,  she
    accepted that it was correct. The  EEA  national  spouse  had  obtained
    entitlement to permanent residence in the UK after five  years  by  May
    2009 and that the appellant therefore also obtained permanent residence
    after five years of marriage to her in February 2010. Her absence  from
    the UK for three months had no effect on his entitlement.  Neither  did
    the fact that no application for permanent residence had been  made  as
    at that point.

33. She was also satisfied that the documentary evidence  showed  that  the
    EEA spouse was working as claimed between February 2004  and  May  2009
    and accordingly  the  appellant  has  acquired  a  right  of  permanent
    residence. She agreed  with  Mr  Ficklin  that  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed.



Decision

34. The original judge erred in law and his decision has  been  set  aside.
    It is remade as follows.  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Upper Tribunal Judge      |Mrs D E Taylor                    |
|issuing approval:                 |                                  |
|Appellant's Name:                 |Bujar Mulgeci                     |
|Case Number:                      |IA/08588/2013                     |

Oral determination (please indicate)


I approve the attached Determination for promulgation

Name:

Date:


Amendments that require further action by Promulgation section:

Change of address:

           Rep:                         Appellant:
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |

Other Information:
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |



