

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08801/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 July 2014                               |On 29 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                            CARLOS ANDRE DA CUNHA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr. P Nath, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to appeal the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge B Lloyd dismissing his appeal against the
    respondent's refusal of his application for a Registration Certificate
    as a confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Portugal born on 9 November 1975.  On 28
    December 2013 he applied for a Registration Certificate as a
    confirmation of a right to reside in the UK.  He submitted with his
    application his Portuguese passport and an enrolment form from Harrow
    College dated 25 November 2013.

3.   On 10 February 2014 the respondent refused the appellant's application
    under Regulation 6 in relation to Regulation 4 of the Immigration (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 on the grounds that (1) the ESOL course he was
    attending was not recognised by the Secretary of State as bona fide, as
    per Regulation 4 of the 2006 EEA Regulations; (2) he did not provide
    evidence that he hols comprehensive sickness insurance in the UK; and
    (3) he had not provided evidence by means of a declaration or such
    equivalent means, that he had sufficient resources not to become a
    burden on the social assistance of the UK during his period of
    residence.

4.   The appellant's appeal was determined by the judge on the papers on 21
    May 2004 as requested by him.  The judge considered the documents which
    the appellant had produced to support his application and found that
    the appellant had provided no satisfactory evidence of his status as a
    "qualified person", namely, a student, exercising treaty rights.

5.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge who granted permission was mystified as
    to why the judge did not make any reference in his determination to the
    documents which accompanied the notice of appeal.  He said that the
    documents produced by the appellant for the appeal were on file and the
    accompanying envelope showed that they were posted together with the
    grounds of appeal.  They included an original payslip which on the face
    of it appeared to show that the appellant worked for Transport for
    London.  This was relevant evidence which although post-decision
    evidence was evidence the judge should have taken into account.  The
    evidence was material, as if it were accepted, it would show that the
    appellant was a worker, the relevant date being the date of the
    hearing, not the date of the decision.  The judge therefore arguably
    erred in law by failing to consider and make findings on the evidence
    produced by the appellant for the appeal.  Alternatively, if for some
    reason the documents were not before the judge, there appeared to have
    a procedural irregularity.

5.   At the hearing before me the appellant spoke through a Portuguese
    interpreter.  He said he arrived in the UK in January 2013 and started
    working immediately at Nando's.  He was now working for ISS FS
    Transport.  He has worked throughout his period of residence in the UK.
     He confirmed that he did not inform the respondent that he was working
    when he made his application on 28 December 2013 or when he lodged an
    appeal against the respondent's decision on 19 February 2014.

6.   I gathered from the papers, and confirmed by the appellant, that he
    submitted the letter from ISS dated 28 May 2014 and a copy of his
    payslip dated 7 February 2014 when he lodged an application to the
    First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal against the judge's
    decision on 28 May 2014. Indeed, he stated in the application that he
    was providing a declaration from his employer to prove that he had
    sufficient resources in the UK and a copy of his payslip.  This means
    that the documents were not before the judge when he made his decision
    on 21 May 2014.

7.   It means that the judge did not err in law on the evidence that was
    before him.

8.   The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.







Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
