
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08320/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2016                            |On 4th August 2016            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                         MRS GLADYMIR TUAZON BLANES
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. Charlton, Bhogal Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       O'Brien promulgated on 23rd September 2015, in which he dismissed the
       appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
       Department of 13th February 2015, to refuse the application  made  by
       Mrs Gladymir Blanes for leave to remain in the UK pursuant to Article
       8 ECHR and on compassionate grounds.

    2. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Hollingworth on 12th February 2016. The matter  comes  before  me  to
       consider whether or not  the  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge O'Brien involved the making of a material error of law, and  if
       so, to remake the decision.

    3. The appellant is a Philippine national.  She last entered the  UK  on
       1st August 2014 with entry clearance as an Overseas  Domestic  Worker
       in a Private Household.  Her entry clearance visa was valid for the 6
       months  between  5th  June  2014  to  5th  December  2014.   She  had
       previously been in the UK between 16th July and 27th August 2012.

    4. On 4th December 2014, the appellant applied for  Discretionary  Leave
       to Remain in the UK  on  Article  8  grounds  and  on  the  basis  of
       compassionate circumstances.  The appellant wished to remain  in  the
       UK to continue with her care of Mrs Baliki Saggar, and Mr Kishori Lal
       Saggar.  They are the parents of Mr Jesdev Saggar and the mother  and
       father-in-law of Mrs Manpreet Saggar.

    5. The background to the appeal is set out at paragraphs [5] to  [8]  of
       the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  At paragraphs [10] to [27],
       the Judge sets out evidence before him.  It  is  uncontroversial,  as
       the Judge records  at  paragraph  [28]  of  the  decision,  that  the
       appellant is unable to satisfy the requirements for leave  to  remain
       on the grounds of private and  family  life  within  the  immigration
       rules.   At paragraphs [30] to [33] of his decision, the  Judge  sets
       out the authorities relevant to an assessment of an Article  8  claim
       outside the immigration rules, and at paragraphs [34] to [43] he sets
       out his conclusions.

    6. The grounds of appeal were settled by the appellant.   The  appellant
       contends that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not
       address the weight of evidence and that the appellant did not have  a
       fair hearing.  The appellant contends that her departure from the  UK
       will almost certainly lead to a deterioration in the  health  of  Mrs
       Saggar Senior and that the Judge has not addressed the matters raised
       in the psychological report that was before him.  It is said that the
       reference at paragraph [42]  of  the  decision  to  alternative  care
       options in the UK demonstrates bias, and a 'conflict of interest'  to
       promote domestic commercially driven  care,  in  circumstances  where
       there is in fact no local care "high end"  or  otherwise,  that  will
       meet the demands of Mrs Saggar Senior.

    7. At the hearing before me, Ms Charlton submits that the  Judge  failed
       to engage with the evidence that was before him.   She  submits  that
       the Judge makes  very  limited  reference  in  his  decision  to  the
       extensive psychological report and that the Judge failed to  consider
       how Mrs Saggar Senior would continue to receive the care and  support
       that she currently receives, if the appellant  is  not  permitted  to
       remain in the UK.  She submits that the Judge  failed  to  appreciate
       that all of the appellant's family and private life  revolves  around
       the Saggar family and that the Judge has failed to have regard to the
       care provided by the appellant in  Dubai,  when  the  family  made  a
       number of extended visits.  Ms Charlton did not at the hearing before
       me, rightly in my view, submit that the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal shows bias or is capable of being challenged on the  grounds
       that the appellant did not have a fair hearing.

    8. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response  in  which  she  confirms
       that the appeal is opposed.  The respondent submits  that  the  Judge
       clearly had regard to the psychological report that  was  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal in reaching his conclusion as to the impact  upon
       Mrs Saggar Senior, should the appellant be required to leave the  UK.
       The respondent contends that it was open to the Judge  to  find  that
       with psychological therapy, Mrs Saggar Senior's mental  health  would
       be adequately managed.

    9. At the hearing before me, Mr Whitwell submits that the appellant does
       not appear to challenge the findings by the Judge at paragraphs  [36]
       and [38] of the decision, that the  appellant  is  not  part  of  the
       Saggar family and that her removal from the UK would not represent an
       interference with  her  family  and  private  life.   Similarly,  the
       appellant does not appear to challenge the finding by  the  Judge  at
       paragraph [38], that the interference will not have  consequences  of
       such gravity as potentially to engage the  operation  of  Article  8.
       The appellant seeks to challenge the Judge's  assessment  of  whether
       any interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought
       to be achieved.   Mr Whitwell submits that in his  assessment  as  to
       proportionality, the Judge refers to  the  report  of  the  Chartered
       Psychologist at paragraphs [26] and [41] of his decision, and it  was
       open to the Judge to note that the Psychologist  had  not  considered
       what would happen if the appellant left the UK, but Mrs Saggar Senior
       received treatment.

DISCUSSION

   10. The immigration rules are said to reflect the  respondent's  view  of
       where a fair balance should be struck between the  right  to  respect
       for private  and  family  life  and  public  interest  considerations
       relating to the maintenance of an  effective  system  of  immigration
       control. The rules should therefore be read in a way that reflects  a
       proper interpretation  of  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention.
       However, it is recognised that there may  be  some  cases  where  the
       rules do not address relevant Article 8 issues.  In  such  cases,  as
       here, it may be necessary to consider whether  there  are  compelling
       circumstances  to  justify  granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the
       immigration rules: SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387. This should
       be assessed by reference to the five stage test outlined by the House
       of Lords in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] 3 WLR 58.

   11. There is no doubt that the Judge approached the issue of Article 8 as
       a two-stage process.  First, considering the applicant's claim  under
       the Rules; and secondly outside the Rules  under  Article  8.  It  is
       clear that the appellant could not succeed under the Rules and  given
       the basis of the claim for leave to remain on compassionate  grounds,
       the Judge carried out an assessment the Article  8  claim  under  the
       five stage test set out in the decision  of  the  House  of  Lord  in
       Razgar.

   12. As Mr. Whitwell submits, the appellant does not appear  to  challenge
       the finding by the Judge at paragraphs [36] and [38] of the decision,
       that the appellant is not part of the  Saggar  family  and  that  her
       removal from the UK would not  represent  an  interference  with  her
       family and private life.  Similarly, the appellant does not appear to
       challenge the finding by  the  Judge  at  paragraph  [38],  that  the
       interference  will  not  have  consequences  of   such   gravity   as
       potentially to engage the operation of  Article  8.   The  Article  8
       claim was therefore bound to fail and the Judge was not  required  to
       go on to consider whether any interference is  proportionate  to  the
       legitimate public end sought to be achieved.  The grounds  of  appeal
       were settled by the appellant and for the avoidance of any  doubt,  I
       have  considered  whether  notwithstanding  the  finding   that   the
       appellant is not part of the Saggar family, the appeal was capable of
       succeeding on private life grounds.  Ms Charlton  submits  that  that
       the Judge failed to appreciate that all of the appellant's family and
       private life revolves around the Saggar family.

   13. The issue for me to decide is whether or not the Judge  was  entitled
       to conclude that the appellant's proposed removal does not constitute
       an interference with her right to respect for her family and  private
       life and that, it would not be a sufficiently grave interference such
       as to engage Article 8.

   14. The Judge sets out at paragraphs [34] to [37]  of  his  decision  his
       reasons for his conclusion.  In R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ
       982, the Court of Appeal held that a finding might only be set  aside
       for error of law on the grounds of perversity if it was irrational or
       unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that  was  wholly
       unsupported by the evidence.  A finding that is  "perverse"  embraces
       findings that are irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense,
       and findings of fact that are wholly unsupported by the evidence.  On
       appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not overturn a  judgment  at  first
       instance, unless it really could not understand the original  judge's
       thought process when he was making material findings.

   15. Applying that guidance, in my judgement it was open to the  Judge  to
       find that the appellant's proposed removal  does  not  constitute  an
       interference with her right to respect for  her  family  and  private
       life and that the interference will not  have  consequences  of  such
       gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of  Article  8.   The
       Judge refers to the evidence before him that the  Saggar  family  are
       all very fond of the appellant and the appellant  feels  an  affinity
       towards the family.  It remains uncontroversial that however much the
       family might consider her to be part of the family, the appellant  is
       paid for the domestic assistance that  she  provides  and  is  not  a
       member of the Saggar family.   The  Judge  noted  that  there  is  an
       element of private life but properly  recognised  that  the  greatest
       proportion of the  appellant's  private  life  with  the  family  was
       established whilst the appellant provided domestic help to Mr  &  Mrs
       Saggar Junior in Dubai.  The fact that the appellant  may  also  have
       provided care in Dubai, when the family made  a  number  of  extended
       visits, adds nothing.  The Judge plainly had regard to the assistance
       that was provided by the appellant to the family overall in Dubai.

   16. At paragraph [39] of his decision, the Judge states:

             "39. Even if I were wrong in that conclusion, the  Appellant's
             removal  would  be  a  lawful  and  proportionate   means   of
             maintaining effective immigration controls"

     The Judge's reasons are set out at  paragraphs  [40]  to  [43]  of  his
decision.

   17. I have carefully read  the  report  of  the  Chartered  Psychologist,
       Anopama Kapoor dated 20th August 2015.  Mrs Saggar Senior was clearly
       in pain and distressed during  her  assessment.   Mrs  Saggar  Senior
       reported that she believes the appellant is like family and does over
       and above what she needs to.  Mrs Saggar Senior seems to have  become
       dependent on the appellant  and  does  not  believe  she  could  cope
       without her.  The appellant assists both Mr and Mrs Saggar Senior and
       they both trust her in a way that they would not  be  able  to  trust
       anyone else, due to their age.

   18. In her conclusions and recommendations,  the  Chartered  Psychologist
       diagnoses Mrs. Saggar Senior as suffering from severe depression  and
       mild anxiety.  She states:

          "3.1     .....This seems to be due to her physical  health  issues
             and the adjustments she has had to make due to this.

             She currently seems to meet the DSM V criteria for  Adjustment
             Disorder with mixed anxiety and depression. The stressor being
             the diagnosis of cancer, mental health symptoms seem  to  have
             arose, within 3 months of this, there seems to be  significant
             impairment in functioning and there is marked  distress  as  a
             result of her diagnosis. Mrs. Saggar reports a depressed mood,
             loss of interest,  difficulty  sleeping  and  eating,  feeling
             guilty/worthless, lack of motivation, and  a  decreased  focus
             and concentration. She also reports  some  anxiety  and  worry
             related to her physical health,

   19. The prognosis is as follows:

             2. Mrs. Saggar mental health difficulties seem to be dependent
                on her physical health, and  the  outcome  of  her  carer's
                immigration hearing. If she was  to  receive  psychological
                therapy for her mental health and learn coping  strategies,
                the severity of her symptoms may decrease in 3 to 6 months.



                However, if she did not receive treatment and her carer was
                forced to return to Dubai, it is likely that  the  severity
                of her symptoms would  increase  due  to  the  loss  of  an
                important and long term source  of  support,  and  she  may
                experience further suicidal thoughts.

   20. I have considered whether or not the Judge properly took  account  of
       that evidence in  reaching  his  decision  that  in  any  event,  the
       appellant's removal would be a  lawful  and  proportionate  means  of
       maintaining effective immigration controls.  I reject the  submission
       that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not  address
       the weight of evidence and that the Judge did not have proper  regard
       to the matters set out in the psychological report.

   21. At paragraph [26] of his decision, the Judge refers to the  diagnosis
       made by the Chartered Psychologist and the prognosis.  The Judge  was
       plainly aware of the diagnosis made and the prognosis, and  had  that
       in mind in reaching his decision.  The Judge stated at paragraph [41]
       of his decision that he had no doubt that Mr. and Mrs. Saggar  Senior
       were glad to have a familiar face, who was familiar with the  customs
       and culture of a Hindu household, looking after them.   He  was  also
       persuaded that the appellant's return would cause a degree  of  upset
       at first.  In my judgement, he plainly considered the  prognosis  set
       out in the report of the Chartered Psychologist and it  was  open  to
       the Judge to note that:

             "...the psychologist does not say whether Mrs. Saggar Senior's
             symptoms would worsen if the Appellant was  returned  but  she
             did receive psychological treatment."

   22. In my judgement, the  finding  by  the  Judge  that  the  appellant's
       removal would be a lawful  and  proportionate  means  of  maintaining
       effective immigration controls has proper regard to the  matters  set
       out in the psychological report and was open to  the  Judge  for  the
       reasons set out at paragraphs [41] and [42]  of  the  decision.   The
       report is lengthy but much  of  what  is  set  out,  relates  to  the
       background of Mrs. Saggar Senior's health  history,  her  background,
       and an analysis of the tests completed.  There is no requirement  for
       the Judge to set out the content of that  report  in  detail  in  the
       decision, provided it is clear that  the  Judge  has  considered  the
       report.  Much of what is recorded in the evidence about the  reliance
       that is placed upon the appellant by the family, is mirrored  in  the
       report.  The essential conclusions and recommendations  were  clearly
       in the mind of the Judge when he reached his decision.   The  finding
       reached by the  Judge  is  in  my  judgment  neither  irrational  nor
       unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that  was  wholly
       unsupported by the evidence.

   23. It follows that in my  judgement,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal discloses no  material  error  of  law  and  the  appeal  is
       dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

   24. The appeal is dismissed.

   25. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.




Signed                                  Date 4 August 2016



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


FEE AWARD


The appeal has been dismissed and there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
