
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08776/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd September 2015                |On 8th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  c s s s s
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    No Representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Appellant is a citizen of India born on  12th  May  1987.   His  appeal
    against the refusal of leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  family  and
    private life was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge McAteer  on  12th
    May 2015 insofar as the decision of  13th  February  2015  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

2.   The Respondent appealed on the ground that the judge erred  in  law  in
    concluding that the Respondent failed to conduct the required  analysis
    of how the decision would impact on  Rahim's  best  interests,  further
    that the burden was on the Appellant to show that it  was  not  in  the
    child's  best  interests  and  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  provide
    sufficient evidence to the Respondent or to the Tribunal  to  establish
    this was in fact the case.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Molloy
    on 10th July 2015 on the grounds that it was arguable  that  the  judge
    had misinterpreted who was responsible for proving a case where Section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 was in issue.

4.   At the hearing before me  the  Appellant  appeared  unrepresented.   Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller relied on the grounds of appeal.

Discussion and Conclusions

5.   The judge made the following findings:

         "59. In this case I  find  there  to  be  no  indication  that  the
             Respondent has conducted the  required  analysis  of  how  the
             Appellant's removal from the UK would impact upon Rahim's best
             interests, when a decision has been made in this case.  I find
             such analysis as there is in the letter to lack reasoning  and
             to be written in very general terms, with no evidence that the
             applicable policy has been considered and  compounded  by  the
             Respondent providing the Tribunal with none  of  the  evidence
             available to her when the decision was made.

         60.  I therefore find that the Respondent has failed to demonstrate
             that she has properly discharged the duty under Section 55, to
             have regard to the need to safeguard and promote  the  welfare
             of the child concerned and to have  regard  to  the  statutory
             guidance, on the facts in this case."

6.   The judge went on to apply MK (section 55 -  Tribunal  options)  Sierra
    Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC) at paragraph 39(b) of the decision:

         "However, there may be cases where the Tribunal forms the view that
         the assembled evidence is insufficient for this purpose.   In  such
         cases, two options arise.  The first is to  consider  such  further
         relevant evidence as the Appellant can muster  and/or  to  exercise
         case management powers in  an  attempt  to  augment  the  available
         evidence.  The second is to determine the appeal in a manner  which
         requires the Secretary of State to make a fresh decision."

7.   At paragraph 66 the judge concluded:

         "I  have  considered  the  desirability   of   finality   and   the
         undesirability of undue delay.  Given that  a  direction  has  been
         made  in  this  case,  and  has  not  been  complied  with  by  the
         Respondent, and that there may have been a  significant  change  of
         circumstances due to the birth of Ms Smedley's child, I find on the
         specific facts of this case that it  is  appropriate  to  determine
         this appeal in a manner which requires the  Respondent  to  make  a
         fresh decision.  Undue delay is undesirable but in the  absence  of
         any evidence, including that which was  before  the  Respondent,  I
         find I am unable to undertake a sufficiently  rigorous  Section  55
         analysis."

8.   The appeal was decided on the  papers  and  the  Respondent  failed  to
    comply with directions and supply a bundle.  The judge  was  unable  to
    assess what information was before the Respondent when she came to  her
    decision in February 2015.  There was insufficient evidence before  the
    judge to enable him to properly assess Section 55.  The judge  properly
    directed himself in law and his approach to the future conduct  of  the
    case was one which was open to him in the circumstances.

9.   I find that there is no error of law in the judge's  decision  of  12th
    May 2015 and the Respondent's appeal is dismissed. The decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 7th September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
