
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08684/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17 September 2013                            |On 12 December 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                          olubunmi oluwatosin taiwo
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Khan
For the Respondent:    Ms Vidyaharan

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in 1986.   She applied on 14
    November 2011 for indefinite leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  long
    residence.  The application was refused under paragraph 276A-D  of  the
    Immigration Rules on 21 March 2012.

 2. It was accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant had entered the UK
    on 13 September 2001 with  clearance  as  a  student.   Her  leave  had
    thereafter been renewed on various  occasions  until  31  August  2004.
    However, the Respondent claimed, the Appellant left the UK on 20  March
    2005 without any lawful leave this having expired on  31  August  2004.
    She then re-entered the UK on 18 June 2005 with entry  clearance  as  a
    student.  The result was that there was a gap in residence when she did
    not have leave from 31 August 2004 until 18 June 2005.

 3. A new period of residence started on 18 June 2005 when  she  re-entered
    and she was subsequently granted leave  to  remain  until  15  November
    2011.  As a result she had shown continuous residence in the  UK  in  a
    lawful capacity for six years and five  months.   She  thus  failed  to
    satisfy paragraph 276A-D.

 4. The application was also refused under Article 8 (ECHR).

 5. She appealed.  The basis of the appeal was that from early August  2004
    until around 10 March 2005 her passport was with the  Home  Office  for
    renewal of her student visa.  During this period her  grandmother  fell
    gravely ill in Nigeria.  The Appellant had asked whether the process of
    renewal could be speeded up because of the grandmother's illness.   She
    wanted to go to her urgently.  She was told by  the  Home  Office  that
    this was not possible and that  it  could  not  be  guaranteed  that  a
    decision on the variation application would be made before she was  due
    to travel.  However she was presented with the  option  of  withdrawing
    her application and obtaining entry clearance in due  course  from  the
    High Commission in Nigeria to return as a student and she followed that
    advice.

 6. At no time was she informed that if she travelled she would be starting
    again in terms of continuous years spent in the UK.  The impression she
    was given was that  her  period  of  stay  would  still  be  considered
    continuous in her particular circumstances.  She felt  it  unfair  that
    she had not been informed specifically that such was not the case.

 7. As for Article 8 she has two brothers and two sisters who  are  British
    Citizens and a niece and nephew as well.  They have  lived  in  the  UK
    most of their lives and she is closely involved with  them.  Her  adult
    life has been spent in the UK.

 8. In brief findings Judge of the First tier Tribunal Wiseman, following a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 7 September 2012, found that  the  Appellant
    was absent from the  UK  between  20  March  2005  and  18  June  2005.
    However, because her last leave had expired on 31 August 2004 'she  had
    no valid leave between 31 August 2004 and a date close to 18 June  2005
    when she returned' [13].  Such a  lengthy  period  without  leave,  the
    judge found, was fatal to her application based on ten years continuous
    residence and the position was not changed by  the  apparent  confusion
    with the case worker as to the effect of her leaving.  He dismissed the
    appeal under paragraph 276.

 9. As for Article 8 the judge ruled that as the Appellant  had  failed  to
    attend the hearing he had 'no way of assessing whether a combination of
    the particular circumstances historically and the apparent family  life
    in this country would enable the  Appellant  to  be  successful  in  an
    Article 8 appeal' [14].  He thought that she had been confused.  Having
    asked for the appeal to be determined 'on the papers' the Tribunal  had
    decided that the matter should be dealt with at an  oral  hearing.   He
    concluded that he had 'no alternative but to dismiss the  appeal  under
    Article 8 because of the absence of proper supporting evidence...' [15]

10. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by a  judge
    on 17 January 2013.  He stated: '...

          3. The application for permission to appeal disputes the  factual
             basis of the judge's findings under paragraph  276B.   It  was
             submitted that  the  judge  did  not  have  all  the  relevant
             evidence.  The grounds also question the basis for finding the
             Appellant's removal would not be a disproportionate breach  of
             Article 8.

          4. The judge proceeded to hear  and  decide  the  appeal  in  the
             absence of the Appellant but arguably there was no exercise of
             discretion by the judge as to whether this was the appropriate
             course.  The reasoning in relation to Article  8  is  arguably
             inadequate.'

11. In submissions before me at the  error  of  law  hearing  both  parties
    agreed that the factual analysis by the Respondent and  the  judge  was
    wrong.  An application for further leave had been made by the Appellant
    prior to the end of her existing leave in August 2004.   Thus  she  had
    leave under section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 until she asked  for
    her passport back in March 2005 and withdrew her application.  It  came
    down, in Ms. Sharma's view (Appellant's  representative),  to  the  six
    days or so following return of her passport until she left the  UK  for
    Nigeria on 20 March 2005.  That comment apart both parties were  unable
    to assist me in the analysis of the meaning of  'continuous  residence'
    and its application in this case.

12. Both parties agreed that the judge erred in not considering  Article  8
    on the information that was before him.  Were the case  to  fail  under
    the Rules it would have to be reheard under  Article  8.   It  was  not
    suggested that the judge had been wrong to proceed  to  deal  with  the
    case in the Appellant's absence.

13. I reserved my decision.

14. I subsequently issued the following error of  law  decision  (to  avoid
    excess repetition only the later paragraphs need to be stated):

         '14. In considering  this  matter  the  facts  of  the  Appellant's
             history are not disputed.  In summary, the  Appellant  entered
             the UK with clearance in  September  2001.   She  renewed  her
             leave on two occasions until 2004.  Prior to the expiry of her
             leave in August 2004 she sought further leave within time.  In
             doing so she had continued leave pending  a  decision  on  her
             variation application under Section 3C of the Immigration  Act
             1971.  The Respondent did not make a prompt decision  on  that
             application.   It  was  still  pending  in  March  2005.   The
             Appellant's grandmother became ill.  The  Appellant  wrote  to
             the Respondent seeking a decision on her application.   Having
             been told that such could not be guaranteed before she had  to
             travel she  withdrew  her  application.   The  exact  date  is
             unclear.  However I see no reason to doubt the information  in
             the Grounds of Appeal that she wrote to the Respondent to that
             effect on 4 March 2005.  There  is  acknowledgement  from  the
             Respondent on 14 March 2005 which stated 'I am returning  your
             passport   as   requested.    This   cancels   the    previous
             application'.  From then until she left the  UK  on  20  March
             2005 she did not have leave.  She was without leave whilst  in
             Nigeria until granted entry clearance to return to the  UK  on
             18 June  2005.   She  has  had  leave  since  then  until  her
             application in November 2011 for indefinite leave.

         15. The judge was mistaken in finding that the Appellant  did  not
             have leave from 31 August 2004 until around 18 June 2005  when
             she returned.  The correct period was from about 14 March 2005
             until about 18 June 2005.

         16. The gist of the grounds seeking permission is that  the  judge
             erred in finding that the Appellant was without leave  in  the
             UK for seven months.  Rather, her  absence  without  leave  in
             total was from March to June 2005 which was less than the  six
             month's gap permissible for continuous residence and  as  such
             "ought not to be considered as a break in continuous reside ".
              Also although she overstayed for six days following return of
             her passport and before she left such did not count as a break
             in continuous residence for that period as it was "within  the
             permissible seven days unlawful stay".

         17. Paragraph 276A reads:

                   a) "continuous residence means residence in  the  United
                      Kingdom  for  an  unbroken  period,  and  for   these
                      purposes a period shall not  be  considered  to  have
                      been broken where an applicant  is  absent  from  the
                      United Kingdom for a period of 6 months  or  less  at
                      any one time, provided that the applicant in question
                      has existing limited leave to enter  or  remain  upon
                      their departure and return... [The subparagraph  then
                      goes  on  to  define  five  circumstances  in   which
                      continuity will have been  considered  to  have  been
                      broken.  It is  common  ground  that  none  of  these
                      factors applies in this case].

                   b)  'lawful  residence'   means   residence   which   is
                      continuous residence pursuant to:

                       i) Existing leave to enter or remain,....."

         18. Paragraph 276B states that

                  "The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite
                  leave to remain on the ground of  long  residence  in  the
                  United Kingdom are that:

                  (i)(a)   he has had at least ten years  continuous  lawful
                  residence in the United Kingdom;....."

         19. The judge erred in finding that the  Appellant  had  no  valid
             leave between August 2004 and June 2005.   However,  that  was
             not a material error of law.

         20. Ms. Sharma was not able to  give  me  any  authority  for  the
             assertion that it was permissible for the Appellant to  remain
             as an overstayer for about six days before her exit  and  that
             such would  not  count  against  her  in  considering  whether
             continuous lawful residence had been broken.

         21. Paragraph 34J of the  Rules  states:  'Where  a  person  whose
             application or claim for leave to remain is  being  considered
             requests the return of her passport for the purpose of  travel
             outside the common travel  area,  the  application  for  leave
             shall, provided it has not already been determined, be treated
             as withdrawn as soon as the passport is returned  in  response
             to that request'.  Such accords with the information given  by
             the Respondent in the letter of 14 March 2005.

         22. I conclude that the Appellant had no existing  leave  for  the
             period from 14 March 2005 until she left the UK  on  20  March
             2005.  I see no reason not to give the language  of  the  Rule
             its  plain  and  ordinary  meaning.  The  definition   "lawful
             residence" in 276A(b) is clearly  exhaustive.   It  says  that
             "lawful  residence  means  residence   which   is   continuous
             residence pursuant to..." [it then gives three  categories  of
             case].  It does not say that lawful residence  includes  these
             three categories.  Further, I see no reason to  give  anything
             other than the plain and ordinary meaning to  the  requirement
             in 276A(a) to have "existing limited  leave to enter or remain
             upon their departure and return".  As indicated  no  authority
             was put before me for any different interpretation.

         23. As for the period of about three months  outside  the  UK  she
             also did not have leave. In TT (Long residence  -  'continuous
             residence' - interpretation) British Overseas  Citizen  [2008]
             UKAIT 00038 the Tribunal held  that  a  period  of  continuous
             residence as defined in the Rules, paragraph 276A(a),  is  not
             broken in circumstances where a person with leave to remain in
             the UK obtains further leave from  an  ECO  while  temporarily
             outside the UK prior to the expiry of the leave to remain. The
             Tribunal did not address the issue of continuous residence  if
             a person exits with leave which  later  expires  and  after  a
             period returns with further leave obtained after  the  expiry.
             It is not necessary for me to give a view on that because  the
             Appellant having left the UK without existing limited leave to
             remain cannot succeed under 276A(a).

         24. Although the judge erred  on  the  facts  the  error  was  not
             material as the case could not succeed even under the  correct
             facts.

         25. The decision to dismiss the appeal under the Rules stands.

         26. As for Article 8 no suggestion was made  that  the  judge  was
             wrong to proceed to determine the appeal in the absence of the
             Appellant.  It seems  that  no  oral  hearing  was  originally
             sought but that administratively a judge considered  that  the
             issues were such that  the  case  be  put  down  for  an  oral
             hearing.  Notice of oral hearing was sent  to  the  Appellant.
             If there had been uncertainty she could have sought advice.

         27. The judge had the issue of Article 8 before him.  It  was  not
             appropriate for him to state  he  had  "no  way  of  assessing
             whether a combination of the particular circumstances and  the
             apparent  family  life  in  this  country  would  enable   the
             Appellant to be successful in an Article 8 appeal".  His  duty
             was to decide the Article 8 claim on the information that  was
             before him.  In failing to  do  so  (and  yet  dismissing  the
             appeal under human rights) he materially erred.

         28. The decision to dismiss the appeal  under  Article  8  is  set
             aside and will need to be reheard.'

15. At the resumed hearing parties agreed that the only issue  was  Article
    8.  The Appellant was not present Mr Khan  stating  that  it  had  been
    mistakenly thought that the  resumed  hearing  was  the  error  of  law
    hearing.  However, Mr Khan indicated that he was content to proceed  in
    her absence with submissions.

16. In her submissions Ms Vidyaharan stated that there was no family  life.
    Whilst there were adult siblings of the Appellant in the UK  there  was
    no indication that  the  relationship  amounted  to  more  than  normal
    emotional ties.  Whilst it was clear that  there  was  a  private  life
    which would be interfered with were she required to  leave  such  would
    not be disproportionate not least because she has always been in the UK
    on a temporary basis.

17. Mr Khan referred me  to  the  Appellant's  written  statement  for  her
    history.  Most of her family are here and it is here that she has  made
    her life for many years.  Her failure to  satisfy  the  long  residence
    Rule was a technical breach.  The  evidence  strongly  pointed  in  her
    favour in the proportionality assessment.

18. Turning to consider Article 8 the House of Lords in Huang  [2007]  UKHL
    11 made it plain that a step-by-step approach as  laid  out  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL was the appropriate method in an Article 8 case.  The first
    question is whether the removal  would  be  an  interference  with  the
    exercise of the Appellant's right to  respect  for  family  or  private
    life.

19. In this case it was not argued that  the  Appellant  has  family  life.
    There was no evidence of a partner or children.  Although she has adult
    siblings living in the UK it was not suggested  that  her  relationship
    with them amounted to more than normal  emotional  ties.   It  was  not
    disputed, however, by Ms Vidyaharan that the Appellant has  established
    a private life having lived in the  UK  for  some  eleven  years  which
    encompassed her relationship with her siblings and their  children,  as
    well as her social life, studies and work. I agreed that the  Appellant
    has established a private life.

20. Having found that there is a private life, turning to the next question
    the Court of Appeal has stated that the threshold for  establishing  an
    interference with private or family life is not  a  high  one.   In  AG
    (Eritrea) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 801, Sedley LJ said (at [28]):

         'While an interference with private or family life must be real  if
         it is to engage Article 8(1),  the  threshold  of  engagement  (the
         "minimum level") is not an especially high one.  Once  the  Article
         is engaged, the focus moves, as Lord Bingham's remaining  questions
         indicate, to the process of justification under Article  8(2).   It
         is this which,  in  all  cases  which  engage  Article  8(1),  will
         determine whether there has been a breach of the Article."

21. Removal of the Appellant has the capacity to interfere with her private
    life in respect  of  separation  from  her  family  and  friends.   The
    threshold is accordingly reached.

22. That the decision is in  accordance  with  the  law  is  not  disputed.
    Further, I am satisfied that the  decision  to  remove  does  pursue  a
    legitimate aim, namely, the maintenance of a fair and effective  system
    of immigration control.  The question remaining is whether or  not  the
    decision is proportionate given all the circumstances of the case.

23. In DM (Zambia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 474, at [9] Sedley LJ said:

         '... this court has said many times that you cannot dispose  of  an
         Article 8 proportionality issue in a perfunctory or formulaic  way.
         It requires a structured decision, however economically expressed.'

24. In this case nothing in the statements before me was challenged at  the
    hearing by Ms Vinyaharan. The Appellant entered the UK  in  2001  as  a
    child student.  She has remained here for more than ten years  entirely
    lawfully with the exception of the very  brief  period  in  2004  when,
    having received her passport back from the Respondent, she  took  about
    six days to arrange her departure to Nigeria to see her sick  relative.
    The consequence was that having withdrawn her application in  order  to
    get her passport back to travel, she was without leave  when  she  left
    the UK. Although she obtained leave to return to the  UK  three  months
    later and has remained lawfully ever  since,  the  exit  without  leave
    meant she could not satisfy the Immigration Rules.  Such is not in  her
    favour in considering the balancing exercise.  However I consider  that
    that failure can, as Mr Khan submitted,  properly  be  described  as  a
    technical breach as there was little she could do to avoid  it  as  she
    needed a short period to arrange her departure.

25. Her situation at the time was not, in my judgment, helped by  the  fact
    she having made her application for variation of her leave as a student
    in time, the Respondent had still not made a decision on it after seven
    months, this despite the caseworker  having  been  made  aware  of  the
    Appellant's desire for a decision to be made so that she could get  her
    passport back and travel to see her relative. I also see no  reason  to
    doubt her claim that the impression given by the case worker  was  that
    if she travelled she would not  be  starting  again  in  terms  of  the
    calculation of continuous residence in the UK a  matter  supported,  in
    her mind, by the fact that she was granted leave in Nigeria  to  return
    as a student.

26. I find the nature of the breach of the Rules and reasons behind  it  do
    not reflect adversely on the Appellant in the balancing exercise.

27. In that regard I note Lord Carnwath in Patel v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72  who
    stated: 'the balance [between the Article 8(1) interest and  legitimate
    aim pursued] drawn by the rules may be relevant to the consideration of
    proportionality',   and   that   'the   practical   or    compassionate
    considerations which underlie the policy are also likely to be relevant
    to the cases of those who fall just outside it, and to that extent  may
    add weight to their argument [under Article 8].' (at [55]).

28. In considering other factors in her favour the Appellant entered the UK
    as a minor aged 15 years.  She went to school and university here.  She
    is now 26 years old.  While Ms Vinyaharan was correct to state that the
    Appellant's leave has been temporary as a student, the effect has  been
    that her formative years have been spent here.  All  her  brothers  and
    sisters were born in the UK and following a period in early  life  when
    they lived in Nigeria, have been in the UK for many  years.   They  are
    British citizens.  I accept that she is close  to  them  and  to  their
    children and they to her. Such is confirmed by statements from them.

29. I also accept that, as she indicates in her statement, during her  many
    years here she has made many friends  from  school,  work  and  through
    other means. Again there are statements supporting such.

30. I further  accept  that  she  has  worked,  lawfully,  at  the  various
    locations in London  indicated  in  her  statement  as  well  as  doing
    voluntary work for  a  number  of  charities.  She  has  been  of  good
    character throughout.

31. In addition I accept that having been away from Nigeria for so long she
    has lost contact with almost everybody she knew there as a young  child
    and that the only reason she goes to Nigeria is to see her parents.  As
    she says in her statement referring to the UK 'this is where (her) life
    is'.

32. Seeking to make a balanced judgment on all the material evidence before
    me  I  conclude  that  the  removal  of  the  Appellant  would  not  be
    proportionate to the legitimate aim.  The appeal succeeds on Article  8
    grounds.

                                  Decision

The previous Tribunal erred in law.  Its decision is set  aside  and  remade
as follows:

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8).

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


