
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/08704/2014
                                                               IA/08733/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2015                   |On 16 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              Ms Annamma thomas
                              miss esmi xavier
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, Counsel, instructed by Paul John and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. By a decision promulgated on 4 September 2015, I found that the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law when dismissing the Appellants'  appeals
    against the Respondent's refusal to  vary  their  respective  leave  to
    remain and to remove them from the United Kingdom under section  47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. My error of law decision is annexed to the current decision.

 3. In summary, I found that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  erred  in
    refusing to carry out an assessment of the Appellants' Article 8  claim
    outside of the Immigration Rules (the Rules). Further, she  had  failed
    to take account of evidence from the first Appellant, which she herself
    had deemed credible.

 4. Having found the errors of law to be material and setting  the  judge's
    decision aside, I adjourned the appeals with directions. The favourable
    credibility finding made by the judge in respect of the first Appellant
    was preserved (see paragraph 19 of the judge's  original  decision  and
    paragraph 13 of my error of law decision).

The remaking of the decision

The evidence before me

 5. In remaking the decision I have had careful  regard  to  the  following
    evidence:

          a) The Respondent's appeal bundle;

          b) Appellant's  bundle  1  (AB1),  indexed  1-38  and  then  1-18
             (incorporating two bundles before the First-tier Tribunal);

          c) Appellant's bundle 2 (AB2), indexed 1-60;

          d) Appellant's bundle 3 (AB3), indexed 1-17.

 6. Both Appellants and the sponsor, Mrs Animascrene Xavier,  attended  the
    hearing, but none were called to give oral evidence.

Submissions

 7. Ms Allen provided Mr Tufan and myself with a skeleton argument. In line
    with the error of law decision, she confirmed that the sole  issue  for
    determination in these appeals was Article 8  outside  the  Rules.  She
    submitted  there  had  been  a  change  in  the  circumstances  of  the
    Appellants since their arrival in the United Kingdom, however  Appendix
    FM did not provide for an application to switch categories  of  status.
    The substantive requirements of Appendix FM (ILRDR.2.4  and  2.5)  were
    met. The second Appellant has significant care needs, and,  relying  on
    the preserved findings and the social worker's report in AB2, the first
    Appellant is no longer able to provide the required level of care.

 8. Ms Allen submitted that if returned  to  India,  the  second  Appellant
    would require either residential care or live-in  care:  the  costs  of
    which would be financially prohibitive. Ms Allen acknowledged, however,
    that there was no evidence of the availability or costs of  such  care.
    Even if the second Appellant could be placed in residential care,  this
    would break the bond between her and the first Appellant. In  terms  of
    the scope of what is meant  by  "required  level  of  care",  Ms  Allen
    submitted that it was broad, and went beyond simple  bodily  functions.
    It included emotional aspects, going out and engaging in daily life.

 9. The issue of live-in care was addressed. It  was  submitted  that  both
    Appellants required  substantial  care.  The  rhetorical  question  was
    posed: could one  carer  provide  adequate  care  for  them?  Ms  Allen
    suggested the answer must be no. The cost of having two carers would be
    too great a burden on the family. The sponsor could not go to  live  in
    India alone. It would be unreasonable for her husband  to  follow  her.
    Their ages and ties to the  United  Kingdom  made  it  unreasonable  to
    relocate. There was no one else in India, as the sponsor's  son  living
    and working  in  Malta.  There  was  no  evidence  of  other  relatives
    providing any financial assistance. It was unlikely they would help  in
    the future. Finally, it would not be proportionate for  the  Appellants
    to return and make an entry clearance  application  from  India.  Their
    care needs were immediate and constant. Any period of insufficient care
    would be detrimental.

10. Mr Tufan suggested that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  made  an
    adverse credibility finding against the sponsor at paragraph 22 of  her
    decision. It was accepted by the Appellants that they  could  not  meet
    the Rules and this counted against them.  In  light  of  case-law,  the
    Appellants need to show that "compelling circumstances" exist in  order
    to succeed outside the Rules. In reality,  these  appeals  were  health
    cases, and the  threshold  was  therefore  very  high.  In  respect  of
    familial support in India, the sponsor's son in Malta was  not  settled
    there and could return to assist his sister and grandmother. There  was
    no evidence on the  costs  of  care  in  India,  or  the  provision  of
    residential care. It was submitted that both Appellants could  go  into
    residential care together. It was accepted that there is  currently  no
    guidance from the Respondent as to the meaning of  "required  level  of
    care".

11. The sponsor and her husband could go and live in India: it was a matter
    of choice for them. In respect of  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, Mr Tufan  accepted  that  the  English
    language issue was irrelevant in these appeals. Although the Appellants
    could be maintained, there was usage of the NHS by the first  Appellant
    and the possibility of a future burden on public finds in this  regard.
    Both Appellant's had always been in this country on a precarious basis.



12. Ms Allen responded by submitting that there  was  in  fact  no  adverse
    finding in paragraph 22 of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.  The
    relative in Malta was male and could  not  provide  the  type  of  care
    required by the Appellants. Although the Appellants came  as  visitors,
    there had been a genuine change of circumstances.

Findings of primary fact

13. There has never been a dispute about the second Appellant's significant
    cognitive  impairments  and  the   functional   limitations   resulting
    therefrom. On the basis of the unchallenged medical evidence at 30 AB1,
    I find that she has global developmental delay and is blind.

14. It is clear from the unchallenged evidence of  the  GP  (30  AB1),  the
    Occupational Therapist's report (13-14 part 2 of AB1), and  the  Social
    Worker's  report  (10-13  AB2)  that  the  second  Appellant  has  very
    significant care needs as a direct  result  of  her  conditions.  These
    include: washing,  dressing,  accessing  the  toilet,  taking  adequate
    nutrition, and moving around both in and out  of  doors.  There  is  no
    suggestion that her ability to care for herself  will  ever  materially
    improve, and I find that it will not.

15. In respect of the scope of the phrase "required level of care", I agree
    that a broad interpretation can properly be applied, in the absence  of
    authority or a natural and ordinary meaning of the words suggesting the
    contrary. On the basis of the independent  evidence  cited  previously,
    and the sponsor's witness statements, I find that the required level of
    care from another person and appropriate to  the  second  Appellant  is
    effectively twenty-four  hour.  It  involves  both  intimate  and  non-
    intimate aspects. The intimate aspects  are  obvious.  Beyond  that,  I
    would agree that emotional support and assistance in being able  to  go
    out and, to a greater or lesser extent, socially interact with  others.
    I fully bear in mind that the "required level of care"  is  not  to  be
    used as a means of equating the quality of life with  that  of  someone
    unaffected by health conditions, or to that which may be achievable  in
    the United Kingdom as opposed to their country of origin. However,  the
    requisite level must be informed by a concept of what is  necessary  to
    allow for a reasonable existence in the  context  of  the  individual's
    circumstances, including medical advice/diagnosis, cultural  norms  and
    living standards in the home country.

16. Bearing this in mind, I find  that  the  care  required  could  not  be
    provided by a man, whether he was a relative  or  not.  This  therefore
    precludes the sponsor's son (whom I accept is  living  and  working  in
    Malta) from stepping in to assist.

17. I find that the first  Appellant  suffers  from  foot  pain,  lethargy,
    microalbuminiria, hypertension, and type II diabetes (see 14 AB2). From
    the evidence before me, it appears as though all  of  these  conditions
    existed prior to her arrival in the United Kingdom in early 2013. It is
    accepted by the Appellants that back in India, the first Appellant  had
    been able to provide the necessary care for her granddaughter (see, for
    example, 3 part 2 of AB1).

18. Based upon the first Appellant's witness statement  and  the  preserved
    credibility finding of Judge Black,  I  find  that  there  has  been  a
    genuine change in circumstances since the Appellants'  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom. Although the medical evidence  is  somewhat  thin,  the
    first Appellant stated that she was getting frailer and this had led to
    an inability to provide the care  to  the  second  Appellant.  This  is
    supported by the sponsor's evidence. I accept that this change  in  the
    first Appellant's health and overall ability to provide what is,  after
    all, significant care for the second Appellant has materially  reduced.
    I find that she cannot now provide  by  herself  the  overall  required
    level of care to the second Appellant.

19. On the evidence before me, I find that a return to India would  not  of
    itself run contrary to the Appellants' interests. I appreciate that the
    Social Worker states in her report that  they  should  remain  in  this
    country (13 AB3).  However,  this  conclusion  is  not  accompanied  by
    reasoning connected in any way to the possibility of care provision  in
    India. The author may not have been asked to comment on this point, and
    of course she is unlikely to have had any expertise on the position  in
    India. It is relevant though that there is no express evidence (whether
    from the Social Worker or any other source) to say  that  a  return  to
    India would be inherently adverse to the Appellants even if care  could
    be arranged.

20. Contrary to Mr Tufan's suggestion, there  was  no  adverse  finding  at
    paragraph 22 of Judge  Black's  decision.  On  a  proper  reading,  the
    passage in question simply states that  the  sponsor  had  "considered"
    bringing the Appellants to the United Kingdom on a long-term basis, not
    that this was in fact her intention at  the  point  of  application  or
    arrival here.

21. I find that the first and second Appellants have a particularly  strong
    bond, resulting from the status of the former as primary carer for  the
    latter over the course of time. This link is perfectly  plausible,  and
    is supported by the Occupational Therapist's report  and  that  of  the
    Social Worker (14 AB1 and 7, 11 AB2). I accept that whilst some  caring
    duties have now been taken on by the sponsor, the  close  bond  between
    the Appellants subsists. I find  that  it  would  be  contrary  to  the
    interests of the second Appellant in particular for her to be separated
    from her grandmother.

22. As I have said, the  sponsor  does  now  undertake  some  of  the  care
    required by the second Appellant.  However,  she  works,  as  does  her
    husband. Therefore, the Appellants at home alone  for  periods  of  the
    day, and there is no evidence to suggest that this is an unworkable  or
    unsafe state of affairs. Thus,  my  previous  finding  that  the  first
    Appellant cannot provide the totality of care  required,  she  can  and
    does provide a degree of on going emotional  and  practical  assistance
    during weekdays.

23. The picture of what if any relatives remain in India  is  not  entirely
    clear. There seems to have been suggestions to the  effect  that  there
    are some and none. Taking the evidence as a whole,  I  am  prepared  to
    accept that there are no relatives in India  would  have  in  the  past
    provided or would be likely in the future to provide assistance to  the
    Appellants. I find that there are  two  sons  of  the  first  Appellant
    (brothers of the second) working in the Middle East  (5  part  2  AB1).
    Although Ms  Allen  submitted  that  any  support  from  relatives  was
    unlikely, I have no evidence to  suggest  that  they  would  be  either
    unable or unwilling to assist their mother and sister. It must be  more
    likely than not that they would in fact offer at least  some  financial
    support, if called upon.

24. There is a very distinct absence of evidence from the Appellants as  to
    the availability and  costs  of  either  residential  or  live-in  care
    provision in India. There is nothing from a  local  authority,  medical
    professional or relevant non-governmental organisation, for example. Ms
    Allen has submitted that the  nature  of  the  care  required  by  both
    Appellants would  be  financially  prohibitive  for  the  family.  This
    submission is made in something of an evidential vacuum, however.

25. I accept that the  sponsor  and  her  husband  work,  with  a  combined
    household income of approximately �1800 a month (2 part  2  AB1  and  2
    AB3). Yet because of the lack of information about the availability and
    costs of residential or live-in care for both Appellants in  India,  it
    cannot be said that the Appellants have shown  that  such  care  (at  a
    required  level  of  course)  is  unavailable,  on   the   balance   of
    probabilities. It is the  case,  I  find,  that  the  Appellants  have,
    understandably on a human level at least, sought to base their cases on
    remaining with the sponsor in  this  country  because  of  the  obvious
    familial connection. Perhaps because of this, there has  not  been  the
    investigation into alternative possibilities in India. Overall, I  find
    that there is likely to be either appropriate  residential  or  live-in
    care for both Appellants in India  on  the  premise  that  they  remain
    living together.

26. On the financial side, I take into account that both  the  sponsor  and
    her husband work. I have no  evidence  about  the  costs  of  care.  It
    follows that I have no evidence to suggest that they would be unable to
    afford what I have found to be  the  existence  of  available  care.  I
    therefore find that they could. Whilst not essential to this finding, I
    note that additional support is available from  the  relatives  in  the
    Middle East.

27. I find that the sponsor and  her  husband  are  British  citizens.  She
    obtained citizenship in 2010 through time  spent  here  as  a  domestic
    worker (having left India in 2003). I find  that  they  have  no  other
    children or relatives in the United Kingdom. I find that they  live  in
    rented accommodation. There is no other evidence of significant ties in
    this country, and I find that there are none. Both are healthy.

Conclusions on the Immigration Rules

28. It has been conceded by the Appellants that  they  cannot  satisfy  the
    Rules. In respect of the Adult Dependent Relative route under  Appendix
    FM, the sole difficulty is said to be  the  fact  that  the  Appellants
    arrived here as visitors. This meant that they fell foul of E-ILRDR.1.2
    (the prohibition on switching). That is right as far as it goes.

29. However, if one were to hypothetically take a step back and assume that
    the Appellants had applied  for  entry  clearance  as  Adult  Dependent
    Relatives, on my findings of fact they still would  not  have  met  the
    Rules. This is because they have not shown that the required  level  of
    care was unavailable in India (E-ECDR.2.5).

30. In terms of Paragraph 276ADE, this was found by the First-tier Tribunal
    not to be satisfied, and nothing has been  said  about  this  provision
    since. It has  been  conceded  that  the  Appellants  cannot  meet  the
    requirements set out therein. This includes, of  course,  the  test  of
    whether very significant obstacles stand in the path  of  reintegration
    into Indian society (Paragraph 276ADE(vi)).

Conclusions on Article 8 outside the Rules

31. I direct myself that the Rules in question are not a complete code, and
    therefore I should, indeed  must,  consider  Article  8  outwith  their
    ambit. The nature and extent of that consideration and the relevance of
    the Rules are of course relevant matters.

32. I find that the Appellants enjoy family life with each other  and  with
    the sponsor. The ties between the  two  Appellants  clearly  go  beyond
    those to be expected in relation to close  adult  relatives.  The  ties
    between the Appellants and the sponsor are less strong. However in  the
    circumstances of these appeals, I find that there  is  family  life  in
    accordance with the threshold set out in Kugathas [2003] EWCA  Civ  31,
    and recently approved in Singh and Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630. There  is
    a dependency now on the sponsor  in  light  of  the  first  Appellant's
    deteriorating health.

33. I find that the Appellants both have  a  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom  to  the  extent  that  this  encompasses  their   health   and
    relationships with the sponsor and her husband.

34. I  find  that  the  Respondent's  decisions  will  interfere  with  the
    protected rights to a sufficiently serious extent so to engage  Article
    8.

35. There is no suggestion that  the  Respondent's  decisions  are  not  in
    accordance with the law, or fail to pursue a legitimate aim.

36. Proportionality is, as is often  the  case,  the  key  issue  in  these
    appeals. In conducting the balancing exercise, I take into account  and
    weigh up the following matters.

37.  The first Appellant is getting older and  her  health  is  in  general
    deteriorating, although she is not significantly incapacitated and  her
    conditions are not of a particularly unusual or serious nature.

38. The second Appellant is fully dependent upon others for  care.  She  is
    vulnerable and significantly disabled. Her required levels of care  are
    high.  Having  said  that,  I  have  found  that  appropriate  care  is
    potentially available in India, whether that is residential or live-in.
    She would not be returning to a country she had left  many  years  ago,
    having lived in India until  2013.  She  is  not  receiving  specialist
    medical intervention here. There is no need, on my  findings,  for  the
    Appellants to be separated from one another.

39. I find that a separation of the Appellants from the sponsor  would  not
    have significant detrimental impact on them in  emotional  terms.  They
    have lived apart from the sponsor for many years prior to  arriving  in
    the United Kingdom in early 2013. In addition, as set  out  previously,
    the  second  Appellant's  bond  is   particularly   strong   with   her
    grandmother. Even in this country, on balance they spend more of  their
    waking time as a couple, than  they  do  with  the  sponsor.  There  is
    nothing in the Social Worker's report to indicate a material  detriment
    arising from a separation of this kind.

40.  Contrary  to  Mr  Tufan's  submission,  these  cases  are  not  to  be
    categorised as 'health cases', and thus attracting a higher  threshold.
    In truth they are about care in a broader sense. To a large extent, the
    issues are reflected in the Rules themselves, and Mr  Tufan's  argument
    seems rather to have ignored this fact. Whilst Mr Tufan's submission is
    misplaced, this does  not  in  fact  take  the  Appellants'  cases  any
    further.

41. The effective control of immigration is in the public  interest  and  I
    attach significant weight  to  this  factor.  The  Appellants  came  as
    visitors and have only ever been in the  United  Kingdom  on  a  highly
    precarious basis. This too counts against them.

42. The fact that the  Appellant's  do  not  meet  the  relevant  Rules  is
    significant. It is not simply  a  starting  point  for  considering  an
    Article 8 claim outside of the Rules, but a matter  that  must  now  be
    accorded greater weight in light of legislative policy  (see  paragraph
    47 of Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558 and paragraph 32  of  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387).

43. In the present appeals, it  is  conceded  that  the  Appellants  cannot
    satisfy Paragraph 276ADE(vi), a provision that to my mind encompasses a
    wide range of potential considerations relevant  to  the  issue  of  an
    individual's circumstances both in the United Kingdom and  upon  return
    to their home country. Thus, the gap between Paragraph 276ADE(vi) and a
    proportionality assessment which is "more at large"  is  in  reality  a
    small one. Given that  I  have  found  that  appropriate  care  can  be
    provided in India and that a return of the  Appellants  together  would
    not in and of itself cause material harm to  them,  I  cannot  see  any
    compelling circumstances in respect of this aspect  of  the  Article  8
    claims.

44. In terms of Appendix FM and the Adult  Dependent  Relative  route,  the
    inability of the Appellants to switch may possibly be  described  as  a
    'technical' matter. The point made by Ms Allen that there  is  a  'near
    miss' element is not entirely  misconceived.  At  paragraph  56  of  SS
    (Congo), the Court of Appeal commented  that  a  'near  miss'  was  not
    "wholly irrelevant" to the issue of proportionality. However, it  takes
    a "good deal"  more  than  this  to  make  out  a  case  of  compelling
    circumstances (see paragraph 55). In these appeals, I have  found  that
    even if an entry clearance application had been made,  the  substantive
    provision relating to the availability of care in India would not  have
    been satisfied. Thus, applying the intention behind the Adult Dependent
    Relative route, the miss was in reality one of somewhat more substance.
    Further, even the 'no-switching' prohibition is remains relevant.  This
    is because the Rules reflect legislative policy that deems it necessary
    for a particular class of  persons  to  obtain  entry  clearance  in  a
    specified category prior to arrival in the United Kingdom. This  was  a
    change from the old Paragraph 317 provisions. It seems to me as  though
    this change must be afforded due weight.

45. The English language issue does not arise in these appeals by virtue of
    Mr  Tufan's  sensible  recognition  of   the   Appellants'   particular
    circumstances.

46. It has never been argued that the Appellants cannot be accommodated and
    maintained by the sponsor and her husband. It  right  to  note  however
    that both Appellants have accessed NHS treatment.  Whilst  this  is  no
    criticism of them, the public purse must be taken to include NHS health
    care. I conclude that the Appellants, in particular that first, is very
    likely  to  require  such  treatment,  and  this  is  relevant  to  the
    Respondent's aim of ensuring  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the  United
    Kingdom.

47. Based on my primary findings of fact, I conclude that the  sponsor  and
    her husband could reasonably move to India to assist in the care of the
    Appellants as an alternative to the provision of care by others.  Their
    British nationality is of course relevant, but it is not a trump  card.
    Their ties to the United  Kingdom  are,  aside  from  citizenship,  not
    particularly strong. There is nothing to indicate  that  employment  in
    India would be unlikely. The recipients of the care are  two  of  their
    closest relatives: a mother and  a  daughter.  There  is  a  reasonable
    choice to be made here.

48. Taking  everything  into  account,  I  conclude  that  the  Appellant's
    interests are outweighed by those favouring the  Respondent,  and  that
    removal would be proportionate. There are no  compelling  circumstances
    in these appeals, by which I mean none as seen in the  context  of  the
    Rules that the Appellants have failed to  meet.  The  disabilities  and
    care needs of the Appellants cannot in  and  of  themselves  amount  to
    compelling circumstances where  care  provision  is  available  in  the
    country of origin, as this situation is covered by the  Rules.  I  have
    sympathy for the Appellants and their family, but I apply the law as  I
    see it to be.

49. The appeals fail on all grounds.

Anonymity

50. No direction has been sought and I do not make one.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by  dismissing  the  appeals  under  the  Immigration
Rules and on human rights grounds.


Signed      Date: 26 October 2015

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date: 26 October 2015

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Annex A: Error of Law Decision

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/08704/2014
                                                               IA/08733/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 August 2015                    |On 16 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              ms annamma thomas
                              miss esmi xavier
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms F Allen, Counsel, instructed by Paul John and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge G A Black (Judge Black), promulgated on 7 October  2014,
    in which she dismissed the Appellants' linked appeals. The appeals were
    against the Respondent's decisions of 28 January 2014, refusing to vary
    their respective leave to remain, and to remove them  from  the  United
    Kingdom under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act
    2006.

 2. The first Appellant is the mother of the second. Both are nationals  of
    India. The first Appellant was born on 15 February 1936, and the second
    on  18  January  1982.  Their  applications  to  the  Respondent   were
    essentially made on the basis that they were adult dependent  relatives
    of the United  Kingdom  sponsor,  Mrs  Animascrene  Xavier,  a  British
    citizen. She is the daughter of the first Appellant and the  mother  of
    the second. The applications, made on 18 February 2013,  were  rejected
    after consideration under Appendix FM to and Paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. Judge Black heard the linked appeals on 23 September 2014. At paragraph
    19 of her decision she found  the  first  Appellant's  evidence  to  be
    "entirely reliable and truthful." She then found that neither Appellant
    could satisfy the Rules. In particular, she found that the  Eligibility
    criteria were not met as the Appellants had been in the United  Kingdom
    only as visitors rather than as pre-existing adult dependent  relatives
    (paragraph 20).

 4. Importantly, at paragraphs 21 and 23 Judge Black states that there were
    "no good arguable  grounds"  to  warrant  consideration  of  Article  8
    outside of the Rules. She finds that the relevant medical conditions of
    each Appellant was pre-existing from when they were last  in  India  in
    2012. There is a finding that the first Appellant could still care  for
    herself. It is said  that  there  was  "no  evidence"  that  the  first
    Appellant was unable to care for the second Appellant, as she had  done
    in the past. There was a male relative in India  who  could  help  with
    care needs. A fresh application could be made from India.  It  is  said
    that the sponsor could go to India and care for the  Appellants  there.
    At paragraph 25 it is said that there had been no significant change on
    medical grounds for either Appellant and that  the  Rules  covered  the
    issues of age and illness. The appeals were dismissed under  the  Rules
    and, apparently, on Article 8 grounds.

 5. The Appellants sought permission to appeal on the  grounds  that  Judge
    Black had failed to take relevant evidence into account (namely that of
    the first Appellant), and that she should have made  an  assessment  of
    Article 8 outside of the Rules. Permission was refused  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal but granted on renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsay on
    5 May 2015.

The hearing before me

 6. Ms Allen relied on the grounds  of  appeal.  Judge  Black  should  have
    considered the claims outside of the Rules. There had been  a  relevant
    change  of  circumstances,  namely  the  deterioration  in  the   first
    Appellant's health, as set out in her  witness  statement.  She  stated
    that the male relative had not in fact been living at the family  home,
    and in any event there were difficulties with a  male  relative  giving
    intimate personal care to a female.

 7. Mr Melvin relied on the Respondent's rule 24 notice. In addition  there
    was no real medical evidence before Judge Black, the issue of the  male
    relative's whereabouts was not in the grounds, and the Judge's findings
    on a lack of change in circumstances were sustainable.

Decision on error of law

 8. I find that there are errors of law in  the  decision  of  Judge  Black
    which in combination lead me to the conclusion that her  decision  must
    be set aside.

 9. The  first  error  is  her  refusal  to  carry  out  an  assessment  of
    proportionality  outside  of  the  Rules.  Although  this   issue   had
    previously been left somewhat uncertain in light of Gulshan (Article  8
    - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC),  the  position
    has been clarified in several decisions since, including  MM  (Lebanon)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 985, paragraphs 134-135, Ganesabalan [2014]  EWHC  2712
    Admin, paragraphs 9 and 29, and Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74). Where, as in
    a case such as the present, the  Rules  are  not  a  complete  code,  a
    'second-stage' Article assessment outside of the Rules is required. The
    extent and nature of that assessment will depend on the  scope  of  the
    Rules in question. But an assessment there must nonetheless be.

10. In light of  the  preceding  paragraph  there  has  been  an  error  in
    approach. Is this error  material?  In  my  view  it  is.  This  is  so
    primarily because of Judge Black's second error of law. I have  already
    noted that she found  the  first  Appellant's  evidence  to  be  wholly
    credible. That evidence was contained largely in a witness statement in
    the Appellant's bundle. In paragraphs 3 and 5  of  that  statement  the
    first Appellant clearly states that  her  health  had  deteriorated  in
    recent times and that she could no longer care for the second Appellant
    (whose needs were substantial, as  evidenced  by  unchallenged  medical
    reports). Once this evidence was accepted by Judge Black, she was bound
    to take account of it and apply it to her conclusions,  or  give  clear
    reasons for not doing do. However, as noted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Lindsay in her grant of permission, this has not been done. There is, I
    find, a genuine inconsistency  between  the  acceptance  of  the  first
    Appellant's evidence in paragraph 19 on the one hand and the other hand
    the conclusion in paragraph 23 that the  first  Appellant  could  still
    look after the second Appellant. The second error lies  in  failing  to
    take account of material evidence which  had  been  accepted  as  being
    reliable. In turn,  if  the  accepted  evidence  had  been  taken  into
    account, this was  in  itself  a  platform  upon  which  to  start  the
    necessary balancing exercise outside of the Rules. The absence of  what
    Mr  Melvin  described  as  "real"  medical  evidence  did  not  somehow
    automatically deprive the first Appellant's own evidence of weight.

11. There are two additional matters which go to disclose  the  materiality
    of the failure to consider Article 8 outside of the Rules.  Whilst  the
    section of Appendix FM dealing  with  adult  dependent  relatives  does
    cover age and illness, these matter were not substantively addressed by
    Judge Black because the Appellants  failed  at  the  eligibility  stage
    (based on their status as visitors). Finally, although it is said  that
    the sponsor could return to India, there is no  reasoning  around  this
    point, and from what I can see in the papers before me this  issue  was
    not fully canvassed at the hearing.

12. As the errors are material, I have decided to  exercise  my  discretion
    and set aside Judge Black's decision.

Disposal of the appeals

13. I have concluded that I should re-make the decisions in these  appeals.
    It is agreed by the parties that the only issue is Article 8 outside of
    the Rules. In addition, there is no reason to disturb the clear finding
    of Judge Black that the  first  Appellant's  evidence  is  credible.  I
    therefore specifically preserve the positive  credibility  findings  in
    respect of the first Appellant.

14. It was suggested by both representatives that I could not go on and re-
    make the decisions purely on the evidence currently before me. I agreed
    that I could not proceed to re-make  the  decisions  in  these  appeals
    without both parties having the opportunity to adduce further  evidence
    and/or for considered submissions. Therefore,  a  continuation  hearing
    will take place before me on a date to be fixed.

Anonymity

15. There has been no direction previously, and none has been  sought  from
    me. I make no direction.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeals are adjourned for a continuation hearing.

Directions
      1. The appeals shall be re-listed before Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Norton-Taylor at Field House on a date not before 1 October 2015;
      2. The only issue to be considered at the continuation hearing will be
         Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules;
      3. Any further evidence to be relied on by either party shall be filed
         and served with the Upper Tribunal and the other side no later than
         14 days prior to the next hearing;
      4. Oral evidence may be taken at the next hearing. As stated  in  this
         Decision, the first Appellant's previous evidence has been accepted
         and this is preserved. If the Appellant's representatives wish  her
         to give additional oral  evidence,  they  must  contact  the  Upper
         Tribunal immediately to confirm the need for an interpreter.


Signed      Date:

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

