
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Numbers:
IA/08470/2015


                                               IA/08501/2015

                                            IA/08507/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29 August 2019                       |On 06 September 2019                |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                               CHARANJIT SINGH
                               GURBINDER KAUR
                                SURPREET KAUR
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Jafferji, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The first appellant is a citizen of India ('the  appellant').   His
         wife and child are the second and third appellants in this  matter.
         They are dependents upon his claim.   The  appellant  has  appealed
         against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') dated 10 July
         2015, in which it dismissed his appeal on human rights grounds.

Background

      2.  The  appellant's  background  in  the  United  Kingdom  ('UK')  is
         summarised in the chronology below.

         2.6.08   A enters the  UK  with  entry  clearance  as  a  religious
    worker.

         5.11.08  A granted further leave as a religious worker.

         9.12.10  A's application for further leave as a Tier 2 (Minister of
                  Religion) Migrant ('Tier 2 Migrant') refused.

         7.3.11   FTT Judge Parker allows A's appeal on Article  8  grounds.
                  The FTT noted that A scored the maximum points  under  the
                  PBS but he was unable to meet para  245ZF(e)  because  his
                  leave to remain was not included in the list  of  relevant
                  categories i.e. he was unable to meet  the  'no-switching'
                  requirement.  This is because the A had been granted leave
                  as a religious worker under the old Rules and not leave as
                  a Tier 2 Migrant.  It was accepted that A  performed  this
                  role   at   all   material   times   and   it   would   be
                  disproportionate to expect him and his family  members  to
                  return to India to apply for entry clearance.

         12.4.11  A granted discretionary leave ('DL') for  three  years  to
    12.4.11.

         11.4.14  A applies for leave to remain as a Tier 2 Migrant.

         16.2.15  SSHD refuses  application  because:  a)  A  was  not  last
                  granted leave in that capacity (but was last granted  DL);
                  b) the Certificate  of  Sponsorship  ('CoS')  provided  by
                  Sponsor had been cancelled; c) the Sponsor was  unable  to
                  certify maintenance.

         10.7.15  FTT Judge Place  dismisses  A's  appeal  on  human  rights
             grounds.

         23.11.15 A's application for permission to appeal against the FTT's
                  decision refused by the Upper Tribunal ('UT').

         4.2.16   Collins J grants permission to challenge the UT's  refusal
                  of permission, observing it arguable, inter alia, that the
                  relevant  transitional  arrangements  were  material   and
                  should have been considered by the FTT.

         29.6.18  UT grants permission to appeal.

         25.7.19  UT hearing adjourned with directions for  the  parties  to
                  file skeleton arguments.

      3. The matter now comes before me to  determine  whether  Judge  Place
         made an error of law.

Hearing / issues in dispute

      4. At the hearing before me the representatives agreed that  the  main
         issues raised in the grounds  of  appeal  could  be  summarised  as
         follows:

          i) Did Judge Place commit an error of law in failing to take into
             account the respondent's policy  on  DL  when  conducting  the
             Article 8 ECHR balancing exercise?




         ii) If the answer to (i) is yes, would that have made any material
             difference to the outcome, as the SSHD's position was that the
             circumstances  before  Judge  Place  were  different  to   the
             circumstances before Judge Parker.

      5. At the beginning of the hearing, Mr  Mills  accepted  that  as  the
         appellant had been granted DL before 2 July 2012, the 'Statement of
         Intent: Family Migration' policy dated June  2012  was  potentially
         applicable.  This states that those who were granted  DL  before  9
         July 2012, like this appellant, would be  subject  to  transitional
         arrangements and not necessarily the requirements  of  the  amended
         Immigration Rules.  The policy also states this:

             "...you will continue to be dealt with under the discretionary
             leave policy through to settlement if you qualify for it."

      6. The DL policy as in force at the date of the hearing  before  Judge
         Place  (version  6)  repeats  this  in  section  10  dealing   with
         transitional arrangements. It also states that  an  application  to
         extend DL should be made shortly before  DL  expires  and  will  be
         subject to an active review.  This will depend on the  reasons  why
         DL was granted.   The policy then states this:

             "-   Decision makers must consider whether  the  circumstances
                prevailing at the time  of  the  original  grant  of  leave
                continue at the date of  decision.   If  the  circumstances
                remain the same  and  the  criminality  thresholds  do  not
                apply, a further period  of  3  years  Discretionary  Leave
                should be granted.

              - If there have been significant  changes  or  the  applicant
                fails to meet the criminality thresholds...the  application
                for further leave will be refused."

      7. Mr Mills accepted that pursuant to  that  policy,  DL  was  usually
         extended unless there was any material change in circumstances.

      8. Both representatives  then  made  helpful  submissions  and  placed
         reliance upon their respective skeleton arguments.

      9. Mr Jafferji submitted that it is implicit from  the  Judge  Place's
         decision that reliance  was  being  placed  upon  the  transitional
         arrangements within the policy  documents  and  these  should  have
         informed the correct approach to  the  applicable  legal  framework
         relevant to Article 8.

     10. Mr Mills submitted that it was fundamental that the  appellant  did
         not apply for an extension of DL, but rather  made  an  application
         for leave under the Rules.  He submitted that it followed that  the
         transitional arrangements relevant to applications for an extension
         of DL were irrelevant in those circumstances and Judge  Place  made
         no material error of law.

     11. After hearing from both representatives I reserved my decision.   I
         also heard from both representatives on the appropriate disposal of
         the appeal, should I find an error of law.  They agreed that any re-
         making would involve substantial fact-finding.  This is because the
         person said to have sponsored the appellant in the  earlier  stages
         of his time in the UK was sentenced to nine years imprisonment  for
         facilitating illegal workers and the appellant has  been  named  as
         one of these.

     12. I now provide my decision with reasons.

Error of law discussion

     13. I must first of all address whether Judge Place  erred  in  law  in
         failing to apply the  policies  I  set  out  above.  Mr  Mills  has
         submitted that there was no obligation to do this because this  was
         not argued before Judge Place and there could be no  such  argument
         in this case because the appellant did not apply for  an  extension
         of DL but leave as a Tier 2 Migrant.

     14. Although I am told that the appellant was represented  by  Counsel,
         there was no skeleton argument before Judge Place.  The grounds  of
         appeal to the FTT against the SSHD's decision did not  specifically
         rely on any argument based upon the policies referred to above.   I
         also note that the application to the SSHD (which  was  drafted  by
         solicitors) did not rely on the policies or seek  an  extension  of
         DL, but rather made an application for leave to remain as a Tier  2
         Migrant.

     15. As conceded before Judge Place, the application under the Rules was
         bound to fail for the obvious reason set out in the decision letter
         - the appellant did not have leave in a category that permitted him
         to apply in-country for leave.  He had DL and was therefore  caught
         by the 'non-switching' requirement of the relevant Rule.

     16. When the decision is read as a whole I am  satisfied  that  it  was
         argued  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  that  when  assessing  the
         proportionality of his removal, the FTT should consider whether  or
         not he could benefit from the relevant policies in the light of the
         findings made by Judge Parker.  Immediately under the  heading  'my
         findings'  at  [14]  of  the  decision,  the  appellant's   Counsel
         submission is recorded as follows:

             "...nothing had changed since Judge Parker's determination  in
             2011, other than that the Appellant had been here  longer  and
             therefore his ties to the UK were stronger.  He  asked  me  to
             find that the Appellant met all the requirements for leave  to
             remain as a Tier 2 (Minister of Religion) Migrant, other  than
             the fact that he does  not  fall  into  one  of  the  required
             categories for transition to that  category  set  out  in  the
             Immigration Rules.  There would be  no  benefit  in  terms  of
             immigration control in requiring the Appellant to leave the UK
             to make an application from India."

     17. The reference to nothing having changed must be viewed in the light
         of Judge Parker's findings and the DL policy  I  have  quoted  from
         above.  I am satisfied that the case being presented on  behalf  of
         the  appellant  was  that  the  respondent's  own  policy  guidance
         required his DL to be extended  because  there  had  not  been  any
         significant changes and there was no question of  him  not  meeting
         the criminality thresholds.  I also  note  that  the  statement  of
         intent policy was in the appellant's bundle before Judge Place.

     18. Judge Place failed to address the fact that the submission recorded
         was predicated upon and supported by the policies.  Moreover, in so
         far as the FTT entirely accepted at [16]  and  [20]  that  the  new
         legal framework applicable to Article 8 cases as  contained  in  s.
         117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the  2002
         Act') applied without more,  that  constituted  an  error  of  law.
         Whilst the FTT was obliged to apply the new legal framework, it was
         also required to take into  account  the  policies  when  assessing
         proportionality for the purposes of Article 8  of  the  ECHR.   AMA
         (Article 1C(5)) - proviso -  internal  relocation)  Somalia  [2019]
         UKUT 11 (IAC) says this at [36]:

             "The only issue before the FTT in this case  was  whether  AMA
             continued  to  qualify  for  protection  under   the   Refugee
             Convention. It is important to read the  headnote  in  SF  and
             others (Guidance - post-2014  Act)  Albania  [2017]  UKUT  120
             (IAC) 10 to the effect that even in the absence of a  'not  in
             accordance with the law' ground of appeal, the Tribunal  ought
             to take the SSHD's guidance into account if it points  clearly
             to a particular outcome, in its proper context. SF involved an
             assessment of the reasonableness of expecting a child to leave
             the UK, and the SSHD's own guidance was relevant to  assisting
             the Tribunal to make judgments, consistent with  the  approach
             that would be taken by the SSHD - see [10] to [12]."

     19. Although the appeal before FTT Place  was  an  'old  style'  appeal
         capable of determining whether the decision under appeal  was  'not
         in accordance with the law', it is clear that the submission  being
         made on behalf of the appellant was not on  this  basis  -  it  was
         entirely  predicated  upon  Article  8.   Nevertheless,  where  the
         respondent's own guidance points clearly to a  particular  outcome,
         this is relevant when determining the proportionality of a decision
         taken in relation to Article 8.  I  entirely  accept  that  the  DL
         policy focuses upon those who make an application for an  extension
         of DL.  This  appellant  did  not.   However  the  wording  of  the
         policies make it clear that a person such as  the  appellant  would
         continue to be dealt with under the DL policy.  The spirit of  that
         policy protects those  granted  DL  prior  to  the  change  in  the
         Immigration Rules.  In my judgment, even though the  appellant  did
         not apply to extend his DL, the  decision-maker  and  the  FTT  was
         still bound to take into account that the appellant's circumstances
         in the light of the guidance in the  policies.   It  was  therefore
         important to consider, for the reasons contained  in  the  policies
         whether the appellant's circumstances had significantly changed.

     20. Whilst (as Collins J observed when  granting  permission)  s.  117B
         "moves the goalposts", it was important  to  treat  Judge  Parker's
         decision as the starting point and to expressly  consider  what  if
         anything, had changed in the light of the policies.  In failing  to
         do so the FTT committed an error of law.

     21. Mr Mills invited me to find that even if Judge  Place  should  have
         considered the policies, there was no material error of law because
         there was a change in circumstances from Judge  Parker's  decision:
         i.e.  whereas  before  Judge  Parker  the  appellant  met  all  the
         requirements of the relevant rule  except  for  the  'no-switching'
         requirement, the situation had changed as the appellant was  unable
         to meet other aspects of the relevant Rules, in particular having a
         valid CoS.  Judge Place expressly found at [19] that  matters  were
         now different because the appellant did not have a valid CoS.

     22. Mr Mills submitted that  the  absence  of  a  valid  CoS  was  key.
         Although  the  decision  letter  refers  to  the  CoS  having  been
         cancelled (on 22  November  2014)  and  the  failure  to  meet  the
         maintenance requirement, Mr Mills accepted that these are likely to
         be interlinked.  As Mr Mills acknowledged, those  refused  for  not
         having a valid CoS, are almost inevitably  refused  on  maintenance
         grounds as well because the employer would not be able to  properly
         certify maintenance in the absence of a CoS.

     23. I note the observations of Collins J when  granting  permission  in
         the judicial review proceedings in this matter:

             "Whilst I recognise that those representing the claimants  did
             not investigate why the [CoS] had been cancelled by  the  Home
             Office, the FTT judge arguably ought to have appreciated  that
             the SSHD should have explained this, since it seemed  contrary
             to the GURWARA's letters and created the difference from Judge
             Parker's assessment."

     24. Although Judge Place mentioned at [19] that  the  reasons  for  the
         cancellation of the CoS  had  not  been  addressed,  there  was  an
         overriding need to determine why it was cancelled  when  addressing
         the relevant policies.  As Mr Mills acknowledged it could have been
         cancelled simply because the appellant was not entitled to leave as
         a Tier 2 Migrant in the light of  the  'no-switching'  requirement,
         and once this  was  recognised  by  the  respondent,  the  CoS  was
         cancelled.  This seems to me to be the more likely reason.  If  the
         SSHD was not satisfied that the sponsor was genuine or appropriate,
         it would have been rather important for that to have been  said  at
         the time.  Mr Mills was unable to access the appropriate system  to
         determine the reason for the cancellation of the CoS.

     25. Furthermore, although Judge Place stated that the CoS issue was not
         addressed, this is difficult to reconcile with the clearly recorded
         submission at [14] that  the  Rules  are  met  save  for  the  "no-
         switching" requirement, as was the case before Judge  Parker.   Had
         Judge Place appreciated the relevance of considering the appeal  in
         the light of the potentially applicable policies, that  would  have
         led to an enquiry into the reasons  for  cancelling  the  CoS.   As
         Collins J observed, the evidence before the FTT  from  the  Gurwara
         supported the appellant's entitlement to a CoS.

     26. In all the circumstances, the failure to apply the policy may  have
         made  a  material  difference  to  the  outcome  of   the   appeal,
         notwithstanding the position adopted by  the  respondent  regarding
         the CoS.

     27. It follows that the FTT's decision contains  a  material  error  of
         law.

Disposal

     28. The findings of fact that need to be made may  well  be  extensive.
         Mr Mills pointed out that it  is  most  likely  that  even  if  the
         appellant has amassed the requisite 10 years lawful  residence  and
         even assuming that the DL policy has the potential to be applied in
         the appellant's favour, it will be necessary to investigate  assess
         the evidence said to link the appellant to the criminal  enterprise
         that led to a nine year sentence for a previous sponsor.   I  heard
         no evidence on this issue and have  made  no  findings.   I  merely
         observe  that  the  factual  matrix  will  need  to  be   carefully
         considered.

     29. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the  relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
         findings required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that
         this is an  appropriate  case  to  remit  to  the  FTT.   Extensive
         findings of fact are  necessary  and  this  is  likely  to  involve
         detailed  oral  evidence  and  cross-examination  on   wide-ranging
         matters.

Decision

     30. The FTT decision contains an error of law and I set it aside.

     31. The decision is remitted to the FTT, where it shall be re-made by a
         judge other than Judge Place.



Signed UTJ Plimmer                               Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     30 August 2019
