
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08344/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th January 2015                           |On 28th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                         Ms Kinga Dobrawa Binkowska
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse to issue  her  with
    a permanent residence card, as an EEA national exercising treaty rights
    in the United Kingdom, was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-
    Stewart ("the judge") in a determination promulgated on 30th  September
    2014.

2.   The appellant claimed to be entitled to  a  permanent  residence  card,
    having resided here in accordance  with  the  2006  Regulations  for  a
    continuous period of  five  years.   She  relied  particularly  on  her
    employment  and  provided  wage  slips  bearing  dates  in  2013,   P60
    certificates and a contract of  employment.   The  Secretary  of  State
    found that bank statements and wage slips  were  not  provided  over  a
    period of five years and so the evidence was  insufficient.   Moreover,
    it appeared that the appellant's earnings varied in the years  2010  to
    2011.

3.   Having weighed the documentary evidence before  her,  the  judge  found
    that the appellant had not discharged the burden upon  her  of  showing
    that she fell within regulation 15(1)(a) of the 2006 Regulations.

4.   In an application for permission to appeal, it was contended  that  the
    judge erred in several respects.  First,  in  finding  that  "the  only
    original documents produced were the payslips for 2009  to  2010".   In
    fact, other original items, including payslips for 2008 and 2009,  were
    made available.  The  judge  inspected  a  bundle  of  such  items  and
    returned them to the appellant's representative.  Secondly,  the  judge
    erred in relation to the evidence before her.  At paragraph  9  of  the
    determination  the  judge  noted  that   the   Secretary   of   State's
    representative accepted that a lot of new evidence had been provided by
    the appellant, which had not been before the caseworker.  That evidence
    supported the appellant's case but the judge failed to give reasons  or
    adequate reasons for rejecting it.  Further, the evidence  showed  that
    the judge's conclusion that there were "omissions" for  2011  and  2012
    and "up to July 2013" was unsustainable.  There were payslips and  P60s
    showing the appellant's employment from April 2008 to  April  2011  and
    then as a part-time worker from April  2011  to  March  2012.   At  the
    beginning of April 2012 the appellant began work as  a  maternity  care
    assistant for the NHS and remained  employed  in  that  role  to  date.
    Finally, the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  reasons  given  by  the
    appellant for her income being lower during  2011  and  2012.   In  any
    event, part-time employment was still sufficient to show worker status,
    for the purposes of Community law.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on 19th November 2014.  In a  rule  24
    response from the Secretary of State, the appeal  was  opposed  on  the
    basis that the judge properly considered the  evidence.   The  response
    was qualified, however, in relation to the specific  grounds  regarding
    evidence submitted at the hearing  and  showing  employment  over  five
    years, as the author of  the  response  did  not  have  access  to  the
    respondent's bundle or the Record of Proceedings.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Walker said at the outset that he  was  now  in  possession  of  the
    respondent's  bundle  and  the  Presenting  Officer's   minute.    This
    confirmed what appeared in the appellant's grounds that there was  much
    evidence which had not been before the  caseworker.   The  respondent's
    representative at the hearing observed that there was a lot of evidence
    of employment and that she did not have much to add on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.  The Secretary of State also  had  a  yellow  ring-
    binder which contained copies of the evidence produced at the  hearing.
    One of the earliest items was a letter confirming  that  the  appellant
    started employment on 10th April 2008 and the other items in the folder
    showed employment through to 2014.

7.   Ms Smith said that the original documents regarding employment in  2008
    and 2009 were before the judge, who looked at them and then handed them
    back.  A trainee at the appellant's solicitors had made a short witness
    statement  to  this  effect,  referring  to  the   yellow   ring-binder
    containing original documents.   Moreover,  the  judge  confirmed  that
    these  original  items  were  before  her,  in  paragraph  10  of   the
    determination.

8.   Paragraph 11 showed that the judge may have misunderstood the  evidence
    regarding periods of employment.  The Secretary of State was  concerned
    particularly with  2011  and  2012,  years  in  which  the  appellant's
    earnings were less than  in  other  years.   The  judge's  reasons  for
    rejecting the evidence,  as  supporting  the  appellant's  claim,  were
    inadequate.   Paragraph  11  contained  material  errors.   The   judge
    referred to a contract of employment at Guy's Hospital in 2014 but that
    contract belonged to the appellant's husband.  The appellant worked for
    the NHS, beginning in 2012, but not at  Guy's  Hospital.   It  was  not
    clear from paragraph 11 how the judge dealt with the evidence regarding
    employment  in  2011  and  2012  or  the  evidence  showing   full-time
    employment in the NHS from that year to date.  There was an absence  of
    focus on the years in dispute and on the  supporting  evidence.   There
    was no issue of falsity regarding  any  of  the  documents.   Part-time
    employment was sufficient for the purposes of the 2006 Regulations and,
    again, it was not clear from the determination how  the  judge  engaged
    with the evidence showing part-time employment in 2011 and 2012.

9.   Mr Walker said that the Secretary of State accepted that the judge  had
    made a material error in assessing  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    employment.  It was clear that there was evidence  of  employment  from
    2008, through to 2014 but the determination contained  no  reasons  for
    rejecting that evidence or showing how the judge reached her conclusion
    that the appellant had failed to discharge the burden of proof.

10.  Ms Smith said  in  a  brief  response  that  the  documentary  evidence
    included P60s and payslips showing residence and employment  throughout
    a period of five years, beginning in 2008 and including the  years  the
    Secretary of State had been concerned about.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11.  I conclude that the judge made a material error of law  in  failing  to
    properly engage with the evidence before her.  The critical  issue  was
    whether the appellant could  show  five  years'  continuous  employment
    here.  At the very end of paragraph 10, the judge noted that  a  bundle
    of original payslips for 2008 and 2009 was produced and returned to the
    appellant.  However, at the very beginning of the next  paragraph,  she
    found that "the only original documents produced were the payslips  for
    2009 to 2010".  With great respect to her, it is difficult to reconcile
    that finding with the presence of the earlier payslips.  The judge went
    on to make a general observation that the balance of the  documents  in
    the ring-binder regarding payment were photocopied payslips  and  P60s.
    Nonetheless, those items had weight as evidence, of course, even though
    they were  copies.   She  found  that  Inland  Revenue  self-assessment
    statements did not take matters further as the information was provided
    to the appellant's accountants after the adverse decision was made.  As
    a matter of general principle, however, that evidence was relevant  and
    fell to be taken into account in the overall assessment, even though it
    postdated the decision.  The judge made a factual mistake  in  relation
    to the Guy's Hospital employment  contract,  dating  from  2014.   This
    belonged to the appellant's husband and the judge may  have  failed  to
    keep the focus on the appellant's own employment  contracts,  including
    one dating from  2012  showing  her  employment  with  the  NHS  (which
    employment continues to date).

12.  Overall, I conclude that the judge erred in failing to give  weight  to
    the original payslips showing  employment  beginning  in  2008  and  in
    appearing to give no  weight  or  negligible  weight  to  post-decision
    evidence.

13.  The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The  two
    representatives agreed that the decision could be remade in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, in the light of the evidence already available.

Remaking the Decision

14.  Mr Walker said that the Secretary of State  no  longer  maintained  her
    stance that the requirements of the 2006 Regulations were not  met,  in
    the light of the evidence before the  Upper  Tribunal.   This  included
    P60s and payslips, showing employment, on  a  full-time  and  part-time
    basis, between 2008 and 2014.

15.  Having made my own assessment of the documentary evidence, I find  that
    Mr Walker was right to give that indication.  The documentary  evidence
    does indeed show, by means of a combination of part-time and  full-time
    employment,  that  the  appellant  has  resided  here  and   has   been
    continuously employed for a period of over  five  years,  beginning  in
    April 2008.  Since 2012, she has been  employed  by  the  NHS.   Before
    that, she worked as a part-time welfare  officer  for  Aldgate  College
    between April 2011 and March 2012 and before that she was  employed  by
    the Alliance Business Network, from April 2008 to April 2011.  Evidence
    showing  these  periods  of  employment  includes  payslips,  P60s  and
    contracts of employment.  It is true that her earnings were less in the
    years 2011 and 2012 but  that  is  neither  here  nor  there,  for  the
    purposes of the 2006 Regulations.

16.  The grounds of appeal have been made out.  The decision to  refuse  the
    application  is  unlawful  as  the  appellant  fell  within  regulation
    15(1)(a) of the 2006 Regulations.  She has shown, in the light  of  the
    evidence of her employment that she has resided in the  United  Kingdom
    in accordance with the 2006 Regulations for a continuous period of five
    years.

17.  The appeal is allowed substantively, as, in the light  of  my  findings
    of fact, the duty to issue a  permanent  residence  card  arises  under
    regulation 18(1) of the 2006 Regulations.  The appellant is entitled to
    the document she applied for.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set aside, it is  remade
as follows: the appeal is allowed.

Anonymity

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no order on this occasion.






Signed                                  Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal, I make a whole fee award  in  respect  of  the
fee payable in these proceedings.






Signed                                  Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

