
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08505/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 October 2014                             |On 21 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

                            SANTOSH KUMAR PISIKE
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Salanki, Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against a decision by Designated First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Manuell that there was no valid appeal against a removal decision
    taken under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2.   The appellant, having been in the UK since 2007 as a  student,  applied
    for leave to remain for  two  years  for  post-study  work.   This  was
    refused on the basis that a false document had been submitted, namely a
    letter from Kensington College of Business stating that  the  appellant
    had been awarded a Masters in Business Administration (MBA).  A refusal
    letter was accompanied by two  notices  (IS151A  and  IS151A  Part  2).
    These notices indicated that the appellant was a person  who  had  used
    deception in seeking leave to remain; that any leave previously granted
    was invalidated through the operation of section 10(8) of the 1999 Act;
    and that an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 could only be pursued after the appellant had  left
    the UK.

3.   The  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  argued  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal had jurisdiction where a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    declined jurisdiction, but where that  decision  had  been  given  full
    consideration.  The grounds went on to argue that the appellant  had  a
    right  of  appeal,  with  reference  to  sections  82  and  92  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ransley,
    on 18 August  2014,  on  the  basis  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    immigration decision in question was a refusal to vary leave  with  the
    result that the person concerned was left with no  leave  to  enter  or
    remain (section 82(2)(e) of the  2002  Act).   On  this  basis  it  was
    arguable that there was an in country right of appeal,  with  reference
    to section 92 of the 2002 Act.

5.   At the start of the hearing we indicated to the parties  that  we  were
    aware of a number of cases heard  at  Taylor  House  in  which  similar
    issues, as far as the  merits  were  concerned,  had  been  considered.
    Detailed evidence had been heard about the administrative  failings  at
    the Kensington College of Business, and in the majority of cases it had
    been decided that it had not been established that false documents  had
    been  submitted.   The  findings  were  concerned  with  administrative
    confusion  at  the  Kensington  College  of  Business,   resulting   in
    unreliable responses being given to requests for information to confirm
    which students had been on the MBA course.

6.   Mr Wilding, for the respondent, produced copies of two  cases  relevant
    to the jurisdiction issue: R (On the application of Mohamed Bilal  Jan)
    v SSHD (Section 10 removal) IJR [2014] UKUT 00265 (IAC); and R (On  the
    application of RK) (Nepal) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 359.

7.   We heard submissions from  both  representatives  on  the  jurisdiction
    point, and reserved our determination.

8.   We accept the submission made by Mr  Wilding  that  the  jurisdictional
    point at issue here is one that was decided in the Bilal Jan  case,  at
    paragraphs 33 and 34, with reference to the judgment in RK (Nepal).  As
    is clear from the passage from the judgment in  RK  (Nepal)  quoted  at
    paragraph  33   of   Bilal   Jan,   there   were   differing   judicial
    interpretations on the issue, but that can no longer be said to be  the
    case.

9.   Ms Salanki, for the appellant, indicated her  awareness  of  the  Bilal
    Jan and RK  (Nepal)  cases,  but  did  not  engage  with  them  in  her
    submissions.  The most that she could say, as a response to the section
    10(8) invalidation point, was that section 82(2)(e) could be read in  a
    simple and straightforward manner, on the basis that the actual  impact
    of this decision was to refuse a variation application with the  result
    of the appellant no longer having leave.

10.  In our view this is no answer,  in  legal  terms,  to  the  authorities
    referred to by Mr Wilding.  The legal mechanism here appears to  us  to
    be clear.  It is that  the  decision  to  remove  the  appellant  under
    section 10 of the 1999 Act, as a person who used deception  in  seeking
    leave to  remain,  had  the  effect  of  invalidating  the  appellant's
    previous grant of leave.  Since  the  appellant's  previous  leave  was
    invalidated the appellant cannot be said to have  made  an  application
    for a variation of his leave at a time when he had valid leave.   As  a
    result no entitlement to an in country right of appeal arises.  Another
    way of putting this is that the  invalidation  of  the  previous  leave
    meant that  the  decision  taken  was  not  a  refusal  to  vary  leave
    (s82(2)(d)), because there was no leave to be varied,  and  was  not  a
    variation of leave (s82(2)(e)), for the same reason.

11.  There was some discussion at the hearing as to the consequences of  the
    jurisdiction point.  Given what  was  said  at  the  start,  about  the
    outcome of similar cases heard recently at Taylor House, the impact  of
    section 10(8) of the 1999 Act could be said to be draconian given  that
    the  respondent's  false  document  allegation  may  not  stand  up  to
    scrutiny.  There also  appears  to  be  an  unattractive  retrospective
    element to the operation of section 10(8), and its effect in  depriving
    the appellant of an in country right of appeal.  There  was  also  some
    discussion of how or why it had come about that numerous similar  cases
    had been decided in such a way  that  in  country  appeal  rights  were
    available, whereas this one was being decided in a  way  that  deprived
    the appellant of an in country appeal  right.   All  of  these  issues,
    however, are not directly relevant to the jurisdiction point, and  they
    were also ventilated and decided in the Bilal  Jan  case.   In  summary
    that case decided that  an  out  of  country  right  of  appeal  was  a
    sufficient remedy, and that there was no obligation for the Home Office
    to explain why other possible legal  options  had  not  been  followed.
    There has also been a history of the development of the law surrounding
    section 47 removal decisions, which may  explain  different  approaches
    taken in the past in similar cases.

11.  Whilst there would be room for all of these matters  to  be  considered
    at greater length the actual  submissions  before  us  were  relatively
    narrow.  In effect the submissions by Mr Wilding, relying on paragraphs
    33 and 34 of the Bilal Jan decision, were unanswered.  Upon that  basis
    our decision is that it  has  not  been  shown  that  Designated  Judge
    Manuell erred in law in deciding that there was no valid  appeal.   Any
    appeal will only become valid if the appellant leaves the UK.

12.  It was not suggested that there was any  need  for  anonymity  in  this
    appeal, and neither do any issues as to appeal fees arise.

Decision

13.  No error of law having been shown the judge's decision that  there  was
    no valid appeal remains undisturbed.






Signed                                  Date: 20 October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

