
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/08237/2014
                                                               IA/07802/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 29 August 2017                          |On 15 September 2017             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between
                                 RAQUIBA [S]
                                    [w h]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  in  July  2011.   His
    mother, also a citizen of Bangladesh had entered the UK as a student in
    2007.  In June 2012 his mother applied for leave to remain for her  and
    him.  This was refused in January 2014  and  a  decision  was  made  to
    remove.  The appellant and his mother appealed.  In a decision sent  on
    22 March 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge (FtT) Lawrence dismissed  their
    appeals on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

2.   This decision was in fact  a  re-promulgation  of  his  decision  of  3
    November 2014.  He stated he had re-promulgated  because  his  previous
    decision had contained a clerical error (omission of the word "not"  in
    paragraph 44).  The appellant does not take issue with this history.

3.   The appellant's mother had not made an  asylum  claim  but  before  the
    judge she claimed that if she was removed to Bangladesh she would  face
    persecution and serious harm as a member of a particular social  group,
    namely a divorced woman returning to Bangladesh with a child  born  out
    of wedlock.  She claimed that her former husband and family would  seek
    revenge against her for having him deported from  the  UK.   The  judge
    rejected her account.  He found that there was no cogent evidence  that
    there had been any threats of any sorts made by her former  husband  or
    family in Bangladesh and in any event the appellant had a viable option
    of internal relocation as it was open to the mother to live in an urban
    area.  The judge considered such an assessment  was  in  line  with  SA
    (Divorced Women - illegitimate child) Bangladesh CG [2011]  UKUT  00254
    (IAC).  The judge then turned to consider the Article  8  circumstances
    of the appellant and his mother both under the  Immigration  Rules  and
    outside them.  The judge noted that he had been presented with a report
    recommending that it was in the appellant's best  interests  to  access
    treatment in the UK and not in Bangladesh.  This report highlighted the
    fact that the appellant suffers from autism.  At  the  same  time,  the
    judge observed, there was background  information  in  the  form  of  a
    "National Autism Network" stating that the  Bangladesh  government  had
    put in place measures to deal with autism  in  Bangladesh.   The  judge
    concluded that "care is available for [the  appellant]  in  Bangladesh.
    There are issues of funding and how widespread such care is Nonetheless
    it is available".

4.   In assessing the appellant's best interests the  judge  made  reference
    to a number of cases including EV (Philippines) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874.
    Having assessed the appellant's age, the fact he had lived  in  the  UK
    since birth, had only just begun his education in  the  UK,  the  judge
    concluded he was young enough to establish himself in  Bangladesh  with
    his parents' assistance (by parents here the judge  clearly  meant  the
    appellant's mother and the child's biological father, [MH].  As regards
    the appellant's family life with [MH], the judge stated:

         "40. It is a fact that the appellants have  a  'family  life'  with
             [MH].  [MH] is the father of the second appellant.  He told me
             that he  wishes  to  settle  in  the  UK  and  not  return  to
             Bangladesh.  He accepted that the respondent has  never  given
             him any grounds for legitimate expectation that because he has
             been granted student leave in the UK that he will  be  allowed
             to settle in the UK.


         41.  [MH] has limited leave to remain in the UK on a BA  programme.
             He completes his studies at the end of 2015.  He wishes to  go
             onto a MBA programme.  He has a choice.   He  could  accompany
             his son and partner  back  to  Bangladesh  and  pursue  a  MBA
             programme in Bangladesh or he can join them at the  conclusion
             of his MBA programme here."

5.   In written grounds of appeal it was submitted:

    (1)  that the judge had erred by failing  to  adequately  consider  the
         issue of the child's best interests  under  s.55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 while considering the issue of
         proportionality;


    (2)  that the judge failed to consider the appellant's medical  history
         of Global Development delay in light of the various  articles  that
         had  been  submitted  concerning  autism  and  lack  of   treatment
         facilities in Bangladesh;


    (3)  the judge's reasoning with regard to SA was inadequate;


    (4)  that the judge failed to address the consequences  to  the  family
         life as a result of the removal of the  appellant  and  his  mother
         since it would separate them from [MH], the child's father, who was
         lawfully present in the UK;  and


    (6)  the judge applied too high a standard of proof.

6.   The appeal of the appellant and his mother as set out  in  the  renewed
    written grounds of appeal submitted a further ground,  which  concerned
    the judge's alleged failure to deal with the issue that the appellant's
    mother was the victim of domestic violence from her former husband.

7.   The decision of FtT Judge Hollingworth granting  permission  to  appeal
    concluded that  the  grounds  relating  to  Article  8  and  s.55  were
    arguable.

8.   Subsequently  the  appellant's  mother  wrote  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    stating that her immigration  circumstances  had  changed  as  she  was
    making a fresh claim to the respondent for  ILR  (based  on  ten  years
    lawful residency) and therefore wished to withdraw her appeal.   On  10
    August 2017 UTJ Finch consented to  her  application  to  withdraw  her
    appeal.  UTJ Finch directed that the mother clarify within  seven  days
    whether she also wishes to withdraw the appellant's appeal on the basis
    that she had parental responsibility.  The appellant's mother then sent
    a further "Skeleton Argument" confirming that the withdrawal of  appeal
    related only to herself and that the appellant's appeal was maintained.
     This document  attached  documents  detailing  the  treatment  he  was
    currently receiving in the UK, including specialist  help  from  autism
    key workers and speech and language therapists;  and  evidence  of  the
    state of provision for autistic children in Bangladesh.  This  document
    added that the lack of Bengali language would pose another  barrier  to
    the first appellant given his learning difficulties and that to  remove
    the appellant and  his  mother  from  the  UK  would  have  significant
    consequences to family life and separate mother from son.

9.   At the hearing the appellant attended  with  his  father  who  said  he
    wished to represent his child.  I granted him permission to do so.   Mr
    Whitwell was agreeable to going first so as to help [MH] understand the
    nature of the  arguments  he  had  to  address.   [MH]  then  made  his
    submissions.

My Assessment

10.  Whilst the delay caused by  FtT  Judge  Lawrence's  re-promulgation  is
    very unfortunate, this is not a case which turns on the  assessment  of
    credibility.  The appellant's mother has withdrawn her appeal and in my
    judgment that entails withdrawal of the grounds of appeal  relating  to
    her claimed  fear  of  persecution  in  Bangladesh.   The  grounds  are
    concerned exclusively with  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  evidence
    relating to the best interests of the appellant in light of his medical
    condition.  As Mr Whitwell outlined, this case now comes for resolution
    at a time when there is an outstanding  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal relating to the decision of the respondent to refuse [MH]  ILR
    on the basis of long residency.  The appellant's  mother  also  has  an
    outstanding application (made on 12 September  2016)  as  an  unmarried
    partner.  These co-existing proceedings do  not,  however,  affect  the
    task I have to undertake, which is solely to decide  whether  the  (re-
    promulgated) decision of FtT Lawrence is vitiated by legal error.

11.  I am not persuaded that the grounds, both in their written form and  as
    developed by [MH], are made out.

12.  I discern no  legal  error  in  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the appellant.  The judge correctly applied  the  guidance
    set out in EV (Philippines), taking into account  a  range  of  factors
    including the appellant's age, strength of connection within the UK and
    his cultural and linguistic background.  It was open to  the  judge  to
    conclude that the appellant would be able to access treatment  for  his
    autism  in  Bangladesh.   That  was  sufficiently  supported   in   the
    background information before him.  The judge's assessment at paragraph
    34 that "there is nothing cogent put before me  to  suggest  he  cannot
    adapt to life in Bangladesh" was one that was reasonably open to him.

13.  It is true that the judge's assessment of the  best  interests  of  the
    child and also of the proportionality of the decision appealed  against
    appears to be predicated on the  assumption  that  there  would  be  no
    separation of the appellant, his mother and his father.

14.  That, however, is consistent with  the  analysis  carried  out  by  the
    judge at paragraphs 40-41 where he held that it was a matter of  choice
    whether  [MH]  accompanied  the  appellant  and  his  mother  back   to
    Bangladesh.  [MH] presently had no established  residence  in  the  UK,
    having only limited leave to remain on a BA programme.  Judge  Lawrence
    cannot be expected to address the possible outcome of [MH]'s own appeal
    proceedings.  That in my judgment  dispose  of  ground  (4)  above.   I
    should add that of course, if the appellant's mother  succeeds  in  her
    own outstanding application, then obviously the appellant's case  would
    require review, but that again is a matter that lies in the future  and
    cannot affect the efficacy of Judge Lawrence's assessment.

15.  Essentially the appellant could only succeed in his appeal if  able  to
    show that he was entitled to succeed (either under EX.1 or outside  the
    Rules) on the basis that it would not be reasonable to expect  that  he
    leave the UK.  Although the  judge  failed  to  address  this  criteria
    directly (as Mr Whitwell conceded), what matters is substance not  form
    and I am quite satisfied that the judge's reasons for finding that  the
    appellant's best interests  would  not  be  jeopardised  by  return  to
    Bangladesh where care for his  autism  was  available  also  served  to
    demonstrate that requiring him to leave would not be unreasonable.

16.  Regarding the criticism raised as to the judge's treatment  of  the  SA
    case (ground (3) above) and his assessment of the risks to  the  mother
    arising out of her being a victim of domestic violence at the hands  of
    her former husband and family.  I conclude that it must fall away given
    withdrawal by the mother of her appeal.  It was her conscious choice to
    rely entirely on her recent application for ILR on the  basis  of  long
    residence.

17.  I see no substance whatsoever in the allegation that the judge  applied
    too high a standard of proof.

18.  I observe that one of the cases dealt with by the Court  of  Appeal  in
    MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 concerned a child who had autism (the
    sixth appellant, AZ).  Significantly, however, the child in  that  case
    had resided in the UK for seven years  and  as  such  was  entitled  to
    remain in the UK unless  compelling  reasons  could  be  shown  to  the
    contrary.  However, the appellant  in  this  case  was  not  a  British
    citizen and had not resided in the UK for seven years.

19.  In the course of clarifying that only she was withdrawing  her  appeal,
    the appellant's mother has now adduced  further  evidence  including  a
    number that postdate Judge Lawrence's decision, in particular a  letter
    from her GP dated 23 March 2017, a letter from  the  Education,  Health
    and Care Team at London Borough of Barking and  Dagenham  dealing  with
    the EHC plan for the appellant,  a  letter  of  17  July  2017  from  a
    Speciality Doctor in Community Paediatrics.  In deciding whether  Judge
    Lawrence erred in law I cannot have regard to evidence that was not  in
    existence at that time.  As regards the documents bearing dates  before
    Judge Lawrence's decision, they are of the same order  as  those  which
    were before him when he heard the appeal and I do not consider they add
    anything of significance.

20.  For  the  above  reasons,  I  conclude  that  the  FtT  Judge  did  not
    materially err in law and  accordingly  his  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal must stand.   (The  appellant's  mother's  conjoined
    appeal has already been accepted as withdrawn).
No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date: 15 September 2017
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey


