
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08463/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 July 2016 & 25 October 2016    |On 17 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                        MUHAMMAD SAJID HUSSAIN SHAIKH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Marrrington, instructed by Alam Ahmed solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (26 July) & Mr C Bates (25 October) -
                    Senior Presenting Officers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal brought with the permission of Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Eshun  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davies,
    promulgated on 21 July 2015, dismissing the appellant's appeal  against
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department's ("SSHD")  decision  of
    13th February  2015  refusing  to  issue  the  appellant  with  an  EEA
    residence card.

 2. At the centre of this appeal is the issue of  whether  the  appellant's
    marriage to a Ms Iacob on 9 January 2014 is a marriage for the purposes
    of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006  ("2006  Regulations").  The
    SSHD asserts that the marriage is one of convenience and, consequently,
    that it is not a marriage for the purposes  of  the  2006  Regulations.
    The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Davies) agreed with  the  SSHD  on  this
    issue and, consequently, concluded that the fact that the appellant had
    married an  EEA  national  did  not,  even  if  that  EEA  national  is
    exercising treaty rights, require the Secretary of State  to  issue  an
    EEA residence card.

 3. Judge  Davies  was  not  the  first  Tribunal  Judge  to  consider  the
    circumstances of, and reasons for, the marriage between  the  appellant
    and Ms Iacob. The appellant had  an  earlier  application  for  an  EEA
    residence card, based on his marriage to Ms Iacob, refused by the  SSHD
    in a decision of 10 April 2014; it having been concluded  by  the  SSHD
    that the marriage was one  of  convenience.   An  appeal  against  such
    decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Burnett on 24  June
    2014, Judge Burnett also finding the marriage to be one of convenience.



Judge Burnett's decision - a summary

 4. The appellant requested the appeal before judge Burnett  be  determined
    on the papers.

 5. An analysis of the decision discloses that the judge's  conclusion  was
    founded in part on the existence of a number of  discrepancies  between
    the accounts given by the appellant and his wife during the  course  of
    their 'marriage interviews' with Immigration officials.  Judge  Burnett
    observed that he had not been provided with a copy  of  these  marriage
    interviews but he, nevertheless, placed reliance upon a summary thereof
    set out in the SSHD's refusal letter.

 6. Broadly speaking that summary  identified  only  those  points  in  the
    interviews that could be considered to  be  supportive  of  the  SSHD's
    conclusions. There was no analysis  or  consideration  of  points  that
    might have potentially been favourable to the appellant.

 7. Having accepted (i) that appellant and his wife lived together and (ii)
    that the appellant is the father of a  child  born  to  his  wife,  and
    having analysed the explanations provided for the points taken  by  the
    SSHD against the appellant, judge Burnett concluded that  it  was  more
    probable than not that the appellant had entered  into  a  marriage  of
    convenience.

Judge Davies' decision - a summary

 8. Unlike judge Burnett, judge Davies heard oral evidence  from  both  the
    appellant and his wife, as well as a number of other witnesses.

 9. Judge Davies treated judge Burnett's conclusions as the starting  point
    for his considerations, following the starred decision of this Tribunal
    in Devaseelan v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] UKIAT
    00702. He then "considered the evidence  as  to  whether  anything  has
    changed since the previous appeal." [12]. It important to observe  that
    judge Davies did not have a copy of the either the appellant's, or  the
    appellant's wife's, marriage interview record before him -  he  had  an
    'Interview Summary Sheet'.

10. The substance of the reasoning provided by judge Davies for  dismissing
    the appeal is set out within paragraphs 31 to 37 of his decision: -

         "31.     The issues before Judge  Burnett  were  the  same  as  are
             before me. I have considered whether there are any new matters
             arising since the first determination. Mr Aslam  submits  that
             the interview record was only available at that this  hearing.
             However, the allegations and details of the discrepancies were
             available to the judge at the previous hearing.  ....

         32.   On  this  occasion  the  appellant  has  attended   and   was
             accompanied by his spouse and other witnesses.  However,  this
             evidence was available to him  at  the  time  of  the  earlier
             appeal.  I might have taken a different view  had  I  heard  a
             consistent view from the appellant and his spouse  as  to  the
             reasons for having a paper determination previously.  However,
             I have set out the position at paragraphs 14 to 16  above  and
             the wildly inconsistent responses undermine the credibility of
             the appellant and his spouse. .... Moreover, it adds little or
             nothing to what was available to the appellant at the previous
             appeal.

         33.  Although there is a vast amount of documentary evidence as  to
             the residence of the appellant and  his  spouse  I  note  that
             Judge Burnett found at paragraph 30 of his determination  that
             there was evidence to show that the appellant and  his  spouse
             now lived together in Manchester so  this  evidence  does  not
             take matters further.

         34.  I have put little weight on  the  evidence  of  the  witnesses
             called by the appellant for the reasons given above ...

         35.  I must consider the photographic evidence in  the  context  of
             the  overall  evidence.   As  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
             appellant and his wife have shown themselves  to  be  reliable
             witnesses I approach the photographs with  caution.  Moreover,
             photographs were available at the previous appeal and so I  am
             satisfied that they do not take the matter any further.

         36.   Devaseelan  also  provides  that  where  credibility  remains
             arguably alive then  it  would  be  open  for  me  to  revisit
             previous credibility findings. As the document relating to the
             interview was  not  provided  until  this  appeal  I  find  it
             appropriate to revisit the previous findings  on  credibility.
             I have done so by considering the evidence including the  oral
             evidence.  However,  my  finding  overall  on  credibility  is
             influenced  by  findings  on  the  evidence  of  each  of  the
             witnesses.  I am not satisfied for the reasons given that  the
             appellant and his wife or the witnesses  called  are  reliable
             witnesses.  They have not convinced me that their explanations
             for the discrepancies and inconsistencies hold up.   I  accept
             these minor inconsistencies such as the purchase of a sim card
             and  for  whom  it  was  purchased  are  not  of   any   major
             consequence.  However, I find no reason  to  depart  from  the
             previous determination in the findings of fact  made  since  I
             have considerable doubts about the veracity of the evidence or
             the appellant and his spouse and attach little weight  to  the
             evidence of the other witnesses.   The  earlier  determination
             referred to notable  discrepancies.   I  have  not  heard  any
             evidence moreover that was unavailable to the appellant at the
             earlier appeal.

         37.      The burden of proof as indicated in Papajorgji has shifted
             to the appellant in this case.  He has not discharged it and I
             see no reason to  depart  from  the  findings  and  conclusion
             reached in the previous determination."

Error of Law

11. At the hearing of the 26 July 2016 I concluded  that  the  decision  of
    judge Davies contained an error of law capable of affecting the outcome
    of the appeal and I set such decision aside  -  the  following  reasons
    were given in my later written decision:

         18. The most relevant points, for the  present  purposes,  of  the
             guidance given by the Tribunal in Devaseelan, are as follows:

             (1)  The first Adjudicator's determination  should  always  be
                  the starting-point.  ...

             (4)  Facts personal to the Appellant that were not brought  to
                  the attention of the first Adjudicator, although they were
                  relevant to the issues before him, should  be  treated  by
                  the second Adjudicator with the  greatest  circumspection.
                  ...

             (6)  If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies  on
                  facts that are not materially different from those put  to
                  the first Adjudicator, and proposes to support  the  claim
                  by what is in essence the same evidence as that  available
                  to the Appellant at  that  time,  the  second  Adjudicator
                  should  regard  the  issues  as  settled  by   the   first
                  Adjudicator's determination and make his findings in  line
                  with that determination rather than allowing the matter to
                  be relitigated...

             (7)  The force of the reasoning underlying guidelines (4)  and
                  (6) is greatly reduced if there is some very  good  reason
                  why the Appellant's failure to  adduce  relevant  evidence
                  before the first Adjudicator should not be,  as  it  were,
                  held against him. We think such reasons will be rare..."

         19. Judge Davies did not have before him a copy  of  the  marriage
             interview record of either the appellant or his wife,  but  he
             was provided an "Interview Summary  Sheet".   The  information
             contained in this  document  consists  almost  entirely  of  a
             summary of the  "inconsistencies,  issues  and  discrepancies"
             within the appellant's claim. The primary purpose of the sheet
             is evident because the text in 4 of its 5  pages  follows  the
             heading   "Evidence   to   support    recommendation".    That
             recommendation was, of course, that the appellant had  engaged
             in a "sham" marriage. The one  thing  the  "Interview  Summary
             Sheet" cannot claim to contain is a fair and balanced analysis
             of the appellant's  circumstances,  and  in  particular  those
             relating to his marriage.

         20. Nevertheless, it was this document  and  the  equally  partial
             refusal letter, that was  used  to  underpin  judge  Burnett's
             conclusions that the appellant had entered into a marriage  of
             convenience.

         21. The grounds  in  support  of  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
             Tribunal (leading to judge Davies'  decision)  clearly  assert
             unfairness to the appellant as a  consequence  of  the  SSHD's
             failure to  provide  copies  of  the  interview  records  but,
             despite this point being taken albeit  in  crude  form,  judge
             Davies failed to  engage  in  any  analysis  of  the  possible
             relevance of the absence of the records of interview to either
             the weight to be attached to judge Burnett's conclusions or to
             his analysis of the circumstances of the appellant's marriage.
             The production of the interview records is entirely within the
             gift of the SSHD.

         22. The records of interview could assist in the consideration of:
             (i)  whether  the  SSHD's  assertions  of  inconsistency   are
             accurate; (ii) the context within which  such  inconsistencies
             arose; and, (iii) whether there is anything probative  to  the
             appellant's case contained therein.

         23. In paragraph 31  of  his  decision  Judge  Davies'  records  a
             submission  made  by  the  appellant's   then   representative
             relating to the  absence  of  interview  record  before  judge
             Burnett and disposes of it by identifying that  the  substance
             of the allegations against the appellant were provided to him.
             This though does not engage with those matters  identified  in
             paragraphs 22(ii) and(iii) above.

         24. In my  conclusion  the  failure  of  judge  Davies  to  engage
             adequately with the potential relevance of the  appellant  and
             the Tribunal (both previously and currently) not  having  been
             provided with copies of the interview records  amounts  to  an
             error of law. It is no answer  to  this  to  assert  that  the
             decision of judge Burnett must nevertheless  be  the  starting
             point. The decision of judge Burnett must be considered in the
             context of the fact that he did not have a copy of the records
             of the interviews, particularly given that  such  absence  had
             not been remedied before judge Davies."

Re-making of Decision

Introduction

12. I  directed  that  the  re-making  of  the  decision  under  appeal  be
    undertaken by the Upper Tribunal and, thus, the matter came back before
    me.

13. In the intervening period the SSHD, in compliance with  the  Tribunal's
    directions, located and served upon the appellant and  the  Tribunal  a
    copy of the appellant's, and his  wife's,  marriage  interview  records
    (dated 24 March 2014). The interview with the former  consists  of  285
    questions and that with the latter contains 251 questions.

Legal Background

14. The correct application of the burden and standard of  proof  in  cases
    such as this (i.e. where there is an assertion that there  has  been  a
    marriage of convenience) was set out by Underhill LJ (Moore-Bick LJ and
    Vos LJ in agreement)  in  Agho  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1198, in the following terms:

         "13. ... What it comes down to is that as a matter of  principle  a
         spouse establishes a prima facie case that he or she  is  a  family
         member of an EEA national by providing the marriage certificate and
         the spouse's passport; that the legal burden is on the Secretary of
         State to show that any  marriage  thus  proved  is  a  marriage  of
         convenience; and that  the  burden  is  not  discharged  merely  by
         showing 'reasonable suspicion'. Of course  in  the  usual  way  the
         evidential burden may shift to the  applicant  by  proof  of  facts
         which justify the inference that the marriage is not  genuine,  and
         the facts giving rise to the inference may  include  a  failure  to
         answer a request for documentary proof of the  genuineness  of  the
         marriage where grounds of suspicion have been raised. ..."

15. The 2006 Regulations do  not  contain  a  definition  of  'marriage  of
    convenience' but in its decision in Rosa v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14, the Court of Appeal were content to
    adopt, as I am, the definition of 'marriage of  convenience'  contained
    in 'Article 1 of EC Council Resolution 97/C/382/01 of 4  December  1997
    on  measures  to  be  adopted  in  the  combating   of   marriages   of
    convenience':

         "a marriage concluded between a national of a  Member  State  or  a
         third-country national legally resident in a  Member  State  and  a
         third-country national, with the  sole  aim  of  circumventing  the
         rules  on  entry  and  residence  of  third-country  nationals  and
         obtaining for the third-country  national  a  residence  permit  or
         authority to reside in a Member State."

Decision and Discussion

16. The following matters of fact are not in dispute:

          i. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on  19  January  2011
             with leave to enter as a student conferred until 13 May  2012.
             He remained thereafter without leave to do so.

         ii. The appellant and Ms Iacob (a Romanian national) undertook  an
             Islamic marriage ceremony in the United Kingdom  on  24  April
             2013;

        iii. On 18 June 2013 the appellant was encountered  by  Immigration
             Officers at 2 Wilby Street. His  wife  was  not  present.  The
             appellant was, on the same date, served with an IS151A;

         iv. The appellant subsequently submitted an application for an EEA
             residence card, which was refused on 6 December 2013;

          v. The appellant and Ms Iacob married according to  the  laws  of
             the United Kingdom on 9 January 2014;

         vi. A child of the relationship ("SZ")  was  born  on  6  February
             2014;

        vii. As of 8 July 2014 (the date of judge Burnett's decision),  the
             appellant and his wife were living together in Manchester;

       viii. The appellant made a further application for an EEA  residence
             card on 27 December 2014, which was refused by  the  Secretary
             of State in the decision under challenge of 13 February 2015;

17. In making her decision the  SSHD  relied,  inter  alia,  upon  numerous
    inconsistencies as between the evidence given by the appellant and  his
    wife during the course of their marriage interviews on  24  March  2014
    (which I do not repeat herein but have taken full account of), the fact
    that the appellant was encountered on 18 June 2013 at  2  Wilby  Street
    (incorrectly recorded in the decision letter as 18  February)  residing
    with 4 other males and when questioned said that he was a  student  but
    did not mention he  was  an  overstayer  and  that,  according  to  the
    immigration officer who visited 2 Wilby Street, there was  no  evidence
    at the premises that the appellant's wife lived there.

18. As identified above, there has been an unchallenged  judicial  decision
    by the FtT of exactly the issue that I am now required to  determine  -
    judge Burnett finding that the  appellant  engaged  in  a  marriage  of
    convenience with Ms Iacob. Following the starred decision in Devaseelan
    I am required to take the FtT's decision, which I  have  summarised  in
    paragraphs 4 to 7 above, as my starting point.

19. The findings made by judge Burnett are, in my conclusion, sufficient to
    shift the evidential burden in this  case  onto  the  appellant.  Those
    findings are my starting point; they are not however  determinative  of
    the instant appeal.  As  already  identified,  judge  Burnett  was  not
    provided with a copy of the interview records of either  the  appellant
    or Ms Iacob, despite such records forming one of the  founding  pillars
    of the SSHD's case that the appellant had  engaged  in  a  marriage  of
    convenience. Judge Burnett observed that  he  was  unable  to  put  the
    'discrepancies' identified by the SSHD (as between the appellant's  and
    his  wife's  marriage  interviews)  in  their  proper  context   as   a
    consequence. As I have identified above, the failure  of  the  SSHD  to
    provide judge Burnett with the copy of the records of those  interviews
    - in compliance with her duty as a party  to  the  proceedings  -  also
    deprived the appellant of the opportunity to rely  upon  evidence  from
    those records which fell to be considered in his favour.

20. I now have a copy those interview records  and,  as  anticipated,  they
    provide substantial evidence in support of the  appellant's  assertions
    that his marriage to Ms Iacob is not borne out  of  the  sole  wish  to
    circumvent the rules on entry and residence in the United  Kingdom  for
    foreign nationals.

21. There are certainly inconsistencies in the  evidence  provided  by  the
    appellant and Ms Iacob at their respective interviews,  some  of  which
    are entitled  to  more  weight  than  others.  I  have  assessed  these
    inconsistencies in the round with all other  evidence  before  me  when
    coming to my conclusions,  having  taken  judge  Burnett's  conclusions
    thereon as my starting point.

22. I, like judge Burnett, place little weight on the question  of  whether
    the appellant bought a sim card at the time of his first  meeting  with
    the appellant. I also place little weight on the inconsistency  between
    the appellant and his wife as to  the  exact  time  of  travel  to  the
    hospital for their child's birth, or indeed  the  time  of  such  birth
    itself. The appellant has  now  produced  evidence  from  the  hospital
    confirming his presence there at 2pm on the day  prior  to  the  birth.
    There is also a hospital record stating that a 'relative was asleep  on
    the sofa' at 3am on the date of the birth. The appellant and  Ms  Iacob
    assert this to be appellant.

23. Furthermore, the explanation provided by the appellant and Ms Iacob for
    two, what would otherwise be, significant inconsistencies, was accepted
    by Mr Bates as being  truthful.  The  first  of  these  inconsistencies
    relates to whether Ms Iacob's daughter was living at 2 Wilby Road  with
    the appellant at the date of the immigration  officers  visit  in  June
    2013. At interview Ms Iacob stated she was not, the appellant stated to
    the contrary. Ms Iacob later stated, however, that she had lied to  the
    interviewing officer in order to "cover up" the fact that her  daughter
    was living at the Wilby Street address  because  she  feared  that  the
    nature of the arrangements (i.e. all three  sleeping  in  one  bedroom)
    would flag welfare issues with the authorities.  The  second  of  these
    inconsistencies relates to the relationship status of  the  Ms  Iacob's
    brother. Again, Ms Iacob explained that she lied  to  the  interviewing
    officer in this  regard  -  this  time  to  protect  her  brother  from
    "children's services" because his partner had given birth  to  a  child
    whilst under the age of 18.

24.  Although  Mr  Bates  accepted  the  truth  of  such  explanations  he,
    nevertheless, quite properly relied  upon  Ms  Iacob's  willingness  to
    deceive a Home Office official in support of his overarching submission
    that Ms Iacob had lied about the reasons underpinning her  marriage  to
    the appellant. I agree with Mr Bates that Ms Iacob's propensity to  lie
    when she perceives she is in a difficult position  is  a  matter  which
    must weigh heavily in my considerations.

25. Turning back to judge  Burnett's  decision,  although  the  judge  took
    account of the fact that there had been a  child  of  the  relationship
    (SZ), there is no discreet analysis in his decision of the relevance of
    this fact when set in the context of the time line of the core events.

26. A significant part of the SSHD's doubt about  the  reasons  behind  the
    appellant's marriage arises from the conclusion that Ms Iacob  was  not
    living at the Wilby Street address on 18 June 2013  (the  date  of  the
    immigration officer's visit). This doubt was fuelled by the  fact  that
    the visit was unannounced. Ultimately the doubt was  fortified  by  the
    inconsistencies in the interview records. Once  again,  however,  there
    appears to be no discreet  analysis  in  the  SSHD's  decision  of  the
    relevance of the child's birth when set in its proper  context  of  the
    chronology of the key events.

27. If one reflects further on this issue it is apparent  that  it  is  not
    only the date of child's birth that has relevance, but also the date of
    conception. SZ was born on 6 February 2014. There is no  evidence  that
    she  was  born  prematurely  or  significantly   late;   indeed,   both
    possibilities are rendered unlikely when viewed in the  knowledge  that
    she was born as a consequence of a planned caesarean. This  means  that
    SZ was conceived on, or around, the 16 May 2013 (not June 2013 as judge
    Burnett identified at [29]).

28. This is of significance because  it  post-dates  the  Islamic  marriage
    between Ms Iacob and the appellant by less than a month and  also  pre-
    dates the visit by immigration officer's to the Wilby Street address on
    18 June 2013 (at which  time  the  appellant  was  also  detained).  At
    interview it was said that the appellant found out about the  pregnancy
    whilst  in  detention,  which   is   entirely   consistent   with   the
    aforementioned chronology.

29. The fact that Ms Iacob was so recently pregnant  with  the  appellant's
    child at the date of the immigration officer's visit  to  Wilby  Street
    provides strong support for the assertion that they were,  as  of  that
    date, in a relationship which involved more than a transaction  between
    them so as to enable the appellant to circumvent  immigration  control.
    That the conception of a child so closely followed the Islamic marriage
    further supports this view, as indeed  does  the  fact  that  Ms  Iacob
    converted from Christianity to  Islam  in  order  to  get  married,  an
    assertion in relation to which there has been no discreet challenge.

30. Of course, the appellant and Ms Iacob did not conduct a legal  marriage
    under the law of the England and Wales until sometime later, in January
    2014 i.e. shortly before the birth of the child. However,  the  history
    and nature of the relationship prior to the marriage  is  of  undoubted
    significance in determining the reasons for the marriage.

31. Turning back to the marriage interviews, which took place in March 2014
    (i.e. 9 months after the  immigration  officer's  visit  to  the  Wilby
    Street address), these were both  lengthy  and  wide-ranging  in  their
    exploration of the appellant's relationship. Despite this, there was  a
    significant degree of consistency as between the evidence  provided  by
    the appellant and Ms Iacob, something  that  has  not  previously  been
    taken into account by a judicial decision maker.

32. A full digestion of the questions  asked  and  answers  given  provides
    persuasive support for the fact that the appellant and  Ms  Iacob  were
    living together on 18 June 2013, despite the inconsistencies  the  SSHD
    has drawn  attention  to.  The  interviewing  officer  asked  both  the
    appellant and Ms Iacob, separately, to draw a plan of the Wilby  Street
    address. Neither of these drawings have been provided to the  Tribunal,
    but I infer they were consistent because any inconsistency  would  have
    been detailed in the documentation produced by the SSHD in  support  of
    her conclusion that there had been a marriage of convenience.

33. Both the appellant and Ms Iacob were also asked to describe the  layout
    and furniture of their (claimed) bedroom, the colour of the carpets and
    curtains and the view from the bedroom window. Again, it  is  not  said
    that the answers given were inaccurate and I observe that  the  answers
    were consistent as between them. I do not lose sight of the possibility
    that the appellant and Ms Iacob could have conferred about such matters
    prior to the interview in order to ensure consistency, or that Ms Iacob
    had visited the premises but not lived there. The other possibility, of
    course, is that they both lived in the Wilby Street address as claimed.

34. It is known, because judge Burnett so concluded, that the appellant and
    Ms Iacob were living together in July 2014. Evidence was also  provided
    at the marriage interviews that the appellant and  Ms  Iacob  were,  at
    that time, living together - having recently moved to a  room  provided
    by the local authority because they had left family accommodation as  a
    consequence of 'arguments' with the host family members.  Although  not
    compelled to, it would have  been  relatively  easy  for  the  SSHD  to
    confirm this information with the relevant local authority.  There  has
    been nothing produced which contradicts the assertions made during  the
    interviews in this regard, and other  documentary  evidence  before  me
    supports the truth of the evidence given during the interviews.

35. As indicated above, the conclusions  of  judge  Burnett  -  which  were
    derived in the absence of live evidence from the appellant and Ms Iacob
    - must be the starting  point  for  my  consideration  of  whether  the
    appellant and Ms Iacob engaged in  a  marriage  of  convenience.  Those
    conclusions are sufficient for me to find that  the  evidential  burden
    has shifted onto the appellant to prove that his marriage was  not  one
    of convenience.

36. Judge Burnett was not, however,  furnished  with  the  records  of  the
    marriage interviews, despite  the  inconsistencies  therein  forming  a
    central plank of the SSHD's conclusions. I have taken full  account  of
    these inconsistencies, as well  as  the  further  inconsistencies  that
    became apparent in the evidence given  orally  before  the  FtT  (judge
    Davies).

37. Having taken all of the above matters into  account,  and  taken  judge
    Burnett's conclusions as my starting point, I find that the  additional
    evidence that I have before  me  -  including  the  marriage  interview
    records and evidence from the hospital demonstrating that the appellant
    was, at the very least, present at the hospital on  the  day  prior  to
    SZ's birth - when taken with an appreciation of the  relevance  of  the
    likely date of SZ's conception in the context of the other  key  events
    relevant to this appeal, leads me to conclude that  the  appellant  has
    demonstrated to the balance of probabilities that he did not engage  in
    a marriage of convenience with Ms Iacob.

38. I find that the marriage between the appellant and Ms Iacob is one that
    attracts the benefit of the 2006 EEA Regulations.  There is no  dispute
    as to whether Ms Iacob  is  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom and, consequently, the appellant's appeal must  be  allowed  on
    the basis that the SSHD's decision to refuse to issue a residence  card
    is not in accordance with the Community Treaties, or the law (the  2006
    EEA Regulations).



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision is set  aside.  The  decision  under  the
appeal having been re-made in the Upper  Tribunal,  it  is  allowed  on  the
basis of, and for the reasons, set out above.


Signed:

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
16 December 2016

