
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08952/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 February 2015                         |On 24 February 2015            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Amine Amghar
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. L. Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. O'Callaghan, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. No anonymity order has previously been made in these proceedings and no
    application was made to me today to suggest  that  such  an  order  was
    required.  Therefore none is made.

 2. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and Mr Amghar as
    "the appellant".

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria, who was born on 29  March  1979.
    He entered the United Kingdom on a visitor's visa valid from 26  August
    2008 until 26 February 2009.   On  13  March  2013  he  applied  for  a
    residence card as a confirmation of a right of residence in the  United
    Kingdom as the family member of an  EEA  national,  Ms  Aminata  Dieye,
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  On 22 March  2013  the
    application was refused and Mr  Amghar  appealed.   That  decision  was
    withdrawn on 27 August 2013 prior to the appeal hearing.  Mr Amghar and
    Ms Dieye were interviewed on 4 November 2013.  Further  representations
    were submitted by the appellant's solicitors  dated  8  November  2013.
    The application was refused on 14 January 2014.

 4. The appellant appealed and following a hearing at Hatton Cross Judge of
    the First-tier  Tribunal  Seifert,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  4
    November 2014, allowed the appellant's appeal.  In so doing  she  found
    the appellant and Ms Dieye credible witnesses and that the requirements
    of the relevant Regulations were met.

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal.  Permission was granted  by
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Foudy  on  19  November  2014.   Her
    reasons for so doing were:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Seifert  who,  in  a
             determination promulgated  on  4  November  2014  refused  the
             Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse
             him an EEA Residence card.

         2.   The grounds argue that the Judge made errors in his assessment
             of the evidence that the marriage was one of convenience.  The
             grounds also argue that the  Judge  failed  to  give  adequate
             reasons for his decision.

         3.   The Judge was not satisfied that  the  Appellant  had  entered
             into a marriage of convenience.   He  gave  some  reasons  for
             making his findings however he appears not to have dealt  with
             a number of important aspects of the evidence.

         4.   The grounds disclose an arguable error of law."

 6. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 7. Ms Kenny relied on  the  authorities  of  MK  (duty  to  give  reasons)
    Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC) and Budhathoki (reasons for decisions)
    [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC).  She submitted that the judge  had  failed  to
    resolve key conflicts in the evidence, that the refusal letter raised a
    number of discrepancies arising from the interviews of the sponsor  and
    appellant that were identified by the respondent as being  significant.
    She accepted that the judge did not  have  to  deal  with  every  point
    raised in the refusal letter or rehearse  every  detail  but  submitted
    that whilst the judge recorded at paragraph 41  of  her  decision  that
    many of the discrepancies were satisfactorily explained,  the  decision
    does not disclose what inconsistencies were  satisfactorily  explained.
    Ms Kenny further argued that the nub of the position was that the judge
    had given inadequate reasons for the findings made in an  appeal  where
    at its nub was the issue of the appellant's marriage to the sponsor and
    the contention of the respondent that it was a marriage of convenience.

 8. Mr O'Callaghan submitted that the judge had given adequate  reasons  at
    the end of her decision, that she had been made aware of the discrepant
    evidence identified by the respondent but having  had  the  benefit  of
    both  examination-in-chief   and   cross-examination   found   in   the
    appellant's favour in concluding that the inconsistencies identified by
    the respondent had been resolved within the oral evidence.

 9. I find that the judge has carried out a thorough credibility assessment
    and was entitled to come to the conclusions that she did in relation to
    the credibility, not only of the appellant but also of his sponsor.  In
    so doing the judge has come to an "omnibus decision" where at paragraph
    41 of her decision she states:-

         "41. Having considered the evidence as a whole, I am satisfied that
             it has been shown that Mr Amghar and Ms  Dieye  were  credible
             witness in respect of the genuineness of  their  marriage  and
             relationship.  In so far as there were some inconsistencies in
             their answers, many of these were satisfactorily explained  in
             their  evidence.   I  do  not  consider  that  the   remaining
             inconsistencies were significant or undermined the genuineness
             of  the  application.   Their  account  is  supported  by  the
             documents, including photographs and bills addressed  to  them
             jointly.  I find that it has not been shown  that  this  is  a
             marriage of convenience."

10. The judge has appropriately attached weight to evidence  that  required
    it both of an oral nature and in  the  form  of  documentary  materials
    including a marriage certificate, utility bills and photographs.  Where
    appropriate she has  given  limited  weight  to  some  aspects  of  the
    appellant's evidence including that  of  his  friend  Mr  Haddour  who,
    although providing a witness statement,  did  not  attend  the  hearing
    before the judge.  The evidence of the appellant and sponsor  explained
    the  highlighted  discrepancies  and  enabled  the  judge  to  come  to
    conclusions that were fully open to be made on the evidence taking into
    account the totality  of  the  oral  evidence  and  written  materials.
    Adequate reasons have been  given  by  the  judge  for  coming  to  the
    conclusions that she did as to why the appeal was allowed.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I do not set aside the decision.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 23 February 2015.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
