
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/08452/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 April 2014                               |On 29 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                       Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

                                   Between

                                USMAN ASGHAR
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Atif Wattoo of Sky Solicitors Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Mr Paul Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

   1.     The Appellant is of Pakistani  nationality  and  is  now  aged  28
      years.  His appeal to the Upper Tribunal has its origins in a decision
      made on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      (hereinafter the "Secretary of State"), dated 7  March  2013,  whereby
      his application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier  4
      (General) Student Migrant under the Points Based System  was  refused.
      The  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT"),  in  a  paper  determination,
      dismissed the ensuing appeal.
   2.    In the somewhat elaborate chain of  legal  events  which  followed,
      permission to appeal to this Tribunal was ultimately granted following
      an initial refusal, a challenge to such refusal by a  judicial  review
      application and an Order of the Administrative Court  granting  leave.
      This was followed by an  Order  of  the  Administrative  Court  Master
      quashing the Upper Tribunal decision to refuse permission to appeal as
      uncontested.  This process culminated in  a  reconsideration  and  the
      grant of permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Southern  on  17
      February 2014.

   3.     The starting point in the Immigration Rules is paragraph 6,  which
      contains an extensive series of definitions.  These  include,  amongst
      many others, the following provision:

           "  'degree  level  study'  means  a  course  which  leads  to  a
           recognised United Kingdom degree at bachelor's level  or  above,
           or an equivalent qualification  at  Level  6  or  above  of  the
           revised National Qualifications Framework ......"

    Part 6 of the Rules regulates the subject of persons seeking  to  enter
    or remain in the United Kingdom in specified capacities.   Within  this
    maze of provisions, paragraph 245ZT and following constitute a discrete
    code governing those who apply for membership of the category of  "Tier
    4 (General) Student".  One  section  of  this  code  is  introduced  by
    paragraph 245ZX which, under the  rubric  "Requirements  for  Leave  to
    Remain", states the following:

           "To qualify for leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Student
           under this Rule, an applicant must meet the requirements  listed
           below.  If the applicant  meets  these  requirements,  leave  to
           remain will be granted.  If the applicant does  not  meet  these
           requirements, the applicant will be refused".

     There follows  a  series  of  "requirements"  which  are  arranged,  in
      sequence, in sub-paragraphs (a)-(m). These specify, to begin with, the
      general requirements that the applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal
      under the general grounds for refusal, must not be an illegal  entrant
      and must have been granted entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to
      remain in the capacity of, inter alia, Tier 4 (General) Student.

   4.      Within  the  remainder  of  paragraph  245ZX  there  are  certain
      provisions designed to confine  the  length  of  stay  in  the  United
      Kingdom of a Tier 4 (General) student to  specified  maximum  periods.
      In some instances, these are three years.  In others,  they  are  five
      years.   It  is  common  case  that  the  main   issue   arising   for
      determination in this appeal relates to paragraph 245ZX (ha).  This is
      one of the lengthy menu of requirements which the applicant  concerned
      "must" satisfy in order to secure leave to remain.  It provides:-

           "If the course is at degree level or above, the grant  of  leave
           to remain  the  applicant  is  seeking  must  not  lead  to  the
           applicant having spent more than five years in the UK as a  Tier
           4 (General) Migrant or as a student, studying courses at  degree
           level  or above, unless ........... .... ".

     The word "unless" is  followed  by  three  sub  paragraphs,  which  are
      clearly designed to operate as exceptions to the requirement specified
      in (ha).  It is common case that the Appellant is unable to  avail  of
      any of these exemptions.

   5.      The  relevant  particulars  and  calculations  contained  in  the
      Secretary of State's refusal letter are as follows:

        a) From 12 September 2006 to 31 December 2007,  the  Appellant  had
           leave to remain to study a one year  post  graduate  accountancy
           diploma.  The parties are agreed that  this  was  not  a  degree
           level or above course of study.


        b) From 17 January 2008 to 30 November 2008 and  from  20  February
           2009 to 31 March 2009, the Appellant  had  leave  to  remain  to
           study  a  three  year  bachelor  degree   course   in   Business
           Administration at two successive institutions.

        c) From 1 July 2009 to 30 September 2012, the Appellant  had  leave
           to remain to study a  three  years  BA  (Honours)  International
           Business Management Course at the London College of Accountancy.

   6.     This gives rise to the following  analysis:

        a)    Initially, the Appellant completed a  one  year  postgraduate
           diploma course in accountancy.


        b)    From September 2007 to March 2009, he attempted to complete a
           BBA course, belonging to the level of degree or above,  but  was
           unable to do so due to one college closing unexpectedly and  the
           next one being unrecognised by the Secretary of State.

        c)    From July 2009 to September 2012, the Appellant  successfully
           completed the BBA course, following the two earlier unsuccessful
           attempts.

      At this juncture, the Appellant applied for further leave to remain in
      the United Kingdom.  His application was made on 1 October  2012.   At
      this stage, he had been studying, in various guises and during  sundry
      periods, in the United Kingdom since his initial entry on 19 September
      2006 i.e. for over 6 years.  He sought permission for further leave to
      remain in the United Kingdom to study the London  School  of  Business
      and Finance CIMA (the Chartered Institute of  Management  Accountants)
      Level 6 course, scheduled to run between 22 October 2012  and  22  May
      2014.  The rationale of the ensuing  refusal  decision  was  that  the
      Appellant's successive grants of leave to remain in the United Kingdom
      had been based on five years studying at degree level or above.   This
      calculation, correctly, excluded the first  of  the  six  years  under
      scrutiny,  which  concerned  the  one  year  postgraduate  diploma  in
      accountancy.








   7. In granting permission to apply for judicial review, Stewart J stated:

         "The FtT decision does not  address  whether  the  CIMA  course  is
           'degree level or above' for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  245ZX
           (ha).

     The learned Judge's analysis of  the  FtT  decision  is,  indisputably,
      correct. The consideration which the FtT  Judge  gave  to  the  issues
      focused,  rather,  on  the  Appellant's  membership  of  the  separate
      categories of Student and Tier 4 (General) Migrant.  The FtT  gave  no
      consideration to the question of whether the  proposed  course  is  at
      "degree level or above".

   8.     Against this framework, the mainstay of the arguments advanced  by
      Mr Wattoo on behalf of the Appellant is that, as a matter of fact, the
      CIMA course which the Appellant is proposing to study and which  forms
      the basis of his application for further leave to remain in the United
      Kingdom is a course which is not "at degree  level  or  above".   This
      argument was based on the proposition that CIMA is a body analogous to
      the ACCA which is not competent to award the qualification of  degree,
      having regard to the decision in Syed v Secretary  of  State  for  the
      Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 196.  The submissions on behalf of the
      Secretary of State laid emphasis of the definition  of  "degree  level
      study" in paragraph  6  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (supra)  and,  in
      particular, the words "a course which leads  to  a  recognised  United
      Kingdom  degree  at  bachelor's  level  or  above  or  an   equivalent
      qualification  at  Level  6  or  above   of   the   revised   National
      Qualifications Framework" [emphasis added].

   9.     It was not disputed that  the  CIMA  course  of  study  which  the
      Appellant aspires to pursue culminates in the grant  by  the  relevant
      competent body of a qualification at Level 6 or above of  the  revised
      National Qualifications Framework which is equivalent to a  recognised
      United Kingdom degree at bachelor's level or above.   As  the  further
      definitions of the terms "UK recognised body"  and  "UK  listed  body"
      make clear, it is immaterial, for the purposes of the Rules, that  the
      course provider is not competent to confer the qualification of degree
      at bachelor's  level  or  above  or  an  equivalent  qualification  as
      defined.  The test, rather, is whether the course "leads  to"  such  a
      qualification, conferred by an approved agency. This test is satisfied
      in the present context. This analysis yields the conclusion that there
      is no merit in the Appellant's main ground of appeal.  While there was
      a demonstrable error of law in the determination of the FtT, it is not
      material, since the correct approach would have  stimulated  the  same
      result namely a dismissal of the appeal.

  10.     The second ground of appeal advanced on behalf  of  the  Appellant
      involved developing an argument which focused on the  word  "studying"
      in paragraph 245ZX (ha).  It was submitted that  the  Appellant  could
      not be considered to have been "studying"  during  21  months  of  the
      overall period under scrutiny having regard to the evidence in his new
      witness statement (summarised above) that there  were  gaps  totalling
      some 21 months in his studies due to the problems concerning  the  two
      educational establishments in question.

  11.  The main riposte to this argument is uncomplicated.  Bearing in  mind
      that the CIMA course which  the  Appellant  was  proposing  to  pursue
      operates from October 2012 to 22 May 2014 and  juxtaposing  this  with
      the Appellant's calculation commencement date of  12  September  2006,
      the deduction of 21 months from  this  overall  period  results  in  a
      shorter period which exceeds  the  five  year  maximum  by  almost  12
      months.  Thus this  argument,  even  if  sound,  does  not  avail  the
      Appellant.  Given this analysis, it is unnecessary for  this  Tribunal
      to attempt any elaborate  or  comprehensive  definition  of  the  word
      "studying", which is undefined.  However, we would add, albeit obiter,
      that we agree with  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  that  the  relevant
      measures, or criteria, in these provisions of the Rules, as  currently
      framed, are those of status and purpose: see Islam  [2013]  UKUT  608.
      While those devising these provisions of the Rules  could  have  opted
      for  the  not  unfamiliar  mechanism  of   elaborate   and   intricate
      computations of time involving qualifying and non-qualifying  periods,
      they did not do so. We find no warrant for excluding from  the  simple
      calculations which the Rules, as  currently  framed,  require  periods
      during which the student's studies were not continuous  by  reason  of
      breaks or interruptions.  Such phenomena, in our view, have no  impact
      on either the status of the person concerned or  the  purpose  of  the
      grant of leave to remain and, therefore, are to be disregarded in  the
      computation of any of the prescribed maximum periods.

  12.     In argument, a third ground of appeal was developed on  behalf  of
      the Appellant.  This was to the effect that the decision on behalf  of
      the Secretary of State was vitiated by unfairness, by reference to the
      decision of the House of Lords in O'Reilly v Mackman [1983] 2  AC  237
      and Patel [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC).  This was canvassed as something of
      a makeweight. Based on the construction of the relevant provisions  of
      the Rules which we have espoused above,  we  find  no  merit  in  this
      contention. The impugned provisions of the Rules  represent  a  choice
      which was reasonably and rationally open to the legislature and  their
      proper construction is a matter of  law,  to  be  contrasted  with  an
      enquiry into rationality or fairness in the  broad  sense.  No  direct
      challenge to the Rules themselves has been properly formulated in  any
      event.

DECISION

  13.     We decide as follows:


     i) At the hearing, an application was made on behalf of the  Appellant
        for the adduction  of  new  evidence.   We  considered  the  bundle
        provided de bene esse and reserved  our  ruling.   Applications  of
        this kind are governed by rule 15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  The  application  was  irregular  and
        unsatisfactory  as  it  was  not  made  either  on  notice  to  the
        Respondent or in writing and did not include, as  required  by  the
        rule, an explanation of why the evidence was not presented at first
        instance.  Notwithstanding these irregularities, we have decided to
        accede to the application in the exercise  of  our  discretion,  as
        this means that our substantive decision has entailed consideration
        of the Appellant's case at its zenith thereby enhancing, we  trust,
        the values of certainty and finality.


      (ii)    For the reasons elaborated above, we dismiss the  appeal  and
         affirm the    decision of the FtT.




                                    Signed:
                                             [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                      Date:   9 April 2014
