
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/08126/2014
                                                               IA/08135/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20th January 2017                     |On 01st February 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                         mrs H N J (first appellant)
                   master s H (a minor) (second appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Z Hussain, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first and second Appellants are  citizens  of  Bangladesh  and  are
    respectively born on 1st October 1974  and  15th  February  2009.   The
    second Appellant is the son of the first Appellant.  By  order  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  the  proceedings  herein  were  anonymised.    No
    application is made to vary  that  order  and  I  leave  in  force  the
    anonymity direction.

 2. Unless mentioned specifically hereinafter all references herein are  to
    the first Appellant.  The second Appellant's appeal is  dependent  upon
    that of the first Appellant.

 3. The first Appellant entered the United Kingdom on  a  student  visa  on
    24th February 2007.   Her  spouse  entered  as  her  dependant  on  7th
    February 2008.  The Appellant child S H was born in the United  Kingdom
    on 15th February 2009.  The Appellant applied for further  leave  as  a
    student on 23rd December 2010 and this  was  granted  until  29th  June
    2012.  Her dependant spouse and child were granted leave in  line  with
    the first Appellant.  On 26th June 2012 the Appellant applied with  her
    spouse and dependent child for leave to remain outside the  Immigration
    Rules but this application was refused on  4th  March  2013.   On  14th
    March 2013 the Appellant submitted an appeal against that decision  and
    on 12th August 2013 her appeal was allowed to the limited  extent  that
    the Secretary of State agreed to consider her application grounds under
    Article 3.

 4. On 10th January 2014 the  Secretary  of  State  acknowledged  that  the
    Appellant would have been allowed to the extent that  her  claim  under
    Article 3 of the Human Rights Act would be accepted.   Having  reviewed
    that application and made it clear that the basis  of  her  application
    was solely on the basis of her stated fear of return to Bangladesh, she
    was invited to make a fresh application for asylum and this  was  made.
    On 20th January a letter was written advising the Appellant that if she
    wished her application would be considered on exceptional circumstances
    outside the Immigration Rules.  If the application was unsuccessful she
    would make an application for asylum.  The application was  refused  by
    the Secretary of State by a Notice of Refusal  and  it  is  the  appeal
    against that decision that came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Roots sitting at Harmondsworth on 21st April 2016.  In a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated  on  24th  May  2016  the  Appellants'  appeal  was
    dismissed both under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.
     It is pertinent to note that the Appellant did not  personally  attend
    that hearing.  Her failure to attend was  addressed  as  a  preliminary
    issue by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   This  is  to  be  found  at
    paragraph 2 of his decision where he states...

         "2.  The appellant did not attend the Hearing of this appeal.   The
             tribunal staff attempted  to  ring  both  her  solicitors  and
             herself but all of the numbers on file  were  not  obtainable.
             There was confirmation on the file that notice of the  hearing
             had been  sent  to  the  appellant  and  her  solicitors.   No
             adjournment request had been received.  In the circumstances I
             decided that it was in  accordance  with  the  rules  and  the
             overriding objective to proceed with this appeal."

 5. No criticism is levelled at that approach by the judge.  On  11th  July
    2016 the Appellant lodged handwritten Grounds of Appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal advising that she did not receive any letter of  hearing  date
    from the Tribunal and consequently had not attended.  On  25th  October
    Judge Osborne refused permission to appeal noting that the decision was
    careful and well-reasoned and that the judge had set out the  pertinent
    issues, law and evidence relating to the facts of the appeal.

 6. On 14th November 2016 amended Grounds of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The amended grounds run to some 23 paragraphs and were
    prepared by legal representatives.  On 8th December 2016  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Taylor granted permission to appeal.  Judge  Taylor  had
    sympathy with the First-tier Tribunal Judge who, as we all agree,  made
    every effort to ascertain whether  the  Appellant  and  her  solicitors
    would be attending.  Having read the grounds in the file  Judge  Taylor
    considered it to be arguable that in fact he should not have  done  so.
    Firstly,  according  to  the  grounds  i.e.  the  amended  grounds  the
    Appellant's former legal representatives are no longer in business  and
    secondly the Appellant had some form of restraining order  against  her
    husband and had moved her address and changed her contact details.   It
    was contended that the new details had been provided to the Tribunal in
    confidence.  Judge Taylor noted that there were certainly a  number  of
    different addresses for the Appellant on the file and that the  hearing
    notice had been sent to an address which was  not  that  on  the  cover
    sheet but on a separate piece of paper.  Judge Taylor  noted  that  the
    Appellant had attended her hearings in the past and that in the Grounds
    of Appeal the Appellant states that she would  have  attended  on  this
    occasion  had  she  known  of  the  hearing.   It  is  clear  from  the
    determination that the judge had reached his conclusions  at  least  in
    part on the assumption that the Appellant had chosen not to attend  the
    hearing.

 7. On 5th January 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response invited the Upper  Tribunal
    to decide whether there was a material error of law  in  light  of  the
    fact that the Tribunal had the Appellant's current address but sent the
    notice to the wrong address.

 8. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant appears by her instructed solicitor
    Mr Hussain.  Mr Hussain comes to this matter extremely  late.   He  has
    only just been instructed and he  is  from  the  law  firm  Hubers  Law
    Partners.  I have placed him on the  court  record.   He  has  filed  a
    bundle which he had provided bearing in mind he was uncertain as to how
    this case was to proceed  and  he  has  provided  me  with  a  skeleton
    argument relating to the Appellant's appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Kotas.

Submissions/Discussion

 9. The issue in this matter turns at this instance on whether or not there
    is an unfairness and prejudice to the Appellant in  not  setting  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and rehearing  the  matter.   I
    acknowledge that both legal representatives do not  seek  to  challenge
    the approach upon which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  reached  his
    decision but conclude that there was a material unfairness by the judge
    or at least that is what is contended by the Appellant's representative
    in proceeding for the  appeal  to  be  heard  in  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant.

10. Albeit that this is an appeal by Mrs H N J it was agreed that Mr  Kotas
    would put his submissions first.   He  states  that  he  is  not  in  a
    position to concede the appeal outright and that he would have been  in
    a better position to consider the matter if  the  Appellant  had  given
    greater clarity as to her reasons as to why she had  not  received  the
    notice of hearing.  He points  out  that  the  Appellant  received  the
    determination swiftly and sent in Grounds of  Appeal.   He  would  seek
    further clarity but leaves the matter in my hands.

11. Mr Hussain takes me to his skeleton argument.  He acknowledges that the
    first Appellant had left the family home with the second Appellant  and
    with the assistance of  the  police  following  an  episode  of  severe
    domestic violence.  He points out that the Appellant found  that  there
    had been a further hearing on 21st April 2016 in  her  absence  as  her
    solicitors had ceased to trade at the beginning of 2016 without letting
    her know and as any notice of hearing sent to her had been  sent  to  a
    previous address  she  had  no  notice.   He  advises  that  the  first
    Appellant only  found  this  out  when  she  contacted  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and after being provided with a copy of the decision she  then
    promptly made the  application  for  permission  to  appeal.   He  also
    advises that she telephone the Law Society to see what  steps  she  can
    take and they advised her that she would have to write in and  secondly
    thereafter contacted the Tribunal.  It  was  following  contacting  the
    Tribunal that the Appellant obtained alternative  representatives  (not
    her current representatives) who drafted the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   He
    asked me to  find  that  there  is  a  prejudicial  unfairness  to  the
    Appellant in the judge making findings without having  heard  her  oral
    testimony and he asked me to set aside the decision and  to  remit  the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal.  In  brief  response  Mr  Kotas
    advises that he is very  much  in  my  hands  and  that  he  hears  the
    explanations given and he does appreciate that those explanations  were
    not obviously available before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. This is the judge who on the face of it has dealt with the issues as he
    saw them very thoroughly.  However he was unaware of the  circumstances
    surrounding the failure of  the  first  Appellant  to  attend.   It  is
    accepted by both legal representatives that this is  an  Appellant  who
    would attend hearings regularly in  the  past  and  that  she  was  not
    someone who merely ignored the matter and failed to attend.  Whilst the
    judge attempted through the court system to contact  the  Appellant  he
    was  not  going  to  be  aware  firstly  that  the  Appellant's   legal
    representatives were no longer trading, secondly that the Appellant had
    tried to contact them for a period of months and thirdly  of  the  fact
    that due to the issues of domestic violence the Appellant  had  had  to
    change her address.  Had he been aware of these features  he  may  well
    have granted an adjournment.  In such circumstances I am satisfied that
    the interests of justice require me to find that there  is  a  material
    error of law and to set aside the decision and to order that the matter
    be reheard.  It is emphasised of course that that does not mean that  a
    future Tribunal would come to a different decision to that of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  That is a matter for further evidence and for a further
    judge.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material  error  of  law.
The decision is set aside and directions are set  out  hereinafter  for  the
rehearing of this matter.

 1. On finding that there is a material error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside with none of the findings of fact to stand.

 2. The matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  by
    any Immigration Judge other than  Immigration  Judge  Roots  at  Taylor
    House (or such other immigration hearing centre as  the  administration
    considers appropriate) on the first available date 28 days  hence  with
    an ELH of 2 hours.

 3. That there be leave to either party to file and/or serve an  additional
    bundle of objective and subjective evidence upon which they  intend  to
    rely at least seven days prehearing.

 4. That it be recorded that Hubers Law Practice, 28 Leman Street,  Pennine
    House, London E1 80R be the solicitors  on  record  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant and that they be served with a copy of this decision.

 5. That in the event of the Appellant  requiring  an  interpreter  at  the
    restored hearing that the Appellant's instructed solicitors  do  notify
    the Tribunal within seven days of receipt of these directions.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

