
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08838/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th December 2015                |On 19th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                             NELSON DEDI KOUTALA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, Counsel; instructed by Elizabeth
Millar Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For ease of  comprehension,  the  parties  are  referred  to  by  their
    appellate status and positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Owens allowing the Appellant's appeal against
    the Secretary of State's refusal under the Immigration Rules and  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

 3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  its  decision   allowing   the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision on 3 June 2015.

 4.  The  Respondent  appealed  against  that  decision  and  was   granted
    permission to  appeal  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Heynes  on  all
    grounds.

 5. The grant of permission gives no  reasons  for  the  decision  granting
    permission to appeal,  but  merely  recites  the  Respondent's  grounds
    followed by a bland statement that they are "arguable". I shall  return
    to this topic momentarily.

 6. I was not provided a Rule 24 response from the  Appellant  however  was
    provided with a Skeleton Argument (numbering 10 pages), a copy of HC532
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, YM (Uganda) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1292, and MF (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 by  his
    counsel. These documents were available to the  Respondent  and  myself
    and sufficient time was given prior to the hearing in order that  those
    documents could be comprehensively addressed.

 7. It is of note that the Respondent chose not to be  represented  at  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  but  was  represented  at  the
    hearing before me.

No Error of Law

 8. I do not find that there was an error of law in the decision such  that
    it should be set aside. My reasons for so finding follow shortly.

 9. Before I turn to my reasons, I formally note  my  dissatisfaction  with
    the grant of permission.  As  mentioned  above,  Judge  Heynes  granted
    permission to appeal on all  grounds,  merely  stating  that  they  are
    "arguable". Whilst this must surely be an oversight, it is an unhelpful
    one as I am not provided with any reason why the  Respondent's  grounds
    were arguable and this  omission  further  demonstrates  non-compliance
    with  the  second  headnote  in   the  Presidential  decision   of   MR
    (permission to  appeal:  Tribunal's  approach)  [2015]  UKUT  29  (IAC)
    wherein the following was stated:

         "When granting permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  it  is
         unsatisfactory merely to state that  the  applicant's  grounds  are
         arguable."

Discussion

10. Turning to the Respondent's first ground, the judge is first criticised
    because  of  placing  reliance  upon  rule  A362   which   relates   to
    deportation. I find that there is nothing whatsoever in this ground  of
    complaint. Indeed, the ground itself has been poorly  drafted  and  was
    misleading. The determination reveals that the reference to  rule  A362
    only comes about by the judge's consideration of  the  judgment  of  YM
    (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1292 at [39] which happens to refer to that rule. The  judge  obviously
    did not err in law by considering a binding judgment of  the  Court  of
    Appeal.

11. The second ground is premised upon  the  judge  considering  the  wrong
    version of rule 276ADE(1)(vi). Ms Sreeraman submitted  that  given  the
    content of  HC532  Statement  of  Changes  in  Immigration  Rules,  the
    applicable rule was the "no ties" test incepted by HC194. She submitted
    the changes introduced by HC532, which includes a  new  test  of  "very
    significant obstacles" being substituted for  the  "no  ties"  test  at
    paragraph 6 of those  changes,  does  not  bring  the  new  substituted
    paragraph into effect as the Implementation paragraph makes clear:

         'The changes set out in paragraphs 4 to 12 and 49  to  64  of  this
         statement take effect on 28 July 2014 and apply to all applications
         to which paragraphs 276ADE to 276DH and Appendix FM apply  (or  can
         be applied by virtue of the Immigration Rules), and  to  any  other
         ECHR Article 8 claims (save for those from foreign criminals),  and
         which are decided on or after that date.'

12. Therefore, the newer version of rule 276ADE(1)(vi) would apply  to  all
    applications decided on or after 28 July 2014 and  for  those  applying
    earlier whom are foreign criminals.  The  Appellant's  application  was
    decided on 17 January 2014 and was served on 4 February 2014.  Both  of
    those dates precede the 28 July 2014 and therefore the new  version  of
    rule 276ADE(1)(vi) could only apply to  the  Appellant  if  he  were  a
    foreign criminal, which of course, he is not. Ms Sreeraman agreed  that
    this  ground  of  challenge  was  essential  to  the  success  of   her
    application and that should she fail to demonstrate a  material  error,
    the grounds concerning Article 8 ECHR outwith the Rules and section 117
    are irrelevant.

13. Ms Solanki remained steadfast in her submission that the new version of
    the Rule could apply  as  she  had  maintained  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. For my part, I do not  see  how  reliance  upon  [39]  of  YM
    (Uganda) nor [15] of MF (Nigeria) can be of assistance to the Appellant
    in this scenario. The implementation of the Rules as reflected in HC532
    are surprisingly clear to my mind. Consequently,  the  judge  ought  to
    have applied the "no ties" test.

14. However, that is not  the  end  of  the  matter.  Ms  Solanki  drew  my
    attention to the Explanatory Memorandum annexed to HC532  at  paragraph
    7.16 which states as follows:

         '... The amendments to the Immigration Rules on family and  private
         life in Appendix  FM  and  paragraphs  276ADE-276DH  made  by  this
         Statement of Changes do not represent any substantive change to the
         policies reflected in the Statement of Changes HC  194  which  came
         into force on 9 July 2012, but ensure consistency of language  with
         that used in section  19  of  the  2014  Act,  which  now  provides
         statutory underpinning for those policies ...

15.  To  my  mind,  it  is  absolutely  clear  that  the  changes  to  rule
    276ADE(1)(vi) upon which the Respondent's main ground of appeal  turns,
    did not introduce any substantive change to the rule in question.  That
    is made plain by the above passage  and  represents  the  view  of  the
    Secretary of State put before Parliament when implementing the proposed
    changes. Therefore, given the Respondent's stance upon those  rules,  I
    find that even if the judge should have applied  the  "no  ties"  test,
    there is no difference between the application of the  "no  ties"  test
    and the "very significant obstacles" test. Consequently, the judge  did
    not materially err in law as the application of either rule should  and
    would have yielded the same  outcome  in  considering  the  Appellant's
    private life under the Immigration Rules.

16. As accepted by Ms  Sreeraman,  as  that  ground  was  unsuccessful  the
    remainder become irrelevant given the  Appellant's  success  under  the
    Rules. Notwithstanding that stance, in any event, I do  find  that  the
    judge's findings are sufficiently reasoned and the complaint  that  the
    decision is unlawfully deficient in its  reasoning  is  wholly  without
    merit. It is also plain that the judge's consideration of Article 8  is
    compliant with higher jurisprudence and the judge was  aware  that  the
    Rules are not a complete code and was considering  Article  8  for  the
    sake of completeness.  Such  diligence,  whilst  unnecessary  given  my
    findings on rule 276ADE(1)(vi), is not consequently  an  error  in  law
    given that it is superfluous. Finally, it is clear that the judge  gave
    consideration to section 117  of  the  2002  Act  given  her  extensive
    consideration  of  these   matters   at   paragraphs   61-70   of   the
    determination.

17. Consequently, given my findings above, the grounds  do  not  reveal  an
    error of law such that the decision should be set aside.

Decision

18. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

