
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08246/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th February 2015                |On 26th February 2016                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ZU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss N Hashmi, Counsel, instructed by Lincolns
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant  (as
he was before the First-tier Tribunal)is granted anonymity.   No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of their family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

 1. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant in these proceedings I
    will refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal.
    The Appellant, a national of  Bangladesh  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  18th
    February 2015 to refuse his application for a derivative residence card
    under the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006  as  amended  (the  2006
    Regulations).

 2. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Rhys-Davies dismissed the appeal under
    the 2006 Regulations.  That decision  has  not  been  challenged.   The
    judge then went on to consider  the  appeal  under  Article  8  of  the
    European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   At  paragraph  25   of   the
    determination  the  judge  said  "I  find  that   notwithstanding   the
    Respondent's stance that such arguments would not be considered without
    a fresh application, I have the  jurisdiction  and  the  obligation  to
    consider these arguments".   The judge found that it was clear that the
    Appellant did not satisfy any of the Immigration Rules in  relation  to
    private or family life and went on to consider the five stage test  set
    out in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.   The judge found  that
    the decision not to grant a residence card amounted to an  interference
    with the Appellant's right to respect for his family life and that  the
    decision was not proportionate to the respondent's legitimate aim.  The
    judge therefore allowed the appeal under Article 8.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed against  that  decision  on  the  basis
    that, in allowing the appeal under  Article  8,  the  judge  materially
    erred in law in that no notice under Section 120  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was served and  no  decision  had  been
    made to remove the  Appellant.  It  is  contended  that  the  Appellant
    cannot, in an appeal under the 2006 Regulations, bring a  Human  Rights
    challenge to removal.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  the  grounds  are
    arguable in light of the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Amirteymour
    and others (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC) and that
    of the Court of Appeal in TY (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.

 5. At the hearing before me Miss Hashmi accepted  that  the  case  law  is
    clear that, where no Section 120 notice or removal directions had  been
    served in an EEA appeal, the judge was unable to  consider  Article  8.
    However, she submitted that there is an intimation in the  reasons  for
    refusal letter that the Appellant would have to  return  to  Bangladesh
    and that if he did not do  so  his  removal  would  be  enforced.   She
    submitted that it was open to the judge therefore to  consider  Article
    8.

 6. Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge erred at paragraph 25 in  deciding
    that he had jurisdiction to consider Article 8 in  light  of  the  case
    law.

 7. The Upper Tribunal, in Amirteymour and the Court of Appeal, in TY  (Sri
    Lanka) gave guidance in relation to the availability  of  human  rights
    grounds in an appeal against the refusal of a residence card under  the
    EEA Regulations. In TY Jackson LJ said;
         "35. It is impossible to say that the Secretary of State's decision
         to withhold a residence card (a decision which is correct under the
         EEA Regulations) will or could cause the UK to be in breach of  the
         Refugee Convention or ECHR. The UK will only be in breach of  those
         Conventions if in the future the appellant makes an asylum or human
         rights claim, which the Secretary of  State  and/or  the  tribunals
         incorrectly reject.
         36.  In the result therefore I reach  a  similar  decision  on  the
         issues before us to the decision reached by the Upper  Tribunal  in
         Amirteymour v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2015]
         UKUT 00466 (IAC). The Upper Tribunal in  Amirteymour  distinguished
         JM  (Liberia)  on  a  different  basis  from  that  which  I   have
         identified. See Amirteymour at [50].  Nevertheless in the  end  the
         Upper Tribunal has come to the same decision as myself. ..."

 8. I have considered the judge's decision in light of the  cases  of  this
    case law.  I also note that in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  the
    Secretary of State invited the Appellant to  make  an  application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his family life should he  wish  to  do
    so.

 9. In these circumstances I am satisfied that it was not open to the judge
    to go on to consider the  appeal  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   I
    therefore set aside that part of the judge's decision.  I preserve  the
    judge's unchallenged findings in relation to the 2006 Regulations.

10. In accordance with the case law and the legal framework  I  remake  the
    decision in relation to Article 8 by dismissing the human rights appeal
    for the reasons set out above.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the  EEA
    Regulations is preserved.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to Article 8 of the
    ECHR is set aside and remade by dismissing it.


Signed   Date: 23rd February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 23rd February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

