
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08729/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Oral determination given following hearing|On 14 September 2016              |
|On 7 July 2016                            |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                           shah sawar khan afridi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan who was born  on  17  September
    1985.  He arrived in this country as a student with leave valid from 28
    September 2011 to 13 October 2014.  It appears that he might  not  have
    been the best of students because the respondent received  notice  from
    the University of Wales which was the  appellant's  sponsor  that  they
    were ceasing sponsoring him because he had not  been  attending  as  he
    should.  In consequence, and there  is  no  dispute  as  to  this,  the
    respondent on 16 April 2013 wrote to the appellant to notify  him  that
    his leave was being curtailed effective from  15  June  2015.   I  will
    return to these dates in due course.

 2. Subsequently on 11 October 2014 the  appellant  applied  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his private and family life  in  the  UK,  which
    application was refused on 17 February 2015.   For  the  reasons  which
    follow it is not necessary for the Tribunal at this stage  to  consider
    the merits or otherwise of that application.  According  to  the  Rules
    which appertained at the time of the application  the  appellant  would
    only have had a right to appeal against this decision if it had been an
    immigration decision  and  it  would  only  have  been  an  immigration
    decision if at the time of making his application he had valid leave to
    remain.  That is common ground between the parties.  According  to  the
    appellant he did have current leave to remain because  the  curtailment
    decision which had been sent to the address the respondent had for  him
    on 16 April 2013 was not received by him.  It is  again  common  ground
    that in fact he did not receive that notice  because  the  notification
    was returned to the respondent as "addressee not known" (see  paragraph
    18 of the Judge Lloyd's  decision  to  which  reference  will  be  made
    below).  The respondent's position was that the curtailment notice  had
    in fact been validly  served,  or  rather  that  was  the  respondent's
    decision at the time the application of 11 October 2014 was refused.

 3. The appellant appealed against  the  decision  refusing  him  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his private and family life and his appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge S D Lloyd sitting  at  Sheldon  Court,
    Birmingham on 1  December  2015.   Having  heard  submissions  by  both
    parties Judge Lloyd did not consider  the  appeal  on  the  merits  but
    rather  found  that  the  Tribunal  lacked  jurisdiction  because   the
    appellant had not had valid leave to remain at the  time  he  made  his
    Article 8 application which was the subject of appeal.

 4. The appellant now appeals  against  this  decision  leave  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro on 3 June 2016.

 5. In my judgment Judge Lloyd made a material error by  finding  that  the
    Tribunal lacked jurisdiction.  My reasons for so finding are summarised
    very shortly below.

 6. In July 2013 the Rules as to  service  of  a  curtailment  notice  were
    altered to provide for alternative to personal service in certain cases
    such as the  present  where  the  whereabouts  of  a  person  whom  the
    respondent wished to serve with  a  curtailment  notice  were  unknown.
    However and Mr Melvin does not seek to persuade me  that  the  position
    was other than as I shall record, before then and certainly as at April
    2013 when the curtailment notice was sent and  15  June  2013  when  it
    became effective, in order for a curtailment notice to have effect that
    notice had to be served personally on the person concerned.  As I  have
    already noted it is common ground that this notification letter was not
    in fact personally served because it was  returned  as  "addressee  not
    known".  At any time after July 2013 it would have  been  open  to  the
    respondent to serve this notice again using the form  of  service  then
    provided within the Rules but Mr Melvin has very fairly  accepted  that
    there is nothing within the respondent's papers to indicate  that  this
    was done.  Accordingly it  follows  that  the  curtailment  notice  not
    having validly been served on the appellant as at the date on which  he
    made his application which was 11 October 2014,  as  at  this  date  he
    still had valid leave to be in this country which leave did not  expire
    until two days later.

 7. It follows that the decision to refuse his application  was  indeed  an
    immigration decision and that the appellant had a right of appeal.

 8.  Accordingly,  Judge  Lloyd's  decision  that   the   Tribunal   lacked
    jurisdiction cannot be sustained and as there has been no hearing as to
    the merits of his appeal this appeal will now have to be heard properly
    within the First-tier Tribunal and I will so order.

Decision

The decision of Judge Lloyd that the Tribunal lacked  jurisdiction  to  hear
the appellant's appeal is set aside.

The appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  hearing  on  the
merits by any judge other than Judge Lloyd.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 29 July 2016
