

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/08571/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On March 9, 2016                  |On March 29, 2016              |
|                                  |                               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MRS NAN ROSALIE STEWART
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
Appellant   Mr Diwnycz (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Mr Vokes, Counsel, instructed by Patrik Klaus
      Helmut Kube

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The respondent in these proceedings was  the  appellant  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal. From hereon I  have  referred  to  the  parties
       accordingly so that for example reference to  the  respondent  is  a
       reference to the Secretary of State for the Home Department.

    2. The Appellant is a citizen of South Africa.  The  appellant  entered
       the United Kingdom on December  20,  2007  with  UK  Ancestry  entry
       clearance valid until October 18, 2012. On April 4, 2013 she applied
       for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  ancestry  and  human
       rights. The respondent refused her application on January 15,  2014.
       The appellant appealed this decision  on  February  14,  2015  under
       section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

    3. The respondent gave the appellant an out of country appeal right and
       as an in-country appeal was lodged the matter was put before a  Duty
       Judge at Arnhem House on a validity issue. On April 16, 2014 a  Duty
       Judge directed that the matter be listed  for  a  hearing  with  the
       issue of validity to be addressed at that hearing.

    4. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Parkes  on
       December 31, 2014 and in a decision that was not sent to the parties
       he concluded there was a valid in country right of appeal. He  later
       heard the substantive appeal on April 21, 2015  and  in  a  decision
       promulgated on  May  18,  2015  he  refused  the  appeal  under  the
       Immigration Rules and under the Immigration (European Economic Area)
       Regulations 2006.

    5. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on May 20,  2015  submitting
       the First-tier Judge had erred by considering  the  appeal  and  had
       failed to give reasons for finding there was jurisdiction.

    6. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchinson gave permission to
       appeal on this point on July 13, 2015.

    7. The matter came before me on the above date and  I  passed  to  both
       parties a copy of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Parkes's decision
       on jurisdiction. Mr  Diwnycz  considered  the  same  and  thereafter
       indicated he had no  further  submissions  to  make  on  the  appeal
       grounds in light of what was contained in that  decision.  Mr  Vokes
       invited me to dismiss the appeal.

    8. The respondent's appeal was based on the  fact  the  Judge  had  not
       given  any  explanation  for  accepting  jurisdiction.  Sadly,   his
       decision had not been sent to either party because if it had then  I
       am satisfied no appeal would have  been  brought.  The  Judge  quite
       properly explained why there was jurisdiction to hear the appeal and
       consequently  the  grounds  have  no  merit.  In  any   event,   the
       explanation given in that earlier decision was correct  in  law  and
       there could not therefore be a material error in law.

    9. The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
       pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make no order now.





DECISION

   10. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a point of law. I uphold the First-
       tier Tribunal's decision.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

FEE AWARD

I make no amendment to the fee award decision.

Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
