
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/08019/2014
                                                               IA/08023/2014
                                                               IA/08024/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21st July 2014                               |On 17th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                            A A (first Appellant)
                          n E I  (second appellant)
                                         A   (third appellant)
                                                                  Appellants
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr G Lee, Counsel instructed by Rotherham & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction


 1. The Appellants are all citizens of Nigeria.  They are A A born  on  7th
    October 1974, his wife N E I born on  7th  September  1983,  and  their
    child, O E A, a female born on 25th October 2010.  The second Appellant
    first arrived in the UK on 17th September 2007 when she was given leave
    to enter as a student eventually until  15th  April  2012.   The  first
    Appellant entered the UK some time in 2008, and married his  wife,  the
    second Appellant, on 5th December 2009.  Their  daughter  was  born  on
    25th  October  2010.   The   Appellants   made   various   unsuccessful
    applications for leave to remain, and eventually on 28th  January  2014
    their applications for leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds  were
    refused and at the same time it was decided to  remove  the  Appellants
    under the provisions of Section 10 Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.
    The Appellants appealed, and their appeals were heard by Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Rose (the Judge) sitting in Birmingham on  1st  May
    2014.  He decided to dismiss the appeals under the  Immigration  Rules,
    but to allow them on asylum and human rights grounds  for  the  reasons
    given in his Determination dated 3rd May 2014.  The  Respondent  sought
    leave to appeal that decision, and on 29th May 2014 such permission was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge allowed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds because
    he found that if returned to Nigeria, the Appellants would live in  the
    village of the second Appellant where there was a real  risk  that  the
    third Appellant would be subjected to Female Genital Mutilation  (FGM).
    The Judge considered the possibility of internal relocation, but  found
    that:

         "in my judgment, it would be unduly harsh to expect the  first  and
         second Appellants to take the third Appellant to live in a part  of
         the country other than the second Appellant's home village, and the
         Appellants cannot reasonably be expected to stay in any such part".

    The Judge reached his conclusion because he found that  the  Appellants
    had no money to take with  them  to  Nigeria,  and  that  they  had  no
    connections with individuals who could  be  expected  to  support  them
    outside of the second Appellant's village.   Therefore  the  Appellants
    would face a very  uncertain  future  outside  the  second  Appellant's
    village, particularly because the first  Appellant  had  no  particular
    skills which would assist him to find employment.  It would not  be  in
    the best interests of the  third  Appellant,  a  child,  to  return  to
    Nigeria.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Kandola submitted that the Judge had erred in law in
    his decision.  Mr Kandola referred to the grounds  of  application  and
    argued that the Judge had given inadequate  reasons  for  his  decision
    that the Appellants  had  to  return  to  the  village  of  the  second
    Appellant and could not relocate elsewhere.   Further,  the  Judge  had
    erred in concluding that the first Appellant had no  particular  skills
    with which to find employment in Nigeria.  The Judge had failed to take
    into account the studies carried out and the qualifications obtained by
    the first Appellant during his time in the UK which had allowed him  to
    support himself and his family whilst in the UK.  The  Judge  had  also
    failed to take into account  the  possible  availability  of  voluntary
    return funds.  Finally, the Judge had failed to  take  account  of  the
    evidence contained in paragraph 3.20.9 of the Operational Guidance Note
    which said that those at risk of FGM from their  relatives  in  Nigeria
    could safely relocate to another part of Nigeria where they  could  not
    be traced.

 5. In response, Mr Lee argued that there had been no such  error  of  law.
    The Judge had given  sufficient  reasons  for  his  decision,  and  the
    grounds relied upon by the  Respondent  amounted  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with that decision.  The Respondent  was  now  asking  for
    reasons for reasons.  There was no challenge to  the  decision  of  the
    Judge that the third Appellant would be at risk of FGM in the  family's
    home village, and it was accepted that it would be in her best interest
    not to return there.  The grounds of application sought  to  impose  an
    impossible standard.  The Judge had come to a conclusion open to him on
    the evidence, and had given sufficient reasons for it at paragraphs  38
    to 41 of the Determination.  The Judge had clearly taken account of the
    Operational Guidance Note.

 6. I found that there was an error of law in the decision of the Judge  so
    that it should be set aside.  The Judge allowed the appeal on the basis
    that the third Appellant was at risk of FGM in  her  family's  village.
    It was therefore behoven upon the Judge to consider whether  the  third
    Appellant and her parents would  be  safe  elsewhere  in  Nigeria,  and
    whether it would be reasonable by way of  not  being  unduly  harsh  to
    relocate there.  The Judge stated in his Determination  that  he  would
    address that possibility, but in my judgment failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for  his  conclusion.   Those  reasons  were  merely  that  the
    Appellants had no money, the first Appellant had no skills  with  which
    to find employment, and that the Appellant had no  connections  outside
    the family village to turn to for support.   These  reasons  failed  to
    take account of the circumstances of the Appellants in  the  UK,  where
    they were able to support themselves, and also the background  evidence
    provided by paragraph 3.20.9 of  the  Operational  Guidance  Note,  the
    relevant part of which states as follows:

         "however in  general  those  who  are  unable,  or  owing  to  fear
         unwilling, to avail themselves of the protection of the authorities
         can safely relocate to another part of  Nigeria  where  the  family
         members who are pressurising them to undergo FGM would be  unlikely
         to trace them.  Women in this situation would if they choose to  do
         so also be able to seek protection from women's  NGOs  in  the  new
         location".

 7. I therefore set aside the decision of the Judge.

 8. I then decided not to proceed to remake the  decision  but  instead  to
    remit the appeal to the First-tier to be heard afresh on the basis that
    the finding of the Judge that the third Appellant would be at  risk  of
    FGM on return to the Appellant's family  village  in  Nigeria  will  be
    preserved.  I decided to remit the appeal to the First-tier because  it
    is probable that when the appeal is reheard it  will  be  necessary  to
    deal with the Article  8  rights  of  the  Appellants  about  which  no
    evidence was given at the first hearing.  This is  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision for it to be remade in the First-tier.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 which I continue.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton





