
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08312/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th January 2017                 |On 7th February 2017                 |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                        mr abidemi tajudeen adegbite
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  his  leave
    and to remove him was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  RJNB
    Morris ("the judge") in a decision promulgated on 8th August 2016.  The
    appellant's case was advanced on the basis of his  private  and  family
    life ties here.  His partner and the children of the  family  (five  in
    all) have discretionary leave  which  expires  in  2018.   One  of  the
    children (Bilal) is a British citizen, born here in October 2005.

2.   The judge found as a fact that the appellant is a persistent  offender,
    for the purposes of the suitability requirements contained in S-LTR  of
    the Immigration Rules ("the rules") and that his presence in the United
    Kingdom is not conducive to the public good.  Having found that he  was
    unable to meet the requirements of the rules, she went on  to  consider
    whether there were compelling  circumstances  which  might  require  an
    assessment outside them and proceeded to make such an assessment.   She
    took into account section 117A to D of the 2002 Act, assessed the  best
    interests of the appellant's two minor children, including  Bilal,  and
    concluded, overall, that although strong ties to the United Kingdom had
    been established by the minor children in particular, these  were  "not
    such as to render the appellant's removal  disproportionate".   Putting
    that conclusion in another way, she found in the final paragraph of the
    decision that the  appellant's  removal  amounted  to  a  proportionate
    interference with his private and family life here and that the  public
    interest in the maintenance of immigration control prevailed.

3.   In the application for permission to appeal, it was contended that  the
    judge erred in her assessment of the proportionality of family  members
    accompanying the appellant to Nigeria and  in  her  assessment  of  the
    impact of separation of the  children  from  their  father,  should  he
    return to Nigeria alone.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 2nd December 2016.  In  a  rule  24
    response dated 9th December that year, the Secretary of  State  opposed
    the appeal.  At paragraph 3 of that response, there is the following:

         "This is an appeal which turns entirely on s.117B(6).  Judge of the
         First-tier Tribunal Morris found that it would  be  reasonable  for
         the appellant's children to go to Nigeria with (the appellant)."

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Paragraph 3 of the  rule  24  response  appeared  to  me  to  correctly
    identify the nub point.  At paragraph 35 of the decision, the judge set
    out paragraph 117B(6) and I invited Mr Melvin to indicate where in  the
    decision might be found the answer to the question whether it would not
    be reasonable to expect Bilal to leave the United Kingdom.   Mr  Melvin
    said that the answer appeared from a reading of  the  entire  decision,
    rather than any discrete part.  The Court of Appeal, in  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705, had  given  guidance  showing  that  the  relevant
    assessment had to be  in  the  round.   The  judge  drew  together  her
    findings at paragraph 46 of the decision, where she found that removing
    the  appellant  was  a  proportionate  response.    The   question   of
    reasonableness  raised  in  section  117B(6)   formed   part   of   her
    proportionality assessment.

6.   The judge assessed  the  best  interests  of  the  minor  children  and
    considered relevant medical issues at paragraph 45  and  her  reasoning
    culminated in the conclusion reached in the following  paragraph.   The
    Secretary of State's case was that the judge had looked at all relevant
    matters and reached conclusions open to her.  In  essence,  the  family
    members faced a choice as to whether they accompanied the appellant  to
    Nigeria or remained  here.   There  was  no  question  of  forcing  the
    children to leave.  Moreover, at paragraph  43  of  the  decision,  the
    judge did appear to find that it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    minor  children,  including  Bilal,  to  travel  to  Nigeria  with  the
    appellant and his partner and adult children.

7.   Mr Harding agreed that section  117B(6)  was  critical.   However,  the
    decision contained no clear  answer  to  the  relevant  question.   The
    judgment in MA (Pakistan) made plain  that  "reasonableness",  for  the
    purposes of section 117B(6), is not the same as "proportionality".   At
    the heart of the judgment at paragraph 46, the relevant starting  point
    was identified as a need to show strong reasons justifying the  removal
    of a qualifying child.

8.   The judgment in MA (Pakistan)  appeared  to  have  entered  the  public
    domain by the date of the hearing but no mention was  made  of  it  was
    made in the decision, or of the  guidance  contained  in  it.   As  the
    relevant question concerned the reasonableness of expecting  the  minor
    children to leave the United Kingdom, rather than  the  proportionality
    of the decision to remove the appellant, the judge materially erred  in
    law.  The wrong test was  applied  at  paragraphs  44  and  earlier  at
    paragraph 39 of the decision.

9.   In  a  brief  response,  Mr  Melvin  said  that  the  judge's  findings
    regarding the appellant's offending behaviour formed part of  both  the
    proportionality  assessment  and  the  judge's  consideration  of   the
    reasonableness of expecting the children to leave.  MA (Pakistan)  made
    it clear that this aspect of the public interest was relevant  and  the
    appellant's offending behaviour weighed against him.

Conclusion on Error of Law

10.  The decision is thorough and the judge  has  carefully  considered  the
    rules and the threshold question identified in SS (Congo), Agyarko  and
    other cases.  She has assessed the best interests of the minor children
    and taken into account the public interest considerations  set  out  in
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.   What  is  missing,  however,  is  an
    answer to the question posed by section 117B(6)(b).   In  other  words,
    the decision does not contain a clear answer to the question whether it
    would not be reasonable to expect  the  minor  children  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  One of the two, Bilal, is a British citizen and so  it
    is perhaps the case, in the light of Zambrano and CS that his  position
    is different from that of his sibling.  The judgment of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MA (Pakistan) was given on 7th July 2016, shortly before  the
    date of the hearing in the present appeal, and gave important guidance.
     In answering the question, the public interest considerations that may
    emerge from a claimant's poor immigration  history,  for  example,  are
    relevant and must be taken into account.  The Court of Appeal preferred
    this analysis to the rival theory that the question is entirely  child-
    focused (as the Upper Tribunal found in MAB).  What is  also  clear  is
    that once the public interest has been taken into account, the question
    resolves into  the  express  terms  of  the  sub-section,  rather  than
    engaging any broader question of proportionality not directly concerned
    with whether it is not reasonable to expect the child to leave.

11.  It is here that the error in the  decision  appears.   The  conclusions
    reached at paragraphs 44 and 46  concern  the  proportionality  of  the
    appellant's removal to  Nigeria.   Section  117B(6)  is  identified  at
    paragraph 35 of the decision, as noted  earlier,  but  there  is,  with
    respect,  no  answer  to   the   relevant   question   concerning   the
    reasonableness of expecting the minor  children  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  At paragraph 43,  there  is  at  first  sight  a  finding  on
    precisely this point but on careful  scrutiny,  that  paragraph  cannot
    sustain the decision.  The judge there considers what would happen "if"
    the appellant's partner were to return to Nigeria with him by choice or
    "if" the family's discretionary leave were not  renewed  on  expiry  in
    2018.  On either basis, the judge would then  find  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the minor children "to travel  to  Nigeria".   Not
    only is that finding based on events yet to occur or family choices yet
    to  be  made,  it  does  not  answer  the   relevant   question.    The
    reasonableness  of  travel   to   Nigeria   is   different   from   the
    reasonableness of expecting a child to leave the United Kingdom.   And,
    of course, section 117B(6) requires the question to be answered  as  at
    the date of assessment (the hearing) and not on a contingent  basis  if
    close family members were to choose a certain course of  action  or  if
    leave is not renewed in a year or two's time.

12.  I conclude that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  must  be  set
    aside and remade.

13.  In a discussion about the appropriate venue,  the  representatives  saw
    some benefit in the appeal being retained by the Upper Tribunal, rather
    than remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   After  careful  thought,
    taking into account both the passage of time  since  the  decision  was
    made (which might bring with it the need for updating evidence) and the
    fact that answering the section 117B(6) question ought as a  matter  of
    general principle to be decided in  the  First-tier,  and  noting  that
    helpful guidance may soon emerge from the Upper Tribunal in CS, I  have
    decided that the decision should be remade in the First-tier  Tribunal.
    The judge's findings regarding the appellant's offending behaviour  are
    not simply findings of fact; they include an evaluative  assessment  in
    the light of the requirements of the rules and so they ought not to  be
    preserved.  It will be for the next  judge  to  make  his  or  her  own
    assessment.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and shall be remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal, at Hatton Cross, before a judge other  than  First-
tier Tribunal Judge RJNB Morris.

No anonymity direction is made.


R C Campbell,
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)     6 February 2017

