
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/08642/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at : Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 14th May 2015                      |On 14th July 2015                     |
|                                      |                                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between


                            MISS NELDON SABANGAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                          Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:    Mr Sheraz Khalid of Lords Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms Julie Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction


   1. Although the respondent is appealing in these proceedings I will
      continue to refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier
      Tribunal.


   2. The appellant is a national of the Philippines, born on the 11
      December 1975. She applied for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General
      Student) on 21 January 2014. The respondent refused her application on
      3 February 2014 and decided to make Removal Directions under section
      47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


   3. Her application was refused on the basis she had not met the
      requirements of paragraph 245ZX(c) of the immigration rules and
      Appendix A paragraph 118(b)(i) 4. She was required to show she was
      competent in the English language at the minimum of CEFR level B2. She
      had submitted an IELTS-B2 certificate which stated that she had scored
      5 in reading. The respondent concluded this did not meet the minimum
      standards required.

   4. Her appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Adio on 25 September 2014
      who, in a determination promulgated on 1 October 2014, allowed the
      appeal. The judge concluded a score of 5 met the requirements.

   5. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the basis the
      immigration judge was incorrect in this conclusion. It was contended
      the relevant equivalent to level B2 of CEFR under the IELTS system was
      5.5. Permission was granted on this basis.

Consideration

   6. The decision of Akhtar (CEFR;UKBA guidance and IELTS)[2013] UKUT 00306
      (IAC) decided that were the immigration rules required an applicant to
      achieve a certain level of English by reference to the CEFR testing
      system and they relied upon IELTS results then they must rely on the
      relevant UKBA Guidance. This was because the rules do not state
      equivalents. The necessary score must be achieved in the individual
      modules. Paragraph 10 of the decision quotes from the UKBA guidance
      schedule that B2 = 5.5.

   7.  Akhtar concerned an application for entry clearance as a wife. Such
      applicants were required to demonstrate they met the lower level A of
      the CEFR. The appellant relied upon test results under the IELTS
      system. In `speaking' she scored 3.5 and achieved higher scores in
      other areas. In the UKBA schedule there was no equivalent to level A.
      The lowest category was B1, which required an equivalent score of
      4.Consequently,the Upper Tribunal held the score of 3.5 did not meet
      the requirements .Paragraph 16 of the decision states:

        ... The rules require level A1. A person who takes the test marked
        on a different scale needs to rely on the guidance to show that the
        mark obtained is equivalent to (at least) level A1.The guidance has
        to be read as a whole. It says that IELTS 4 is equivalent to level
        B1.But, apparently deliberately, it does not attribute any mark
        less than level B1 to any IELTS score....


   8. In the present appellant's case B-2 does have an equivalent in the
      UKBA schedule, namely 5.5. This would clearly indicate that the
      appellant does not meet B-2 because one of her scores is 5.


   9. Judge Adio was referred to documentation indicating a score of 5 in
      IELTS system met the requirements of B-2.There is a letter from the
      appellant's College, dated 31 March 2014 stating that a score of
      between 5 to 6.5 is equivalent to B2, with 5 being borderline between
      B1 and B2.There is an extract from Wikipedia containing equivalences:
      it states that a score of 5 is borderline between B1 and B-2. There is
      a document from IELTS marked P 17 in the appellant's appeal bundle
      which has a table indicating 5 in IELTS is the equivalent of B2. There
      is a similar statement from the British Council at p.18. Judge Adio
      relied on these documents and also referred to a document from CEFR as
      supporting the view a score of 5 was sufficient.

Conclusions

  10.  Judge Adio erred in relying on these comparators from third parties
      rather than focusing upon the UKBA guidance as he was required under
      Akhtar. I have not been provided with a copy of the Guidance but based
      upon the extract at paragraph 10 of Akhtar it is clear that B-2 equals
      5.5 and not 5.


  11. In the papers I have I cannot find any original document from CEFR. In
      Akhtar, as here, materials obtained from the Internet were submitted.
      At paragraph 14 the Upper Tribunal referred to the doubtful provenance
      of some of the documentation. Typically, internet material adopts
      logos giving the appearance it is emanating from an official body when
      this is not in fact the case.


  12. The conclusion at paragraph 5 of the Judge Adio's decision that B-2
      can be lower than 5.5 is not sound. The judge referred to paragraph 14
      of Akhtar as authority for this. Paragraph 14 does not say this. In
      Akhtar the appellant was trying to show that her IELTS scores reached
      level AI. The Upper Tribunal said that the Guide did not attribute any
      mark less than level B1. Whilst that appellant scored 5.5 in respect
      of listening, which would convert to the higher B2, she had only
      scored 3.5 in speaking. As she had not achieved the relevant score in
      all areas her appeal failed.

Decision

  13. There is a material error of law in Judge Adio's conclusion that a
      score of 5 in the IELTS met the minimum English requirements of B-2
      under the CEFR. This is because a score of 5.5 was required. I remake
      the decision dismissing the appeal of Ms Sabangan.


Signed



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly



Fee award

The First-tier Judge made a full free award. This no longer applies because
the appeal has not been allowed

Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

