
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08042/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 1 May 2014                        |On 9 May 2014                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   The Honourable Mrs Justice Andrews DBE
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede


                                   Between

                             Vikram vipin gohil
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Ofei-Kwatia, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant who was born on 5 May 1980, is a  citizen  of  India.  He
    brings this appeal against the decision  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
    (Immigration Judge Elek) dated 7 January 2014  to  dismiss  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent on 28 February  2013  to  cancel
    his indefinite leave to remain (ILR) and to remove him from the  United
    Kingdom and to refuse his claim on human rights grounds.

 2. The Appellant entered the UK as a student on 15 September 2001, at  the
    age of 21. His visa was valid from 7  September  2001  until  30  April
    2002. His leave was further extended as a  student  and  under  Tier  1
    (Post Study Work) until 15 October 2010.

 3. On 8 December 2009, the Appellant applied for a Certificate of Approval
    (Marriage) which was duly granted with an expiry date of 25 April 2010.
    On 20 March 2010 he married a British national, Ruksha  Fatania,  in  a
    civil ceremony and on 27 April 2010 he was  granted  limited  leave  to
    remain as the spouse of a settled person in the United  Kingdom,  valid
    until 27 April 2012. The couple married in an Indian religious ceremony
    on 30 May 2010. After that ceremony they lived together at [address].

 4. On 10 April 2012 the Appellant applied for  ILR  as  the  spouse  of  a
    settled person in the United Kingdom. This application was supported at
    the time by his wife.  However, on 24 July 2012 the Appellant left  the
    marital home. When he returned on the following day, it was  simply  to
    collect some of his belongings and paperwork. On 28 July 2012 his  wife
    received in the post a mail redirection confirmation  from  Royal  Mail
    dated 26 July,  which  confirmed  that  they  had  been  asked  by  the
    Appellant to redirect his post to another address (which turned out  to
    be his sister's address) as from 24 September 2012.

 5. On 30 July 2012 the Appellant's wife wrote a letter to the UKBA stating
    that as of 24 July 2012 her husband had left the marital residence  and
    had not returned, and she feared her marriage was over as a result. She
    said that this led her to believe that he had married her  under  false
    pretences to obtain residence in this country. She  also  supplied  the
    UKBA with a copy of  the  mail  redirection  confirmation.  Due  to  an
    administrative error, Mrs Gohil's letter did  not  reach  the  decision
    maker before ILR was granted on 4 August 2012. On 13 August  2012,  Mrs
    Gohil informed the UKBA that she wished  to  withdraw  her  sponsorship
    with immediate effect. On 24 September 2012 she filed  a  petition  for
    divorce. The Appellant and his wife were not reconciled. On  30  August
    2013, Mrs Gohil obtained a decree nisi.

 6. The Appellant was under an obligation to inform the Respondent  of  any
    material change of circumstances that occurred before  his  application
    for ILR was determined.  He  did  not  inform  the  Respondent  of  the
    problems in his marriage before ILR was granted or indeed at  any  time
    before he left the UK on a trip to  India,  where  he  stayed  from  29
    September 2012 until 16 October 2012. On his return, he was stopped  at
    the airport by an Immigration Officer and asked  questions.   Initially
    he said that his marriage was still subsisting, and  gave  his  current
    address as [address].  When the Immigration Officer told him  that  his
    wife had informed them that the marriage was no longer  subsisting,  he
    admitted to having had marital problems for the last three months,  but
    he denied leaving the matrimonial  home.  It  was  only  after  he  was
    informed that the UKBA records showed that he was now residing with his
    sister that he admitted this, but he said that  this  was  because  his
    wife had changed the locks and would not let him in.

 7. The Appellant was granted  temporary  admission  with  no  restrictions
    pending further inquiries.  By  letter  dated  22  February  2013,  the
    Respondent gave the Appellant another opportunity  to  respond  to  the
    allegations made by his wife,  but   his  solicitors'  response  of  27
    February said no more than that he strongly denied them all.

 8. The Appellant's ILR was cancelled under paragraph 321(A)(1) and (2)  of
    the Immigration Rules on  28  February  2013.  On  13  March  2013  the
    Appellant lodged an appeal against that decision and contended that his
    removal would breach his rights under Article 8 ECHR. In the  light  of
    that appeal  the  Respondent  reconsidered  the  matter  with  specific
    reference to his Article 8 claim. A lengthy and detailed  supplementary
    refusal letter was sent on 4 July 2013.

 9. When his appeal came before the FTT, the Appellant, his sister, and his
    former wife all gave evidence. The Appellant alleged that the  marriage
    had been a happy one and that there had been a minor domestic  argument
    on 24 July 2012 which escalated and led to his being forced out of  the
    marital home by his wife. He had not expected the argument to  lead  to
    divorce, and he was giving his wife some space  for  the  good  of  the
    marriage. He admitted that he had broken into  the  former  matrimonial
    home on 6 August 2012, but alleged that because his wife had refused to
    let him back in and had changed the locks, he had to get a locksmith in
    order to enter the property to get his Tesco manager's uniform. He  did
    not produce the locksmith's invoice.

10. His former wife stated that she had noticed problems in their  marriage
    only six months after the civil ceremony.  Although she had tried  hard
    to make the marriage work, the Appellant had been totally uncooperative
    and uninterested in improving the  situation.  Her  evidence  was  that
    after he had  completed  his  biometric  tests  in  May/June  2012  her
    husband's attitude towards her changed significantly, and then, to  her
    shock and despair, on 24 July 2012 he left the matrimonial  home.  When
    he came back on 25 July she thought it was in order for  them  to  talk
    and reconcile, but he said he had come back for some of his  belongings
    and his car tax renewal paperwork. He would not consider  talking,  and
    was not interested in her or their marriage. On 26 July they  exchanged
    text messages in which he confirmed to her that their marriage was over
    and this was best for all.  Those texts were produced in evidence.

11. In a fully and sufficiently reasoned decision, Immigration  Judge  Elek
    made adverse findings about the Appellant's credibility. She held  that
    he had lied to the Immigration Officer and that he  had  abandoned  his
    marriage before his ILR was granted on 4 August 2012.   Those  findings
    were plainly open to the Judge on the evidence before her. It is  clear
    from the decision that the Judge was well aware of the possibility that
    the Appellant's ex-wife might be  exaggerating  through  understandable
    hurt that the marriage had ended, but  she  decided  that  Mrs  Gohil's
    conclusions about his behaviour were based on the  evidence  (including
    the fact that the Appellant had given instructions to redirect his mail
    to his sister's address sometime before 26 July 2012).  The  Judge  did
    not accept the Appellant's evidence that his  instruction  to  redirect
    the mail was with effect from September 2012 was a mistake.  The  Judge
    concluded that Mrs Gohil was telling the truth and that  the  Appellant
    was not.

12. On 7 January 2014  Judge  Elek  dismissed  the  appeal  on  immigration
    grounds and on human rights grounds.  On 17 February 2014 Judge  Pooler
    granted an extension of time and permission to appeal on the basis that
    Judge Elek arguably erred in law by failing to make  a  finding  as  to
    whether there had been a change of circumstances  since  the  grant  of
    leave or the  making  of  false  representations  in  relation  to  the
    application. However, the Appellant was granted permission to argue all
    grounds raised in the Grounds of Appeal. None of these  grounds  relate
    to the decision to reject the claim under Article 8 ECHR and  therefore
    we say no more about that.

13. The  Respondent  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  grounds  raised  no
    material errors  of  law  and  that  they  amounted  to  no  more  than
    disagreement with the negative outcome of the appeal.

14. Although all those grounds were maintained and relied upon  before  us,
    Ms Ofei-Kwatia concentrated on  the  allegation  that  the  Immigration
    Judge erred in law because she failed to give consideration to  whether
    the Appellant qualified for ILR under  Rule  276B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

15. One of the allegations made by Mrs Gohil in her witness  statement  was
    that after her husband left  the  marital  home,  she  discovered  some
    letters confirming that the Appellant had  previously  applied  to  the
    Home Office for a visa under the Highly Skilled Migrant Programme which
    had been refused, and which she never knew about. In  paragraph  24  of
    his witness statement dated 27 July 2013, the Appellant  said  this  in
    response:

         ".... my ex-wife states that I had previous  application  of  HSMP.
         This is suggesting that I used my ex-wife to gain entrance into the
         UK. At the time of making the ILR on the basis of a spouse  settled
         in the UK on 10 April 2012, I qualified for ILR on the basis of  10
         year legal residence in the UK. I wanted to apply on this basis  as
         I have worked hard to get my 10 year legal stay.  However,  through
         pressure from my  ex-wife  and  her  family,  which  brought  about
         arguments, I decided, and to appease Ruksha and her family, to  get
         the ILR through the route which my wife consented to."

16. The appellant did not raise the argument  that  he  qualified  for  ILR
    under Rule 276B at the time when the original  decision  was  made,  or
    when the matter was reconsidered, or in his section 120  statement,  or
    in his original grounds of appeal to the FTT. Although he  was  legally
    represented, there is no evidence that the point was raised before  the
    FTT in oral argument either. Ms Ofei-Kwatia sought to rely on the  case
    of MU v SSHD [2010] ILIT 442 (IAC) in which it was  held  that  it  was
    open to an appellant to serve a fresh statement of  additional  grounds
    in response to a section 120 notice  whilst  his  appeal  was  pending.
    However no application to serve such a statement was made to the FTT or
    to this Tribunal.

17. Ms Isherwood drew our attention to the decision of the Supreme Court in
    R (Patel) v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72. This  confirms  that  s.85(2)  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 imposes a duty on  the  FTT
    to consider any potential ground of appeal  raised  in  response  to  a
    section 120 notice, even if it is not directly related  to  the  issues
    considered by the Secretary of State  in  the  original  decision.  The
    Supreme Court held that the grounds for an  application  for  leave  to
    remain can be varied up to the time when the decision is  made.  If  an
    application is varied after the decision, then it would be open to  the
    applicant to submit further grounds to be considered at appeal. However
    it appears to be clear from Patel, especially paragraph 44, that on any
    view, the applicant's last opportunity to raise new grounds in response
    to a section 120 notice is at the time of the appeal to the FTT.

18. The decision of the FTT cannot be criticised  on  the  basis  that  the
    Immigration Judge failed to make a finding in the Appellant's favour on
    a ground which was never raised or argued before her. Whilst the FTT is
    obliged to deal with an obvious human  rights  point  which  arises  on
    appeal whether it is raised in the grounds or not, there  is  no  wider
    obligation to consider matters  that  the  Appellant  has  not  raised,
    particularly if he is legally represented. It was not an error  of  law
    for the Judge to fail to draw inferences from the Appellant's  evidence
    about other grounds or arguments that might have been  raised,  if  the
    Appellant's legal representatives chose not to  put  those  grounds  or
    arguments. If the Judge had taken that approach in  her  decision,  the
    Respondent would have  had  a  legitimate  ground  for  complaint.  The
    Respondent would have had no forewarning  that  the  ground  was  being
    relied upon or that the argument was being deployed or considered,  and
    would have had no proper opportunity to address the FTT about it. It is
    not the function of the appellate Tribunal to make the Appellant's case
    for him. There is no unfairness caused to the Appellant by taking  this
    approach.

19. The argument has no merit in  any  event.  Taken  at  its  highest  the
    Appellant's evidence in paragraph 24 of his witness statement  goes  no
    further than stating that he had accumulated 10 years' legal  residence
    in the UK by the time he made his application for ILR as a  spouse.  He
    then  offers  an  explanation  for  why  he  decided  not  to  make  an
    application in his own right. This was in the  context  of  seeking  to
    persuade the Judge not to find that his marriage was a  sham  from  the
    onset, rather than to persuade her that his  application  for  ILR  was
    meritorious in any event.

20. It does not follow from the fact that the Appellant may  have  met  the
    threshold for making an application for ILR in  his  own  right  before
    April 2012 that he would have been granted ILR  had  he  made  such  an
    application.  One  cannot  speculate  what  the  outcome  of  such   an
    application would have been,  let  alone  assume  it  would  have  been
    favourable. Moreover, the Applicant only achieved the ten  year  period
    of residence because he had been granted limited leave to remain in the
    UK as a spouse.  It is again a matter of pure speculation that he would
    have been granted leave to remain in the UK beyond 15 October 2010  had
    he not married his former wife  and  obtained  limited  leave  on  that
    basis.

21. Ms Ofei-Kwatia submitted that the fact that the  Appellant  could  have
    made an application for ILR in his own right undermined the  suggestion
    that he only married his ex-wife in  order  to  obtain  ILR.  Thus  the
    alleged failure of the Judge to consider  this  factor  undermined  her
    reasoning in reaching that conclusion. However that does not follow  at
    all. First, it ignores the fact that the ten years,  which  expired  in
    September 2011, included a not insignificant period of leave based upon
    the marriage in March 2010. Thus, on the face of it, the marriage was a
    necessary  step  towards  gaining  ILR.  The  submission  requires   an
    assumption, without any evidence to  support  it,  that  the  Appellant
    would have been able to stay in the  UK  beyond  15  October  2010  and
    achieve the 10 year threshold regardless of his marriage.

22.  Secondly, the Appellant did not make an application for ILR under Rule
    276B either then or at any subsequent time. There is no satisfactory or
    credible explanation for his failure to do so. There was no reason  for
    his wife or her family to want  him  to  go  down  the  "spouse"  route
    instead of making his immigration status certain by some other route at
    an earlier juncture if the marriage was a happy one; and the  Appellant
    provides no explanation for their alleged attitude or for his  need  to
    appease them. Moreover his evidence that this matter was the subject of
    arguments does not sit well  with  the  Appellant's  portrayal  of  the
    marriage as untroubled until the domestic argument  allegedly  blew  up
    without warning on 24 July 2012.

23. Given its inherent implausibility, the Immigration Judge was not  bound
    to accept at face value the Appellant's explanation for why he did  not
    apply for ILR in his own right even though he said that he  wanted  to,
    especially in the light of her adverse findings about  his  credibility
    which were plainly justified on the totality of the evidence. The Judge
    was not obliged to deal with every aspect of the  Appellant's  evidence
    when giving her reasons; she gave sufficient reasons for  reaching  the
    view that she did about the Appellant's credibility, and there was more
    than enough evidence to justify her findings about his  motivation  for
    entry into the marriage.

24. Indeed, the fact that the Applicant made no application for ILR in  his
    own  right  in  September  2011  but  waited  until  the  end  of   the
    probationary period tends to support, rather  than  to  undermine,  the
    assertion that he was only relying on the  marriage  as  the  means  of
    obtaining ILR, especially  when  taken  together  with  all  the  other
    evidence about his behaviour on which the Immigration Judge  relied  in
    finding that there had been forethought and planning in his abandonment
    of his marriage and the matrimonial home prior to its grant. It  is  at
    the very least consistent  with  the  adverse  findings  made  in  that
    regard.

25. It is also important to bear in  mind  that  although  the  Immigration
    Judge concluded that the forethought and planning of the abandonment of
    the Appellant's marriage cast doubt on his intentions in entering  into
    it, the cancellation of his ILR was justified  on  the  basis  that  he
    failed  to  inform  the  Respondent  of  major  developments   in   his
    relationship with his former wife that were of critical  importance  to
    his entitlement to  ILR.  What  really  mattered,  therefore,  was  the
    marital breakdown and the Appellant's deliberate concealment of it from
    the Respondent, which would have been sufficient  reason  for  refusing
    ILR even if the Appellant had entered into the marriage in good faith.

26. It is suggested that the FTT Judge erred in failing to consider whether
    there had been a material change of circumstances between the grant  of
    leave on 4 August 2012 and the cancellation of  leave  on  28  February
    2013. Although there is no express mention of Rule 321A  or  the  tests
    under it in the decision under appeal, the Immigration Judge  concluded
    in paragraph 15 that the decision to cancel ILR was "in accordance with
    the law". She could only have done that if she were satisfied that  the
    requirements of Rule 321A (1) and/or (2) were  made  out.  There  would
    have been ample justification for making an  express  finding  to  that
    effect.

27. At one point it appeared that the Appellant was seeking to  argue  that
    because the marriage was already over before  the  grant  of  ILR,  and
    remained over at the time of the decision to cancel his ILR, there  was
    no material change of circumstance.   However,  in  the  light  of  the
    decision in Fiaz v  SSHD  [2012]  UKUT  00057  (AC)  that  argument  is
    untenable. When he came back from India, it  was  not  the  Appellant's
    intention to re-enter in order to resume his marriage and  go  back  to
    the matrimonial home (though that was the story he told the Immigration
    Officer and maintained on appeal), and that critically  undermined  the
    basis on which he had sought and obtained ILR. That suffices to  amount
    to a material change of circumstances for the purposes of the  exercise
    of the statutory power to cancel ILR.  In any event, it was plain  that
    after 4 August, at least by the time she filed for divorce in September
    2012, his wife was no longer willing to take the  Appellant  back.  The
    Immigration Judge was entitled to find on  the  evidence  that  it  was
    incredible that his wife did not tell the  Appellant  when  he  was  in
    India that she had filed a petition for divorce, particularly since  he
    maintained that he was in telephone contact with her during that  time.
    The fact his wife had filed for divorce was in and of itself a material
    change of circumstance.

28. Ms Ofei-Kwatia submitted in reply to the Respondent's submissions  that
    it was only  after  the  decision  to  grant  ILR  was  made  that  the
    Appellant's ex-wife made it clear  to  the  UKBA  that  she  wished  to
    withdraw her sponsorship. That argument does not assist  the  Appellant
    because  if  it  were  right,  the  wife's  decision  to  withdraw  her
    sponsorship after ILR had  been  granted  would  clearly  have  been  a
    material change of circumstances. However  the  argument  is  factually
    misconceived; the Appellant's ex-wife's view expressed in  her  earlier
    letter was that the marriage was over and that she feared it had been a
    device to get ILR. It was clear from that letter that she had withdrawn
    her support for her husband's application.

29. Ms  Ofei-Kwatia  also  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  lies  to  the
    Immigration Officer on re-entry occurred after he had been granted  ILR
    and therefore could have had no impact on the decision to grant ILR. Of
    course that is true in terms of the chronology; but the  lies  told  to
    the Immigration Officer reinforced the  misleading  impression  of  the
    marital relationship created by the Applicant's failure to  inform  the
    UKBA of the developments in his marital relationship on  and  since  24
    July 2012, including his decision to leave  the  matrimonial  home  and
    redirect the mail to his sister's address, as he was obliged to do. His
    behaviour also cast doubt on his credibility, including his claim  that
    this incident was just one of the normal ups and downs of  any  marital
    relationship. It is plain that if  the  decision  maker  had  seen  Mrs
    Gohil's earlier letter before  4  August,  and  if  the  Appellant  had
    informed the Respondent of the true situation, as he was obliged to do,
    ILR would not  have  been  granted.  The  decision  to  grant  ILR  was
    therefore based  on  a  false  representation  that  the  marriage  was
    subsisting,  which  the  Appellant  tried  to  maintain  when  he   was
    questioned on re-entry, although he knew it was  false.  Thus  even  if
    there had been no material  change  of  circumstance,  the  alternative
    requirements of paragraph 321A(2) were plainly satisfied.

30. There is no merit in any of  the  other  grounds  of  appeal.  We  have
    already indicated that the adverse findings on  credibility  were  more
    than adequately reasoned and justified on  the  evidence.  There  is  a
    complaint that there was "massive procedural unfairness" because it  is
    alleged that insufficient time was given to the  Appellant  to  counter
    the issues raised by his ex-wife prior to the  initial  decision  being
    taken. We find there is no substance in that complaint.  The  Appellant
    chose to issue a bare denial despite being given the opportunity to put
    his side of the story to  the  UKBA  after  he  was  granted  temporary
    admission, and even if he did not have sufficient time to do so  before
    the initial decision was made, he had ample opportunity to do so before
    the matter was reconsidered and the second decision was  made  in  July
    2013.

DECISION

31. It is quite clear that the  conclusion  of  the  Immigration  Judge  in
    paragraph 14 of the decision under appeal that the cancellation of  the
    Appellant's ILR was in accordance with the law was  correct,  and  that
    there was no material error of law. Even if there had  been,  we  would
    have reached the  same  conclusion.  We  agree  with  the  Respondent's
    submission that no properly constituted tribunal could have arrived  at
    a materially different outcome on the basis of the material  facts.  We
    therefore dismiss the appeal on all grounds.


Signed   Date 7th May 2014

Mrs Justice Andrews
