
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08989/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 February 2016                    |On 8 April 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          KHAJA MASI UDDIN MOHAMMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Singer, Counsel instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sweet in which
    he allowed the appeal  by  Mr  Khaja  Masi  Uddin  Mohammed  against  a
    decision by the Respondent dated 24 February 2015 to cancel his Tier  2
    general permit issued on 19 August 2014.

 2. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a citizen  of
    India, born on 10 April 1987.  He came to the United Kingdom  in  March
    2010 on a Tier 4  student  visa  and  undertook  a  number  of  courses
    including a Diploma in Management Studies  and  an  MBA  in  Innovative
    Management.  He applied for and was granted  a  Tier  2  general  leave
    which was valid from August 2014 for five years.  He left  the  country
    to visit India and on his return to the United Kingdom in February 2015
    his leave was cancelled at the airport on the basis it was  alleged  he
    had submitted a TOEIC English language certificate which was  found  by
    the Respondent to be false.  The test in question,  the  listening  and
    reading part, took place in November 2011 and the speaking and  writing
    in December 2011 and it is in relation to  the  second  test  that  the
    Secretary  of  State  asserted  that  the  document  was   fraudulently
    obtained, hence the Claimant's leave was cancelled.

 3. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge as a float case on
    2 September 2015.  Prior  to  the  hearing  commencing  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the case was one that was suitable to be treated
    as a float case and that the Secretary of State wished to  get  further
    evidence from another Presenting Officer, Mr M Sartorius in support  of
    their case.  Counsel for  the  Claimant  objected  to  the  case  being
    adjourned and that objection was upheld by the judge who says:

         "I saw no reason why this matter could not be heard as a float case
         as the parties had had sufficient time to prepare and as far as the
         missing letter from Mr Sartorius was concerned the  Respondent  has
         had since April 2015 when the appeal date  was  fixed  for  him  to
         provide the missing documentation."

 4. The judge heard evidence from the Claimant and  submissions  from  both
    parties.  At paragraph 10 he found that the burden of  proof  was  upon
    the Claimant and the civil standard is the  balance  of  probabilities.
    At paragraph 11 the judge held as follows:

         "I am satisfied from the evidence produced that there was no reason
         for the Appellant to deceive the authorities over the test, because
         he had already obtained a BA in commerce from India (a course which
         was conducted in the English language) and had obtained  a  Diploma
         in management studies in the UK.  I  also  take  into  account  the
         discrepancies in the  Respondent's  evidence  as  set  out  in  the
         skeleton argument."

    And at paragraph 12 the judge said:

         "I am satisfied for these reasons that  the  Respondent's  decision
         should be overturned and the Appellant's leave should be reinstated
         until August 2019."

 5. The Secretary of State made an application for permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal in time on 17 September 2015.  The grounds of appeal
    asserted that the  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    findings on a material matter and in particular  the  grounds  set  out
    extracts from the evidence submitted on  behalf  of  the  Home  Office,
    including witness statements from Mr Peter Millington  and  Ms  Rebecca
    Collings and an email  document  from  the  ETS  Task  Force  dated  10
    September 2014.  The grounds also  asserted  that  a  printout  of  the
    relevant section of the ETS spreadsheet was attached at Appendix  E  of
    the Explanatory Statement and the spreadsheet identifies  the  Claimant
    by name and records that the test taken on 14 December 2011 was invalid
    and identifies him as having exercised deception and  it  was  asserted
    for these reasons the judge had failed  entirely  to  provide  adequate
    reasons for making contrary findings in light of this evidence.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle  on
    18 January 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge failed
    to give adequate reasons  for  rejecting  the  Secretary  of  State  's
    evidence.

     Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Wilding appeared on behalf of the Secretary
    of State and the Claimant  was  represented  by  Mr  Singer.   I  heard
    submissions by both parties, in particular Mr Wilding drew my attention
    to the fact that two test cases are in the process of being heard where
    the Upper Tribunal were considering all the evidence including that  of
    Mr Millington and Ms Collings and also oral evidence from  Dr  Harrison
    who has provided an analysis of  the  Home  Office  evidence.   It  was
    anticipated there would be a decision in respect of this  case  by  the
    end of March 2016.

 8. Mr Singer attempted to defend the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge on the basis that although the reasoning was very  short  it  was
    adequate.

     Decision

 9. I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet did materially err  in  law
    in that at paragraph 11 there is simply no engagement with the evidence
    put forward by either party in respect of the appeal.  It may  be  that
    there was no reason for the Claimant to deceive  the  authorities  over
    the test but that was not the key material issue before him viz whether
    in fact the Claimant had fraudulently obtained the certificate  by  not
    having taken the test himself, which is a different question.

10. Further, whilst the skeleton argument before  the  judge  analysed  the
    Secretary of State's evidence, it was  incumbent  upon  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to say more than simply "I also take  into  account  the
    discrepancies in the Respondent's evidence as set out in  the  skeleton
    argument".  He should at least, in my view, have set out a  summary  of
    the  evidence  in  question  and  the   submissions   in   respect   of
    discrepancies in that evidence.

11. For these reasons I find there is a  material  error  of  law  and  the
    appeal will need to be re-heard.  I direct that the  appeal  is  listed
    for a resumed hearing on the first available  date  after  judgment  is
    handed down in the ETS test  cases.  Subject  to  any  application  for
    further oral evidence, the appeal should be limited to submissions only
    with a time estimate of one  hour.  The  judge's  findings  as  to  the
    evidence which is not disputed by the Secretary of State  in  terms  of
    the Claimant's educational qualifications are preserved.





Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

