
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/08240/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27 April 2017                          |On 3 May 2017                    |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                            SHARAF SAMIUR RAHMAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. R. Sharma, Counsel, instructed by Hunter Stone
Law
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  notice  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grant, promulgated on 7 March 2016, in which she  struck
    out the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to  remove
    the Appellant from the UK as not valid.


  2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "There is no Reasons for Refusal letter in the bundle and no mention in
    the Judge's Record of Proceeding of any Pre-Action Protocol  letter  or
    article 8 claim.  However, the letter from A's representatives dated  4
    September 2014 clearly states on page 9 that "it is  further  contended
    that the SSHD's decision to serve the removal notice on our client is a
    breach  of  our  client's  rights  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on human rights", and goes on to give details of A's private
    life.  The article 8  claim  was  also  mentioned  at  page  7  of  the
    representative's letter dated 10 February [2015].   As  both  of  these
    letters predate the immigration decision, were  directly  addressed  to
    the Secretary of State  and  were  not  certified  in  the  immigration
    decision, it is therefore arguable that  the  Judge  erred  as  to  the
    implications of Mahesh Nirula on the facts of this case."


 3. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I  heard  brief  oral  submissions
    from Mr. Sharma.  Mr. Nath did not take issue with his submissions  and
    stated that he was satisfied that the Appellant had an in-country right
    of appeal.


 4. I stated that was in agreement with both parties that the notice should
    be set aside as the First-tier Tribunal had jurisdiction  to  hear  the
    appeal, and that my full reasons would follow.


Error of Law Decision


  5. The notice of Judge Grant does  not  set  out  the  chronology  of  the
     Appellant's case, or give any reasons for finding  that  there  was  no
     jurisdiction to hear the appeal.  It is therefore necessary to set  out
     a chronology here.


  6. On 28 August  2014  the  Respondent  made  a  decision  to  remove  the
     Appellant  from  the  UK.   On  4  September   2014   the   Appellant's
     representatives wrote to the Respondent.  On page 9 it  states  "It  is
     further contended that the  SSHD's  decision  [to]  serve  the  removal
     notice on our client is a breach of our client's rights under Article 8
     of the European Convention for Human Rights (ECHR)".


  7. The  skeleton  argument  refers  to  further  correspondence  from  the
     Appellant's representatives to the Respondent dated 24 October 2014.  I
     do not have a copy of this letter.


  8. On 10 February  2015  the  Appellant's  representatives  wrote  to  the
     Respondent in a letter headed "Judicial Review -  Pre  Action  Protocol
     Letter".  At [22] it states: "In these circumstances any  removal  will
     be a disproportionate breach of the UK's obligation under Article 8  of
     the ECHR."


  9. On 27 February 2015 the Respondent wrote to the Appellant stating  that
     her decision dated 28 August 2014 had been withdrawn.   A  new  removal
     decision was made dated 17 February 2015.  It is this decision which is
     under appeal.


 10. I find that, prior to the decision under appeal dated 17 February 2015,
     the Appellant had at least twice raised human rights grounds  with  the
     Respondent.  As stated above, I do not have a copy of the letter  dated
     24 October 2014, but this is not material  as  I  have  clear  evidence
     before me that the Respondent was twice informed by the Appellant  that
     he was raising human rights grounds.


 11. I find that the pre-2014 amendment version of the 2002 Act  applies  to
     this appeal, given the date of the notice of decision.


 12. I have considered the case law set out in  the  skeleton  argument.   I
     find that, following Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ  615,  and  Nirula  [2012]
     EWCA Civ 1436, the Appellant "had made" a human rights claim  prior  to
     the initiation of his appeal.  Indeed, I find  that  he  twice  made  a
     human rights claim prior to the issuing of the Respondent's decision of
     17 February 2015.  There is express reference to Article 8 of the  ECHR
     in both of  the  letters  before  me  which  predate  the  Respondent's
     decision.


 13. Given that the Appellant had made a human rights claim, I find that  he
     has an in-country right of appeal,  as  was  agreed  by  Mr.  Nath.   I
     therefore find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in striking  out  the
     grounds of appeal on the basis that the Appellant had no valid  appeal.
     I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  jurisdiction  to  hear  the
     appeal.


 14. Given that the Appellant has not had a  hearing,  I  find  that  it  is
     appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard.


Decision


 15. The notice involves the making of a material error of law and I set  it
     aside.


 16. The Appellant has made a human rights claim and has an in-country right
     of appeal.  Accordingly the First-tier Tribunal  have  jurisdiction  to
     hear the appeal.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


 17. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 28 April 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


