
                                    [pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08322/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st September 2016               |On 10th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                            Yadwinder singh brar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kannangara, Counsel for Visa Expert Limited,
                    Hayes, Middlesex
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant was born on 15 May 1983 and is a citizen of India.  He is
    the dependant and husband of Jagmeet Kaur  Brar  born  on  27  February
    1991.  They appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated  28th
    November 2014 refusing to grant them  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant and her dependant under the Immigration Rules
    HC 395 and against the removal directions.  The  appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal James  on  17th  February  2016.   She
    dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 1st March 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Landes  on
    15th August 2016.  The Appellant's wife argues that she was not given a
    proper opportunity to vary her application for leave  because  although
    she  received  a  60  day  letter  it  did  not  include  her  original
    educational documents or a certified copy of her passport  although  it
    stated that these were enclosed.   The  Respondent  stated  that  these
    documents were sent with the 60 day letter.  Because of  the  terms  of
    the Respondent's letter, the entry in the database and the omissions in
    the evidence of the Appellant's wife, the judge found that the relevant
    documents had been sent to the  Appellant's  wife  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities and that the Appellant's wife was not credible.

 3. The permission states that it is arguable that the judge erred  in  law
    by making an adverse credibility finding because the  Appellant's  wife
    had not reported her passport missing (paragraph 21).   The  permission
    states that the Appellant's wife had never suggested that her  passport
    was missing.  It is with the Respondent who is entitled to  retain  it.
    This was only one aspect of the judge's adverse  credibility  findings.
    The permission states that it can be said to  be  inevitable  that  the
    judge would have come to the same overall conclusion, even if  she  had
    realised  that  the  Respondent  was  entitled  to  retain  Mrs  Brar's
    passport.  The  judge  found  that  the  Appellant's  wife  could  have
    produced to colleges another certified copy of her  passport  if  there
    was not one with the 60 day letter but  the  permission  states  it  is
    arguable that the 60 day letter and the leaflet imply that an applicant
    is expected to produce  to  the  Sponsor  the  copy  certified  by  the
    Respondent.

 4. There is a Rule 24 response but the decision was not  attached  to  the
    Grounds of Application.  The Respondent therefore was unable to comment
    as to whether there may  have  been  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision.

 5. I heard the appellant's wife's claim in the Upper  Tribunal,  reference
    IA/08315/2015, on 21 September 2016 at Field House.

 6. I found that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision  and  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 October 2016.

 7. As the appellant is the dependant of his wife, Mrs Jagmeet Kaur Brar, I
    dismiss his appeal on the same basis.

 8. Anonymity has not been directed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

