
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/08645/2015
                                                               Ia/08647/2015
                                                               IA/08651/2015
                                                               IA/08653/2015
                                                               IA/08657/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th November 2015                |On 10 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                Fareed Ahmed
                                Mouneeb Ahmed
                              Farkhanda Fareed
                              Rukshsana Fareed
                                 Sana Fareed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Afsal of the International Immigration Advisory
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellants' appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Caswell
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 21st May 2015.

Background

 2. The appellants are father, son and daughters, Pakistani  nationals  who
    have lived in the UK since, in the principal appellant's case 2005, and
    his family from 2006.

 3. The family's immigration history is as follows.

 4. Mr Fareed Ahmed arrived in the UK on  15th  February  2005  as  a  work
    permit holder with leave to 13th January 2009.  His wife  and  children
    came in September 2006.  In 2009 Mr Ahmed made a number of applications
    for leave to remain which were refused and he overstayed.

 5. In 2012 he applied for leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules  and  was
    refused.  In 2013 he applied on the basis of family  and  private  life
    and again was refused.  In February 2014 he asked for  the  application
    to be reconsidered. The reconsideration resulted in another refusal  in
    February  2015  which  was  the  subject  of  the  appeal  before   the
    Immigration Judge.

 6. It was accepted that the appellant and his family have had no leave  to
    be here since 2009 and since then they have  been  in  the  UK  without
    leave.  As at the date  of  decision  the  children  were  all  adults,
    although the youngest, Sana, was under the age of 18  at  the  time  of
    application.

 7. The judge found that the family had relatives in the UK including adult
    children who would be prepared to support them if they had to return to
    Pakistan.  She acknowledged that the house in Pakistan  may  well  have
    been sold and there may be few if any relatives still  there.   On  the
    other hand there was no suggestion that  the  principal  appellant  had
    attempted to secure employment in Pakistan, or that the adult  children
    could not find work there or indeed not apply to return to  the  UK  as
    students.

 8. She assessed the medical evidence.  The  appellant  and  his  wife  are
    diabetic  and  he  suffers  from  a  kidney  condition.   His  wife  is
    depressed.  The judge found that he would be able to  access  treatment
    in Pakistan if needed.

 9. The family all speak Punjabi and, at the date of the hearing, were  all
    adults and potentially able to work.  She specifically  considered  the
    position of the youngest child, Sana, in relation to  paragraph  276ADE
    and concluded that she could not  meet  the  relevant  sub-paragraph  6
    which provides that she must show that there would be very  significant
    obstacles to her integration into Pakistan.  The  judge  accepted  that
    Sana was culturally adapted to life in the UK and has friends here  and
    enjoys the freedom of living in a liberal country.  On the  other  hand
    she has always  lived  in  a  family  with  Pakistani  origins,  is  of
    Pakistani heritage herself, speaks some Punjabi and there  was  nothing
    to suggest that she  was  not  healthy  or  not  of  at  least  average
    intelligence.  She concluded that a young adult  with  these  qualities
    returning to the country of her nationality with her elder siblings and
    parents would not face very significant obstacles to integration.

10. The judge also considered Article 8 outside the  Rules.   She  accepted
    that there was family life between the appellant and his wife and their
    dependent children and also family life between the appellants and  the
    members  of  the  household  where  they  were  living,  including  the
    appellant's grandchild and his mother.  She found that the family could
    keep  in  touch  with  the  UK  relatives  through  modern   means   of
    communication.

11. She concluded as follows.

         "I also find that the respondent has shown that  the  decisions  to
         remove  are  proportionate.   The  younger  appellants  all   speak
         English.   I  accept  they  have  been  supported  financially   by
         relatives, but they have all utilised the educational  and  medical
         facilities of the UK without being entitled to  them.   The  family
         chose to live in the UK even when all their  applications  to  stay
         were rejected.  The fact they developed ties to this country and to
         family and friends here was a matter which they (or  at  least  the
         appellant and his wife) must have taken into account when  deciding
         to take that course.

         There are no children under the age of 18.  The younger  appellants
         have all been educated through secondary  schools,  speak  English,
         are in good health and able to work or to study.  They could  apply
         from their country to return to study in the UK if  they  meet  the
         requirements.  The appellant and his wife have  health  issues  but
         these are not life threatening and  there  is  treatment  for  them
         available in  their  country.   All  the  private  life  which  the
         appellants have built up in this country since 2009/2010  has  been
         done at a time when they had no entitlement to be  here  and  their
         position was precarious."

12. On that basis she dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

13. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had not considered the correct rule  when  dealing  with  the  youngest
    child.  She was under 18 when the application was  made  and  paragraph
    EX.1 applied to her.  The judge therefore should have asked herself the
    question whether it would be reasonable to expect her to leave the  UK.
    He relied on recent Article 8 case law for the proposition that, in the
    absence of countervailing factors, residence of seven years or more  is
    likely to make removal not proportionate.

14. Second, it was argued that the judge did not make  any  findings  about
    the testimonies of the witnesses other than the principal appellant and
    finally did not make any findings about the Article  8  rights  of  the
    grandchild.

Submissions

15. Mr McVeety accepted that the judge had erred in law in not  looking  at
    EX.1, which was applicable because Sana was under 18  at  the  date  of
    application. However, there was no proper alternative  outcome  to  the
    appeal.

16. Mr Afsal relied on his grounds and submitted that the judge  had  erred
    not only in  failing  to  apply  the  correct  rule  but  also  in  not
    considering the rights of the grandchild who was very young when making
    her assessment of proportionality.

Findings and Conclusions

17. It is correct that the judge should have considered paragraph EX.1  and
    therefore considered whether it would be reasonable to expect  Sana  to
    leave the UK, although it is not at all clear whether those submissions
    were made to her at the hearing.

18. However, the error is immaterial.

19. None of the findings of facts are in dispute and indeed not  challenged
    in the grounds.  Sana has been in the UK since she was nine years  old,
    but, for the last six years, has been  here  unlawfully.   During  that
    period the family made a series of unsuccessful applications  in  order
    to try to delay their removal.

20. Sana would be returning to the country  of  her  nationality  with  her
    parents and three of her siblings.  She speaks Punjabi and  has  gained
    skills here which will be of assistance to her on return  to  Pakistan.
    The judge found that the family here  would  continue  to  assist,  and
    there is no challenge to that finding in the grounds.

21. Sana has friends here,  and  has  developed  closer  ties  with  family
    members who do have leave to be here. She  has  obviously  developed  a
    private life, but that  aside,  there  is  nothing  in  her  particular
    circumstances which could render  it  unreasonable  to  expect  her  to
    leave.

22. There are countervailing factors here, in particular the lengthy period
    of overstaying.  The principal appellant was informed in 2009  that  he
    had no basis to remain in the UK and instead of leaving made  a  series
    of fruitless applications.  The  fact  that,  inevitably,  during  that
    period, Sana's private life developed and deepened does not  mean  that
    it would not be reasonable to expect her to leave with the remainder of
    her family and return to her country  of  nationality.   As  the  judge
    stated, if she wished to  return  here  to  study,  and  can  meet  the
    relevant  requirements  of  the  rules,  she  is  free  to  make   that
    application.  The case law cited in the grounds is not determinative in
    her favour.

23. So far as the grandchild is concerned,  the  judge  did  refer  to  the
    family life which he enjoys with his grandparents and uncle and  aunts.
    He is not dependent upon them, because his own parents look after  him.
    She  clearly  took  his  position  into  account.   The   grandparental
    relationship can continue with future visits.

24. Mr Afsal properly did not pursue any argument in relation to Article  3
    and health grounds.

Decision

25. The judge did not materially err in law.   The  decision  stands.   The
    appeals are dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

