
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/09407/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 March 2018                   |On 17 April 2018                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                Tapashee [D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V. Easty, of Counsel instructed by White Horse
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appeals, with permission, against a  decision  of  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Chana who in a determination promulgated  on
    17 February 2017 dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  appellant  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse her  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds.  Her husband and her child are her dependents  in
    this appeal.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 6 August  1981.   She
    came to Britain in November 2010 with her husband with entry  clearance
    as a student and was granted leave until 21 June 2013.  Her  leave  was
    extended until December 2014. Before her leave expired she applied  for
    leave to remain on human rights grounds with her husband, [DM], as  her
    dependent. Her claim was based on the fact that they had  had  a  child
    here who had been born on 18 July 2012.  Her application  was  refused.
    In the grounds of appeal she amplified her reasons for not  wishing  to
    return to Bangladesh. These were that she came from a high caste  Hindu
    family; she had married a Buddhist and converted to Buddhism  when  she
    had married. It was asserted that her family not  only  disapproved  of
    the marriage but that she feared harm from them. She claimed  that  her
    rights under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR would  be  infringed  by  her
    removal.  Her husband had prepared a statement in which he said that he
    had been threatened by his own religious community and  family  because
    of his marriage.  The appellant asserted that if they had to return  to
    Bangladesh she would be forced to give up her Buddhist faith  and  that
    their child would suffer physical harm.

3.    It is of note that the appellant stated that she had met  her  husband
    at Chittagong university in 2001: he was studying a Masters  degree  in
    the same subject.  They had fallen in love. In 2004 her father  decided
    to marry  her  to  someone  else.  She  had  told  her  father  of  her
    relationship. Because he was impressed by her academic ability he  took
    her to India to take her away from [DM], but when she promised to  give
    [DM] up her father  allowed  her  to  return  to  university.  She  had
    continued her studies and spending time with [DM] and they  decided  to
    marry, marrying in 2005. When she converted  to  Buddhism  she  made  a
    declaration in the  Magistrate's  Court  in  Chittagong  that  she  had
    converted of her own free will so that her  Hindu  religious  community
    could not blame her husband for her conversion.

4.    In her statement the appellant said that the fact that  she  had  left
    her religion was considered to be "a rare and life  ending  crime"  and
    that "Consequently I was blamed with  horrendous  allegations.   I  was
    leveled (sic) as sacrilegious, apostate and targeted and threatened for
    life".  Her community had claimed that her marriage had  disgraced  and
    humiliated and "out-casted" the family and the community. Her husband's
    family had been constantly terrorised by  the  Brahamman  community  in
    collaboration with her family. She said that "Should  had  they  become
    successful in the pursuance I would had to  perform  horrendous  ritual
    activities like shaving off my hair and leaving sic on my  own  in  the
    darkest corner of the house without  meeting  anybody  until  I  became
    sacred again".

5.    In paragraphs 3 onwards of the determination the  judge  set  out  the
    appellant's claim and in paragraphs 24 onwards she set out her findings
    of fact. She stated that "the burden of proof is on the  appellant  and
    that it is on the balance of probabilities." In paragraph 28 she stated
    that she could find no objective evidence had been  placed  before  her
    that Hindus and Buddhists have any hostility towards each other or that
    any adverse consequences follow from a Buddhist  marrying  a  Hindu  or
    that there is intolerance between these two religions. She went  on  to
    say:

         "28.     ... There is no background evidence placed before me  that
         Buddhism and Hinduism are substantially different religions.  There
         is no background evidence placed before me to show that Hindus  and
         Buddhists have a propensity for violence towards Hindus  who  marry
         each other.


         29.       There  is  no  background  evidence  to  demonstrate  the
         philosophical differences between a Hindu and a Buddhist.  There is
         no background evidence placed before me to say  that  Buddhist  and
         Hindu beliefs differ in any manner shape or form such as  for  them
         to discriminate against each other, let alone to inflict  violence.
         There is no background evidence that  Buddhism  is  an  independent
         religion to Hinduism. There is no  background  evidence  before  me
         that Buddhism is not a religion but a philosophy.


         30.      There is no background  evidence  placed  before  me  that
         conversion is possible for a Hindu to Buddhism or vice versa. There
         is no evidence before me that conversion to  Buddhism  is  done  by
         swearing an affidavit in the Magistrates  Court  as  the  appellant
         claims that is what she did when she converted.


         31.      I find that the appellant's  evidence  that  she  and  her
         family will  be  at  risk  in  Bangladesh  is  a  complete  fantasy
         unsubstantiated by any background evidence whatsoever. This goes to
         credibility of the appellant and to the credibility  of  her  claim
         that she and her family would be harmed if they are  to  return  to
         Bangladesh."


6.    Thereafter the judge  considered  the  issue  of  the  rights  of  the
    appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR.  She found that  there  were  no
    exceptional reasons why the appellant, her husband and child could  not
    return  to  Bangladesh  and,  having  considered  the  fact  that   the
    appellant's husband was  at the time of the appeal, in prison and  also
    having found that the appellant's son could be  educated in Bangladesh,
     concluded that there was nothing to  indicate that the removal of  the
    appellant  and her family would be a disproportionate interference with
    their rights under the ECHR.  She therefore dismissed the appeal.

7.    The grounds of appeal assert that the appellant was astounded  to  see
    the determination. They repeat the appellant's claim that she came from
    a high caste Hindu family and would suffer on return  her  because  she
    had married a Buddhist.  They complained that the judge demotivated the
    appellant when commenting on the appellant's level of English and  said
    that there had been a case study of a marriage between lower and higher
    caste people in the context of  the  Indian  sub-continent  before  her
    which showed the intolerance and violence between Hindus and Buddhists.
    They asserted that the appellant's child would be targeted on return as
    a child of an interfaith marriage and that his rights under section  55
    had not been properly considered.  They  asserted  that  the  appellant
    would face insurmountable hardship on return.

8.    Although the application was refused in the First-tier Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Coker granted permission stating that was arguable that the first-
    tier judge had failed to have adequate regard to evidence placed before
    her and that the judge, in the introductory paragraphs of the decision,
    had referred to the appellant as a man when she was not   and  that  it
    might  be  relevant  that  the  judge  had  taken  the  view  that  the
    appellant's English was poor  but there was  no  interpreter  and  that
    that might have impacted on the appellant.

9.    At the hearing of the appeal before me Miss  Easty  distanced  herself
    from the grounds of appeal but emphasised that this was a case where if
    it had been properly prepared there would have been an  expert  report.
    She referred to the comments  the  judge  had  made  in  paragraphs  29
    onwards of  the  determination  and  stated  that  the  judge  had  not
    considered the documentary evidence and the  affidavits  produced.  She
    said that the judge was wrong to state that there was  no  evidence  of
    the marriage and that there was no background evidence before her.  She
    also asked me to take into account that the hearing had taken place  on
    27 May 2016 and although the determination had been signed  on  9  June
    2016, it had not been promulgated until 17 February 2017. The fact that
    the judge had stated that the standard of  proof  was  the  balance  of
    probabilities when this was an Article 3 case was an  error.  She  said
    that the judge's comment that this claim was a complete fantasy was not
    in accordance with the evidence although she again stated that the case
    had not been prepared as well as it should have been.  With  regard  to
    the consideration of the appellant's rights under Article 8 of the ECHR
    Miss Easty stated that the judge had referred to out of date case  law.
    She  emphasise that the judge, when she had  said  that  the  appellant
    could return to Bangladesh and that her husband that could follow after
    the end of his sentence had erred because she should  have  taken  into
    account the facts as at  the  date  of  hearing  which  were  that  the
    appellant's husband could not return with her. She accepted that it was
    now the case that the appellant's husband, who had  been  sentenced  to
    one year's imprisonment had been released last November.

10.   Mr Nath stated that the judge had  no  background  information  before
    her and that there had been no application for an adjournment  so  that
    further evidence could be obtained. There was nothing material  in  the
    documentary evidence which was placed  before  the  judge  which  could
    possibly have influenced the decision. He emphasised that the appellant
    had not applied for asylum.

Discussion

11.   When considering this case it is  important  to  note  the  chronology
    which is that the appellant, at the age  of  20,  met  her  husband  at
    university. She had told her father in 2004 of the relationship and  he
    had taken her to India  to  further  her  studies,  but  then,  on  her
    assertion that the relationship was over, agreed that she should return
    to Chittagong university in Bangladesh.  She married in 2005 but it was
    not until 2008 that her family and that of her husband became aware  of
    the marriage. Thereafter she and her  husband  remained  in  Bangladesh
    until 2010 when they came to Britain as a student  and  her  dependent.
    The appellant did not apply for asylum when she entered and  indeed  it
    was not for five years that her application  for  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds  was made. She has never  applied  for  asylum  or
    asserted that she would  face  persecution  for  a  Refugee  Convention
    reason on return.

12.   I have read the affidavits of  the  appellant  and  her  husband.  The
    reality is that they  lack  any  specific  detail  to  show  that  they
    suffered Article 3 ill-treatment in Bangladesh after their marriage  in
    2005 or after 2008, when their families became aware of  the  marriage,
    before they left in 2010. The letter from the Mayor at Cox Bazar states
    that the appellant's father is a "well reputed  person"  and  that  the
    mayor knew that the appellant had married a Buddhist.  He  states  that
    that was totally unacceptable to their religion and the local community
    and against that culture. He went on to see say that he knew that  they
    had left Bangladesh in 2010 and that if they wished  to  come  back  to
    Bangladesh both of their families will be "un-pleased to  each  other".
    There is nothing in that letter to indicate that he considered that the
    appellant would be in danger if she returned. There is also a complaint
    by Mr Mudsuddy to the Officer in Charge of a police  station  in  Dakha
    in which he states that "our lives have been face  in  threatened"  sic
    and that the marriage was never accepted by both  parents  and  by  the
    local religious community.  There is  nothing  to  indicate  that  that
    application to the police station was  based  on  any  specific  action
    against the couple and there is simply nothing  to  show  that  in  the
    following two years they suffered any harm.  I consider that the  judge
    was entitled to find that there was no evidence  before  her  that  the
    appellants would suffer treatment which would cross  the  threshold  of
    Article 3 or treatment on return. I consider that she was  entitled  to
    state that there was no background evidence to show  animosity  between
    Hindus  and  Muslims  such  that  those  who  entered  into  interfaith
    marriages would be persecuted by members of either religion.  There  is
    no allegation of a risk of ill- treatment by the  State  let  alone  is
    there any indication that there would not be  for  the  appellant,  her
    husband and child, a sufficiency of protection. The grounds  of  appeal
    were simply wrong to assert that there was objective evidence  to  show
    interfaith hostility between Hindus and Buddhists in Bangladesh  before
    the judge.

13.   While it is the case that the judge referred to the standard of  proof
    as being that of the balance of probabilities when in fact  she  should
    have considered whether or not there was a real risk of Article 3 harm,
    that is not relevant in the context of the facts  in  this  case  where
    there is no evidence whatsoever to  discharge  the  lower  standard  of
    proof. While I accept that Judge Coker was correct  to  note  that  the
    judge erred in the opening paragraphs of the determination by referring
    to the appellant has "he" rather than  "she"  that  is  clearly  not  a
    material factor as, after the  opening  paragraphs  the  appellant  was
    always referred to as "she" and her husband as "her husband".  There is
    nothing in Miss Easty's argument that the judge was applying "old" case
    law: the case law which was applied  is  still  relevant.  Moreover,  I
    consider that there is nothing in Miss Easty's  point  that  the  judge
    should specifically have considered the fact that the  appellant  would
    be returning to Bangladesh alone. What the  judge  said  was  that  the
    appellant could return and that her husband could follow her. The judge
    would have been fully aware of the fact that  the  appellant's  husband
    would have been released from prison within less than six months of the
    signing of the determination, as indeed was the case. The date that the
    judge signed the  determination  is  the  relevant  date  for  deciding
    whether or not the determination was completed timeously and  the  date
    the determination was signed was within an  actable  period  after  the
    appeal was heard.

14.  The  reality  is  that  both  the  appellant  and  her   husband   have
    considerable academic qualifications from a  university  in  Bangladesh
    and some experience of living in Britain and that there is  nothing  to
    indicate that they would be destitute on return.  The judge  was  fully
    entitled to conclude that the appellant and her husband would  be  able
    to return to Bangladesh and would not face Article 3 ill treatment when
    they did so and to conclude that there was nothing that would  indicate
    that the rights of the appellants under Article 8 of the ECHR would  be
    infringed by their removal or that the rights of the child who was aged
    4 at the date of the decision, and is still young would  be  infringed:
    he would be returning to  the  country  of  his  nationality  with  his
    mother, shortly  to be joined by his father and  the  family  would  be
    able to establish themselves in the country of their nationality.

Decision.

This appeal is dismissed


Signed:     [pic]                 Date:  23 March 2018.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
