


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA097542015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On : 6 June 2016                       |On : 8 June 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               muhammad saleem
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 15 April 1984. He  has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Maxwell, dismissing his appeal against the respondent's
      decision to reuse to vary his leave and to remove him from the  United
      Kingdom.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 1 June 2011 with leave  to
      enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant until 30 December 2014. On
      29 December 2014 he applied for leave to remain on the  basis  of  his
      private life, on form FLR(O). In  a  letter  accompanying  the  FLR(O)
      form, the appellant referred to being in receipt of support  from  his
      EEA national cousin brother and claimed  that  he  had  established  a
      family and private life in the UK.


   3. The appellant's application  was  refused  by  the  respondent  on  19
      February 2015, on the grounds that he could not meet the  requirements
      in  paragraph  276ADE(1)  and   that   there   were   no   exceptional
      circumstances justifying a grant  of  leave  outside  the  immigration
      rules.

   4. The appellant appealed  against  that  decision.  In  his  grounds  of
      appeal, he referred to having applied for a residence  permit  on  the
      basis of his EEA family member and claimed that he had  established  a
      private life in the UK.


   5. The appellant's appeal was heard on 28 September  2015  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Maxwell. The appellant did not appear  at  the  hearing
      and was not legally represented. The judge had  before  him  a  letter
      from the appellant, dated 28 September 2015, requesting an adjournment
      of the proceedings on the basis that he had fallen down the stairs  on
      24 September 2015 and had injured his lower back and  could  not  sit,
      walk or stand. He said that he had visited his GP  the  following  day
      and had  been  given  a  letter  recommending  two  weeks'  bed  rest.
      Accompanying the letter was a Statement of Fitness for Work  from  the
      appellant's GP advising that he  was  not  fit  for  work.  The  judge
      decided to proceed with the appeal  in  the  appellant's  absence  and
      found that he did not meet the criteria  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)  and
      that there was nothing to consider outside the immigration  rules.  He
      accordingly dismissed the appeal.


   6. The appellant then sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,
      on the grounds that the judge ought to have adjourned the  proceedings
      and had acted unfairly by proceeding in his absence. He asserted  that
      the judge's decision was contrary to his Article 8 human rights and to
      the EEA Regulations.


   7. Permission to appeal was granted on 28 April 2016.


   8. At the hearing before me there was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of
      the appellant and no explanation for his absence. Mr Tufan asked me to
      uphold the judge's decision and I did so, for the following reasons.


   9. In refusing the adjourn the proceedings  Judge  Maxwell  gave  careful
      consideration to the application made by the  appellant  and  properly
      directed himself in accordance with the provisions of Rule 28  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure  (First  tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber) Rules 2014. He noted that the GP's  note  had  not  suggested
      that the appellant was unfit to attend court or unfit  to  travel  and
      found that that was not a satisfactory reason  for  his  absence.  The
      judge also noted that the appellant had failed to submit any documents
      in support of his appeal, had  failed  to  particularise  his  claimed
      private life and had submitted no evidence or statements  in  relation
      to his claimed EEA national relative and indeed had not even  provided
      his name or nationality. The judge considered that the  appellant  had
      taken no steps to advance his claim and concluded that he would not be
      prejudiced by the appeal proceeding in his absence.


  10. The appellant, in his grounds challenging the  judge's  decision,  has
      not sought to respond to the judge's reasoning and  has  not  provided
      any suggestion as to how he was prejudiced by the appeal proceeding in
      his absence. He has not produced any further evidence in  relation  to
      his private life or his claimed EEA national relative which could have
      been considered by the judge and which could  possibly  have  had  any
      effect on the judge's decision. The fact that the  appellant  did  not
      appear at the hearing before me was, as Mr  Tufan  submitted,  further
      evidence of the lack of any genuine substance to his case and his lack
      of interest in providing  a  genuine  challenge  to  the  respondent's
      decision.


  11. Accordingly, I find nothing in the appellant's grounds to suggest  any
      unfairness on the part of the judge in proceeding with the  appeal  as
      he did. The appellant's claim under Article 8 and the EEA  Regulations
      was without any substance and was hopeless. The  judge  addressed  all
      relevant matters in reaching his decision and properly concluded  that
      the appellant's presence would have made no difference to the  outcome
      of the appeal. The conclusions that he reached were  indeed  the  only
      ones open to him on the evidence before him. I find no errors  of  law
      in his decision.

DECISION

  12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.









Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 8 June 2016
