


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/09588 /2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|on 2 February 2015                   |on 26 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                MR RIZWAN ALI
                        (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY Of STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Muira, Solicitor
For the respondent:    Mr R Peterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough who allowed
    the appellant's appeal in a determination dated 5 November 2014 outside
    the Immigration Rules  and  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights. However for the sake of convenience I shall
    refer to Mr Ali, as the appellant and the Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent which are the designations that they had before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant, who is a national of Pakistan, born on 2 September  1984
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 31  January  2014
    to refuse him leave to remain in United  Kingdom.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hembrough dismissed his appeal in a determination.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on  16
    December 2014 stating that it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge  made  a
    material error in allowing the appellant's appeal and did not give full
    consideration for why the appellant could return to Pakistan and obtain
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a spouse.

    The First-Tier Tribunal Judges Findings

 4. The Judge noted that the solicitor's letter stated that  the  appellant
    did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM as his  sponsor  is  under
    the age of 18. The appellant was also not able to  satisfy  the  income
    requirements. Furthermore the provisions of paragraph  X  one  are  not
    available to the appellant because one of the parties to  the  marriage
    is under the age of 18. It is also been  accepted  that  the  appellant
    could not meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE and therefore  the
    appellant's appeal is dismissed pursuant to the Immigration Rules.

 5. The Judge stated that the appellant sponsor is a British  citizen,  has
    visited Pakistan and she was born in the United Kingdom. Despite  being
    of marriageable age she is still a minor and it is  therefore  arguable
    that there is a continuing duty  under  section  55  of  the  Boarder's
    Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  to  safeguard  and  promote  her
    welfare. She is pregnant and the rights of her unborn child,  who  will
    be a  British  citizen,  also  fall  to  be  considered.  Against  this
    background the sponsor could reasonably be required to live in Pakistan
    the appellant may  encounter  difficulties  with  his  former  extended
    family  there.  Although  it  is  observed  in  passing  that  internal
    relocation is available to them in Pakistan. If they were not found  in
    the United Kingdom in a country of 65 million people the Judge found it
    difficult to believe that they would be discovered  in  Pakistan  in  a
    country of nearly 200 million.

 6. The Judge referred to the case of Bekkou-Betts [2008] UK HL 39 which is
    still good law and provides that regard must be had on  the  effect  of
    the appellant's removal on  the  sponsor  and  her  unborn  child.  The
    reality is that sponsor is  in  need  of  the  emotional  and  physical
    support by the appellant and his wider family in  the  UK  and  in  due
    course to the child. If the appellant was removed his sponsor would  be
    deprived of that support. She cannot have recourse  to  her  family  at
    whose hands, it has been found she may be at risk of  harm.  The  child
    would be deprived of the opportunity  to  establish  a  bond  with  his
    father and the reality is that the sponsor is unlikely,  at  least  for
    the  foreseeable  future,  to  be  able  to  meet  the  minimum  income
    requirements so  as  successfully  sponsor  a  future  entry  clearance
    application by the appellant from Pakistan. The family life  for  which
    the appellant sponsor has  sacrificed  so  much  would  effectively  be
    brought to an end.

 7. Having due regard to these consideration, the Judge gave weight to  the
    exceptional circumstances in this appeal and found that the removal  of
    the appellant would result in consequences that would be  unjustifiably
    harsh for the appellant, his sponsor and their unborn child. He allowed
    the appeal pursuant to Article 8.

    Grounds of Appeal

 8. The appellants' grounds of appeal state the following.  The  judge  has
    considered Article 8 as a general dispensing power  which  is  not  the
    correct  approach.  The  appellant  circumstances  do  not  disclose  a
    disproportionate breach with Article 8 as there is a viable remedy open
    to him to make an application for entry clearance  from  Pakistan.  The
    judge considers that it is not reasonable for the  appellant  to  leave
    his sponsor in the United Kingdom as she has cut herself off  from  her
    immediate family and would need  support.  She  did  not  consider  the
    possibility of those family members that are currently  supporting  the
    appellant 'wife whilst the appellant returns to Pakistan  and  make  an
    entry clearance application.

 9. The Judge places weight on the fact that it seems  that  the  appellant
    could not satisfy the financial requirement of the Rules. The prospects
    of a future application are not a matter for the Tribunal  to  consider
    with regard to the instant appeal.

10. In the case of Sabir (appendix FM-EX.1 not  freestanding)  [2014]  UKUT
    00063 whether  it  states  that  the  likelihood  or  otherwise  of  an
    appellant being able to meet the requirements of  the  rule  for  entry
    clearance is not a relevant consideration. In SB  (Bangladesh)  v  SSHD
    [2007] EWCA Civ 28 it was stated that "there has been no evidence which
    could lead to a conclusion that the proposed interference  (namely  her
    hypothetical  removal  to  Pakistan  from  where  she  could  make   an
    application  for  entry  clearance  to  return  as  a  spouse)  in  the
    claimant's right to respect for her family and private life as a  woman
    married to a British citizen living in working in the United Kingdom is
    anything other  than  proportionate  to  a  competing  public  interest
    issue."

11. It is appropriate and proportionate to the compelling  public  interest
    in the maintenance of an effective immigration control as expressed  in
    section 117B (1) that the appellant makes an application for  an  entry
    clearance from Pakistan.

    Findings on Error of Law

12. It was conceded before the Judge that the appellant could not meet  the
    requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.  The  appellant's  appeal  was
    allowed pursuant to Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights and therefore outside the Immigration Rules.

13. I find that the Judge fell into material  error  as  he  did  not  give
    sufficient reasons for why the appellant cannot return to  Pakistan  to
    make his application for entry clearance. It was not a matter  for  the
    Judge to consider whether the appellant would succeed or not succeed in
    his application. The Judge also fell into material error by considering
    the rights of unborn child. An unborn child does not have rights  until
    he is born. I agree with the respondent's grounds of appeal that it  is
    proportionate to require the  appellant  to  make  an  entry  clearance
    application from Pakistan.

The Hearing

14. I heard evidence from the appellant and  his  wife  who  adopted  their
    written statements.

15. The appellant adopted his written statement dated 10 October 2014  gave
    the following evidence  in  cross-examination  which  I  summarise.  He
    studied at Luton International College but attained no  qualifications.
    He married in March 2013 and his sister-in-law, cousins and his  wife's
    mother attended the ceremony. There were 5 to 6 people in total at  the
    ceremony. He lived with Farouk  Shah.  Asked  why  it  is  a  different
    address he said that he lives with his relative's family whose name  is
    Mehaboob Shah. He does not pay rent.

16. Asked about the whereabouts of his father-in-law is, he said that he is
    in Pakistan. Asked how he knows this, he said that his wife's relatives
    told his wife. Asked when his wife was told this, he said about a  year
    ago. Asked whether the appellant wife is in touch with her sisters,  he
    said "I don't think so" and added that his wife is not told him whether
    she has had contact with her family. His wife's sisters live with their
    mother in London but he does not know where.

17. It was put to him that he submitted information that he  is  was  touch
    with the police in Luton, yet at the letter at page 36 from the  police
    stated that they have no information to disclose about  the  appellant.
    He said that he asked the police for evidence that he has been in touch
    with them. Asked why they do not have any information on their  records
    about this, he said "I don't know  the  police  took  interview  I  was
    surprised that they said that there is no information." His  father-in-
    law was charged with domestic offences involving his wife. His  father-
    in-law's family live in Rawalpindi and he is from  Punjab  which  is  a
    three-hour drive away.

18. In questions from me he gave the following evidence which I  summarise.
    His father-in-law wanted his wife to marry her cousin  in  Pakistan.  I
    asked him why her father would object  after  the  marriage  and  after
    pregnancy. The appellant said "we did Islamic marriage before reception
    party. He said I am not going  to  accept  it  and  you  must  end  the
    relationship". I asked the appellant is  it  not  shameful  in  Islamic
    culture for a girl to leave her husband after pregnancy and  why  would
    her cousin accept and marry his wife. The appellant  said  "the  cousin
    would accept even though she married me".

19. His father-in-law lives 5 to 6 months in the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    other half in Pakistan. He went to the police who told  him  that  they
    are watching him and will take action if something happens. His father-
    in-law has threatened him by mobile telephone. The last  time  he  made
    threats was about a year ago. He said that he  comes  from  a  prophets
    family who are "very high up" in society and her family is not. He  has
    never asked whether these wife's parents are  divorced  but  he  thinks
    that they may be divorced.

20. The next witness to give evidence was the appellant's wife,  Ms  Sayeda
    Sannah Iqbal who adopted her written statement dated 10  October  2014.
    In cross-examination she gave the following evidence which I summarise.



21. She and the appellant married at Luton and her  mother,  aunt  and  the
    appellant's brother and wife attended. There were three guests  at  the
    wedding. There was no procedure  that  she  had  to  follow  when  they
    married at the registrar's office even though she was only 16. She said
    her mother who attended the wedding was asked to  give  permission  and
    she gave it. She was asked whether there  were  questions  put  to  her
    about her father and she said that her mother said  that  she  was  not
    living with her husband.

22. Her father lives in Pakistan. She does not know for  how  long  he  has
    lived there. If he is not in Pakistan he  will  be  in  London  but  he
    mainly stays in Pakistan. Her father was not charged of  kidnapping  in
    2014. Her mother reported her  father  to  the  police.  The  appellant
    complained to the police but they did not take any action. She has  not
    received any threats recently. It was  four  months  ago,  if  she  can
    remember that she received a threat from her mother  through  Facebook.
    She did not go to the police because the actual threats  were  made  on
    telephone calls. She cannot rely on Mr Farouk for support if  she  goes
    to Pakistan. She is scared of her life in Pakistan including fear  from
    her father.

23. Her father lives in Mirpuri but she also has many family members around
    Pakistan. The appellant comes from Lala Mussa which is 3  to  4  hours'
    drive from Mirpur. She went to Pakistan in January 2012 and lived there
    for two years.

24. I asked her if she accedes  to  her  father's  request  and  leave  the
    husband, what would happen to her. He said that she will have to  marry
    her father's sister's son. I  asked  her  whether  he  would  accept  a
    married woman who is pregnant as his wife and she said "I  don't  think
    so". I asked whether her cousin would bring up another man's child  and
    she said "I don't think so".

25. I heard submissions from both parties in the full notes of the  hearing
    are in my Record of Proceedings.

Remaking of the Decision

26. In determining whether the appellant's removal from the United  Kingdom
    would constitute a disproportionate  interference  with  his  right  to
    respect for private and family life under Article 8, I have  considered
    each of the following issues, as laid down in Regina  v.  Secretary  of
    State  for  the  Home  Department  (Appellant)  ex  parte  Razgar  (FC)
    (Respondent) [2004] UKHL 27 at paragraph  17  of  the  speech  of  Lord
    Bingham of Cornhill:

         (1)      Will the proposed removal be an interference by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or family life?

         (2)      If so, will such interference have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

          3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

          4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

          5) If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?

27. The question that I have to decide is whether the refusal of  leave  to
    the appellant, 'in circumstances where the life of  the  family  cannot
    reasonably be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere, taking full account  of
    all considerations weighing in favour of the  refusal,  prejudices  the
    family life of the applicant in a manner sufficiently serious to amount
    to a breach of the fundamental right protected by article 8'  (Huang  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007]  UKHL  11  ('Huang'),
    para. 20).  In considering this question, we have  taken  into  account
    all factors that  weigh  in  favour  of  the  Appellant's  deportation,
    including  the  desirability  of  applying  a  workable,   predictable,
    consistent and fair system of immigration control  (Huang,  para.  16).
    Against this, I have taken into account  the  effect  that  refusal  of
    leave would have on the enjoyment of the appellant's private and family
    life in the appellant's case, bearing  in  mind  the  core  value  that
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention seeks to protect and the  fact
    that '[t]heir family, or extended family, is the group  on  which  many
    people  most  heavily   depend,   socially,   emotionally   and   often
    financially' (Huang, para. 18).

28. I have further considered the case recent  decision  of  the  House  of
    Lords in Beoku-Betts (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 39 where the issue for determination was phrased
    in the following terms:

         'In determining an appeal under section 65 of the  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 1999 (the 1999 Act) (now  sections  82  and  84  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the  2002  Act))
         against the Secretary of State's refusal of leave to remain on  the
         ground   that   to   remove   the   Appellant    would    interfere
         disproportionately with his article 8  right  to  respect  for  his
         family life, should  the  immigration  appellate  authorities  take
         account of the impact  of  his  proposed  removal  upon  all  those
         sharing family life with him or only its impact upon him personally
         (taking  account  of  the  impact  on  other  family  members  only
         indirectly i.e. only insofar as this would in turn have  an  effect
         upon him)?

29. Baroness Hale observed that 'the right to respect for the  family  life
    of one necessarily encompasses the right to respect for the family life
    of others, normally a spouse or minor children, with whom  that  family
    life is enjoyed'.  It was further said that:  'Together  these  members
    enjoy a single family  life  and  whether  or  not  the  removal  would
    interfere disproportionately with it has to be looked at  by  reference
    to the family unit as a whole and  the  impact  of  removal  upon  each
    member. If overall the removal would be disproportionate, all  affected
    family members are to be  regarded  as  victims'.   In  light  of  this
    decision we have to consider the family life of  all  those  who  share
    their family life with the appellant.

30. I have also had regard that  from  28  July  2014  section  19  of  the
    Immigration  Act  2014  is  brought  into  force:  article  3  of   the
    Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement  No  1,  Transitory  and   Saving
    Provisions) Order 2014 (SI 2014/1820).  This  amends  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 by introducing  a  new  Part  5A  which
    contains sections 117A, 117B, 117D and 117D. Part 5A only applies where
    the Tribunal considers Article 8(2) ECHR directly.

31. There is no dispute that the four questions in Razgar must be  answered
    in the affirmative. Therefore the only question that remains is whether
    the  respondent's  decision  is  proportionate  to   the   respondent's
    legitimate interest in a fair and transparent immigration control.

32. I guide myself that I must make a  fact  sensitive  assessment  of  the
    appellants'   circumstances   and   make   my   own    assessment    of
    proportionality. It is obvious that respect for a claimant's family and
    private life under Article  8  (1)  is  subject  to  proportionate  and
    justified interferences in pursuit of a legitimate  aim  under  Article
    8(2) (Izuazu).

33. In considering proportionality specific to this appellant,  I  consider
    the submissions made on behalf of the appellant at the hearing and  his
    witness statement as to what why his  circumstances  should  be  deemed
    exceptional such as he should succeed pursuant to  Article  8  when  he
    cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules.

34. The gist of the appellant's case as to why  his  circumstances  are  so
    exceptional in that they misplace the respondent's interest in  a  fair
    and transparent immigration control is that the appellant cannot return
    to Pakistan  to  make  his  entry  clearance  application  because  the
    appellant's father-in-law who lives  in  Pakistan  will  harm  him.  He
    claims that he married his wife when she was 16 years old  without  the
    permission of his  father-in-law.  He  claims  that  his  father-in-law
    wanted his daughter to marry a cousin in Pakistan.

35. At the hearing there were inconsistencies in the evidence  between  the
    appellant and his wife. The  appellant  said  that  he  does  not  know
    whether his father-in-law is in this country or in Pakistan but he last
    heard about a year ago that he was in Pakistan. His evidence  was  that
    father in law lives six months of the year  in  this  country  and  six
    months in Pakistan. He said that sometimes his father-in-law  lives  in
    this country for more than  a  year.  However  the  appellant's  wife's
    evidence was that her father lives in Pakistan most of the  time.  This
    inconsistency in the  evidence  goes  to  their  credibility  into  the
    credibility of their claim that the appellant's father-in-law wishes to
    harm him or that they married against his will.

36. The appellant's wife said that because she was under the age of 18, her
    mother who attended their wedding ceremony gave permission to marry and
    there were no questions about her father because the  mother  told  the
    registrar that she was  not  living  with  her  father.  The  appellant
    however did not know whether his wife's mother  is  divorced  from  his
    wife's father. He said that he has never asked his wife. I do not  find
    it credible that the appellant's mother who gave permission for her  to
    marry would  suddenly  start  threatening  her  on  the  telephone  and
    Facebook. The appellant's wife went she was asked at  the  hearing  why
    she did not make a complaint about her mother's  threats  on  Facebook,
    she  said  that  all  the  threats  were  on  the  telephone.  This  is
    inconsistent with her  evidence  that  her  mother  threatened  her  on
    Facebook.

37. I also do not find it credible that the appellant would  not  know  the
    situation between his wife's father and mother  given  that  he  claims
    that his father-in-law is threatening him. Furthermore, when  asked  at
    the hearing whether his wife is in touch with her sisters, he  said  "I
    don't think so" and added that his wife is not told him whether she has
    had contact with her family. He also said that wife's sisters live with
    their mother in London but he does not know where. I  do  not  find  it
    credible that the appellant would not  know  whether  his  wife  is  in
    contact with her sisters in this country or  where  exactly  they  live
    given that he claims that they are going to harm him and  it  would  be
    expected that he would know more about  his  wife's  contact  with  his
    family. I find that this goes to the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    claim that he is being threatened by his wife's father-in-law.

38. The evidence is that the appellant's father is a citizen of the  United
    Kingdom. The appellant said  that  he  complained  to  the  police  and
    provided a letter from the police. The letter stated that they have  no
    information on their records. At the hearing the appellant said he does
    not know why the police said that they have no information because they
    took a statement from him. I do not find his  claim  credible  that  he
    complained about his father-in-law to the police in  this  country  and
    the police have no record of it. The more  likely  explanation  is  the
    appellant has not complained to the police because his  wife's  parents
    did not object to the wedding.

39. The appellant said that his father-in-law wants his daughter  to  leave
    the appellant and to marry his cousin even though she is pregnant  with
    another man's child. He said that the cousin would accept his  pregnant
    wife and marry her. The appellant's wife however in in her evidence  at
    the hearing however said that she does not think that the  cousin  will
    accept her after she has been  married  or  bring  up  the  appellant's
    child. This inconsistency in the evidence also goes to the  credibility
    of the appellant's claim that his father-in-law wants his wife to marry
    her cousin even after she married the appellant and  is  pregnant  with
    his child.

40. I therefore find there would be no purpose for the  appellant's  mother
    and father-in-law to threaten the appellant to  leave  his  wife  given
    that it the marriage is now a fait accompli and she  is  pregnant  with
    his child. The appellant claims that he comes from the Prophets  family
    which is "very high up" in the community and his wife is not. There  is
    no explanation for why the appellant's father-in-law would not want his
    daughter to marry socially and culturally upwards.

41. I find that the appellant and his wife are not telling the truth  about
    the circumstances of their marriage and I place no  reliance  on  their
    evidence that the appellant  cannot  return  to  Pakistan  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance because he would be threatened  by  his
    father-in-law.

42. I find that this evidence of being threatened by his wife's mother  and
    father has been made up by the appellant and his wife in order for  the
    appellant to continue to live in this  country.  This  is  because  the
    appellant's wife is not working and will not be  able  to  sponsor  the
    appellant as her spouse and satisfy the financial requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

43. I have taken into account the case  of  Chikwamba  v  SSHD  [2008]  121
    referred to me by  the  appellant.  It  states  that  "I  am  far  from
    suggesting that the Secretary of  State  should  routinely  apply  this
    policy in all but exceptional cases. Rather it seems  to  me  that  the
    only  comparatively  rarely,  certainly  in  family   cases   involving
    children, should an Article 8 appeal be dismissed on the basis that  it
    would be proportionate and more appropriate for the applicant to  apply
    for leave from abroad."

44. I find that the appellant and his wife have manufactured their evidence
    of fear of his  wife's  father-in-law  to  circumvent  the  Immigration
    Rules. I do not read Chikwamba to say that in every case where there is
    a child, should the appellant not be required to return to his  country
    of origin to make an application. I also do not really to say that this
    case can be used to circumvent  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

45. I find in this case there is nothing which precludes the appellant from
    relocating to Pakistan and making his entry clearance application  from
    that country. If the appellant cannot succeed in his application,  then
    it would be up to  the  appellant's  wife  to  consider  relocating  to
    Pakistan to be with the appellant and enjoy family life in that country
    with her child. The appellant's wife has her family in this country who
    can support her as they are now doing. I do  not  accept  her  evidence
    that she is isolated from them.

46. I find there are no compelling circumstances in  the  appellant's  case
    for him to succeed  pursuant  to  Article  8  when  he  cannot  succeed
    pursuant to the Immigration Rules for leave to remain in this country.

47. Considering all the evidence in the round I find that even if there  is
    some disturbance in the appellant's and his wife's family life, however
    it is not sufficient to trump the interests of the  respondent  as  set
    out in section 117B of the Immigration Act.


    Decision


    Appeal dismissed



Signed by,
      Dated this 25th day of January 2015
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................
Mrs S Chana
