
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA095222015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 May 2016                            |On 26 May 2016                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                                jawad akhtar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:


For the Appellant:     Ms J Victor-Mazeli, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan born on  11  August
    1986. However, for the sake of convenience, I shall continue  to  refer
    to the Secretary of State as the respondent and to  Mr  Akhtar  as  the
    appellant which are the designations they  had  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


 2. The appellant appealed against the decision of the respondent dated  18
    February 2015 to refuse to vary his  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and to remove him by way of direction under Section 47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M Phelan allowed the appellant's appeal to the  extent  that  the
    appellant's application remains outstanding before the respondent to be
    considered in accordance with the law.


 3. The respondent appealed against the decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Page on 7 April 2016 granted permission  for  the  respondent  to
    appeal stating that it is arguable that there is an error of law in the
    decision to allow the  appeal  "to  the  extent  that  the  appellant's
    application  remains  before  the  respondent  to  be   considered   in
    accordance with the law".


 4. The substance of the complaint made by the respondent is that the judge
    erred in allowing the appeal on the basis that the respondent  did  not
    meet the requirements of fairness on his finding following the case  of
    Naved (Student - Fairness - Notice of Points) Pakistan [2012] where  it
    was stated that the respondent had a duty to contact the  appellant  to
    give him the opportunity to explain why his CAS  was  withdrawn  before
    refusing his application.  The respondent complains that the judge  was
    unaware of a string of more recent Court of Appeal cases  and  referred
    me to the case of Kaur v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2015] EWCA Civ 13 which found that Naved was very much  fact  specific
    and did not establish any universal  principle  applicable  across  the
    field of immigration decision-making.


 5. The First-tier Tribunal in allowing the  appellant's  appeal  made  the
    following findings and stated that:

         "The appellant's case is that  there  was  a  valid  CAS  when  the
         respondent made his decision on 18 February 2015 and  therefore  he
         was entitled to further leave."

   6. The judge noted at paragraph 17 that the circumstances are exceptional
      because the appellant's CAS was withdrawn in error and  the  appellant
      was not at fault and that the college issued a new CAS immediately the
      appellant contacted them because the appellant was  genuinely  unaware
      that the error could result in his application being refused  and  his
      ability to serve evidence to prove his  case  at  appeal  is  strictly
      limited by statute.  The judge found that in all the circumstances  of
      this  case  here  fairness  required  the  respondent  to  inform  the
      appellant of the gist of the case which he has to  answer,  i.e.  that
      there was a problem with his CAS, and afford him  the  opportunity  to
      explain the substituted number  and/or  find  a  new  college  if  his
      sponsor had lost their licence.   The  Respondent  did  not  meet  the
      requirements of fairness in this case  and  the  decision  is  not  in
      accordance with the law and found that the appellant's application for
      further leave to remain remains outstanding before the respondent.

   7. The grounds of appeal state that the judge allowed the appeal  on  the
      basis that the respondent did not meet the  requirements  of  fairness
      and her decision is not in accordance with the law and this finding is
      based on the judge's  view  following  the  case  of  Naved  that  the
      Secretary of State has a duty to contact the appellant to give him the
      opportunity to explain why his CAS was withdrawn before  refusing  his
      application.  The grounds of appeal further state that the more recent
      Court of Appeal case of Kaur has established very clearly  that  there
      is no obligation on the part of the Secretary of State to  contact  an
      appellant to enable him to explain why a CAS is deficient or has  been
      withdrawn save in particular circumstances which do not apply in  this
      appeal.  Therefore, the respondent argues that there is no  breach  of
      duty of fairness in this case and the judge has materially misdirected
      herself and that the determination should be set aside.


   8. At the hearing I heard submissions from both  parties  as  to  whether
      there is an error of law in the determination.  Mr Avery  adopted  his
      grounds of appeal and said that notwithstanding the decision that  the
      appellant does not have a right of appeal, the appellant does  have  a
      right of appeal in this case but nothing turns on  this.   He  further
      argued that no one told the Secretary of State that the CAS  had  been
      withdrawn and re-issued a day later  and  if  that  had  happened  the
      result might have been different.  He emphasised that the CAS had been
      withdrawn and the subsequent revocation of the sponsor would have  had
      no effect.  He referred to the case of Kaur.


   9. Ms Mazeli in her submissions said that although the  judge  relied  on
      the case of Naved he also looked at other cases on the fairness  point
      including Patel and R v SSHD ex parte Doody [1993] UKHL 8 and came  to
      a proper conclusion.  She argued that the respondent when she made the
      decision on 18 February 2015 knew that the licence  had  been  revoked
      and should have contacted the appellant and given him 60 days to  find
      a new college and therefore unfairness has resulted by  their  failure
      to do so.

My findings as to whether there is an error of law in the determination

  10. The appellant's CAS was withdrawn in error on 1 July 2014  and  a  new
      CAS was issued on 2 July 2014.  This information was not  provided  to
      the Secretary of State by the appellant or the  college  so  therefore
      when the respondent made their  decision  to  refuse  the  appellant's
      application on 18 February  2015  the  information  available  to  the
      respondent was that the appellant's CAS had been withdrawn.


  11. The argument put forward by the appellant  at  the  hearing  was  that
      because at the date of the hearing, the  sponsor's  licence  had  been
      revoked, the appellant should have been given 60 days to  find  a  new
      college has no merit whatsoever.  It was the case that the appellant's
      CAS had been withdrawn and it was not the case that the  institution's
      licence was revoked. The information before the  respondent  when  she
      made her decision was that the appellants CAS had been  withdrawn  and
      only subsequent to that was  the  institutions  licence  revoked.  The
      subsequent revocation of the  sponsor's  licence  would  have  had  no
      effect on the appellant because the appellant no longer had a  CAS  to
      the institution whose licence was then revoked.


  12. I place reliance on the case of Kaur referred to me by the  respondent
      where it has been made quite clear at paragraph 41  that  the  points-
      based system is basically an exact science. It is designed to  achieve
      predictability, administrative simplicity and certainty.  It  does  so
      at the expense of discretion that is to say it is  prescriptive.   The
      consequences  of  that  failure  to  comply  with  all  its   detailed
      requirements will usually lead to a failure  to  earn  the  points  in
      question and thus refusal.


  13. I was referred to the case of EK (Ivory Coast) the facts of which were
      on all fours with the current appeal where the applicant in that  case
      relied upon a CAS which she supplied with her application.  It  stated
      that between the date of her application and the date upon  which  the
      UKBA made its decision the sponsor withdrew this CAS  and  it  appears
      this was done by mistake.  The judge  found  in  that  case  that  the
      applicant was unaware of that.  Her application was refused and  judge
      Sales with whom Briggs LJ agreed in a separate judgment  distinguished
      Naved and concluded that in the context  of  the  points-based  system
      there was no obligation to inform the applicant to enable her to  make
      good any deficiencies in the application.  The case law is quite clear
      that there is no discretion involved.


  14. It was also argued that the judge took into account other  aspects  of
      unfairness and not only that in pursuance to Naved but I  can  see  no
      unfairness on the part of the respondent in not alerting the appellant
      because there was no duty requiring her to do  so.   The  points-based
      system as I have said is technical and prescriptive. One either  meets
      the requirements or one does not.  The appellant in this case  clearly
      did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and whether his
      circumstances  were  exceptional  or  not  had  no  influence  on  the
      decision.


  15. Had the appellant alerted the respondent about the new CAS having been
      issued to him, he  would  not  have  found  himself  in  this  unhappy
      position.  The appeal of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  in  its
      entirety as being erroneous in law  and  I  remake  the  decision  and
      dismiss the appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed under the Immigration Rules
The appellant's appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Mrs S Chana                        Date 25th day of May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
    TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed        Mrs S Chana                        Date 25th day of May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
