
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/09822/2015
                                                             & IA/10134/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2016                   |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                               BILAL MOHAMMAD
                                      &
                         Ms ATTILA GYOERGYNE BALOGH
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E King of Counsel instructed by Rahman & Company,
                    Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant is  a  national  of  Pakistan.  He  was  refused  a
    residence card as the spouse of an EEA national who was exercising  her
    treaty rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  second  appellant  is  a
    Hungarian national who has been residing in the UK since 2007. The  two
    appellants started living  together  after  meeting  in  2012  and  got
    married on 31 August 2014. The application of the first  appellant  for
    issue of Residence Permit was refused on 10 March 2015 and  in  respect
    of the second appellant the respondent made a decision to remove her on
    the basis of "abuse of rights."

 2. Their appeals were heard by First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Courtney  on  6
    July 2015 at Richmond Centre. She dismissed the  appeals,  for  reasons
    given in her determination of 28 July 2015.

 3. The appellants sought and were granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. The first appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul  on
    8 January 2016 and the second by Judge Saffer, a  Judge  of  the  First
    Tier  Tribunal  in  decision  dated  11  December  2015.  In   granting
    permission, Judge Rintoul inter alia said, "It is arguable that in  the
    light of Agho v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1198  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Courtney misdirected herself in respect of the burden of proof that the
    marriage was one of convenience. All the grounds are  arguable".  Judge
    Saffer in his decision granting permission to  second  appellant  said,
    "Ground 3 is arguable as the Judge may have gone behind a concession by
    the respondent and also said, "Ground 4 is arguable as it is unclear if
    the Judge took the Appellant's length of time and status  into  account
    in requiring her to leave."

 4. In its Rule 24 response to the  appeal  of  the  first  appellant,  the
    Respondent contended that the ratio of Agho V SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1198
    was "very much fact specific" where the Court  concluded  that  as  the
    genuineness of that marriage had not been  successfully  impugned,  the
    appellant was entitled to a residence card. It was also contended  that
    Judge Courtney's determination was comprehensive and the  "plethora  of
    discrepancies that had emerged undermined the assertion that this was a
    genuine marriage. The determination is  well  reasoned  and  cannot  in
    anyway said to be irrational."

 5. In its Rule 24 response to the  appeal  of  the  second  appellant  the
    respondent inter alia said, "It does not appear to have  been  advanced
    at the hearing that the appellant had a permanent right  of  residence.
    It was stated at paragraph 2 that the appellant was  exercising  treaty
    rights." The respondent also  stated,  "In  any  event  on  preliminary
    consideration the respondent  does  not  accept  that  the  appellant's
    permanent  right  of  residence,  if   established,   is   a   material
    consideration in a case of the appellant." It also  makes  one  or  two
    other points which are not worthy of reproducing in this determination.

 6. At the hearing before me Ms King took me through the relevant parts  of
    the determination of  Judge  Courtney  in  respect  of  the  appellants
    pointing out that the Judge had clearly erred in  law  in  placing  the
    burden of proof upon the appellant to demonstrate that the marriage was
    genuine and not one of convenience. She asked me to take note of the UT
    decision in Lindita Papajorgji [2012] UKUT 00038 which was specifically
    approved in Agho by the Court of Appeal and  in  paragraph  14  of  its
    judgement given by Lord Justice Underhill it stated "Consistently  with
    prior discussion, that formulation clearly places the burden  of  proof
    on the Secretary of State (or ECO).

 7. It is fair to say that Mr Staunton did not put up  much  resistance  to
    the argument advanced by Ms King that the decision of the First Tier be
    set aside for reasons advanced in the grounds for obtaining permission.
    I announced my decision to set aside the decisions of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal as I found both to be vitiated by material errors of law.

 8. I reserved my decision on the way forward, having been reminded  by  Mr
    Staunton that the proper course  would  be  to  remit  the  matter  for
    further consideration of the claims by the respondent. Having carefully
    considered all matters including the suggestion made by Mr Staunton and
    not resisted by Ms King, I allow these appeals  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to re-consider her decisions in these two cases.


K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
15 February 2016

