
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA093682015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 3rd June 2016                         |On 14th June 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                              Miss Sabikunnaher
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For ease of  comprehension,  the  parties  are  referred  to  by  their
    appellate status and positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Telford dismissing the Appellant's  appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision refusing to grant her leave as a Tier
    4 (General) Student Migrant.

 3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  its  decision  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision  on  29th  October
    2015.

 4. The Appellant appealed against that decision and was granted permission
    to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on the following grounds:

         "The grounds complain that the judge did not  consider  Article  8.
         It is correct he did not.  Article 8 is raised in  the  Appellant's
         written submissions and thus should have  been  considered  by  the
         judge."

 5. The Appellant was unrepresented before the First-tier Tribunal and  did
    not attend and consequently her appeal at the First-tier  proceeded  on
    the papers.

 6. I received a letter dated 2nd June  sent  by  fax  from  the  Appellant
    confirming that she was unable to attend the hearing today due  to  her
    sickness and she requested that the appeal proceed on paper.  Given the
    Appellant's request and there being no objection from the Respondent, I
    was happy to proceed in her absence particularly as she had attached to
    her letter of 2nd  June  further  written  submissions  numbering  some
    eleven paragraphs which I have fully taken into account in reaching  my
    decision.




    Error of Law

 7. I do not find that there was an error of law in the decision such  that
    it should be set aside.  My reasons for so finding are as follows:

 8. Judge Andrew is right in granting permission given that it is  arguable
    that Judge Telford failed to consider Article 8.  It  is  correct  that
    Judge Telford did not consider Article 8.  Article 8 was raised in  the
    Appellant's written submissions to the First-tier Tribunal which appear
    in her bundle.  Those written submissions state  that  in  summary  the
    Appellant has been living in the UK for a long time and has established
    her private life through her education and  integration  into  society.
    It is said that she  is  a  law-abiding  and  genuine  student  and  is
    determined to further her career in this country and has an expectation
    of completing her higher education and that she invested time and money
    to achieve her higher education in the UK and that if  the  appeal  was
    unsuccessful it would jeopardise her long-term career goals.

 9. The submissions before the Upper Tribunal made by the Appellant on  her
    behalf and considered by me in her absence argue further to  that  that
    the Respondent failed to engage with Article 8 in assessing her Tier  4
    Student  application  and  repeats  the  submissions   that   she   has
    established her private life through her education and integration into
    society  and  that  she  wishes  to  complete  her  higher   education.
    Reference is also made to the decision of this Tribunal  in  Treebhawon
    and others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC), which establishes
    that Sections 117B(4) and (5) are not  parliamentary  prescriptions  of
    the public interest but operate as instructions to courts and Tribunals
    to be applied where the balancing exercise is  conducted  in  order  to
    determine proportionality.

10. In my view Judge Telford did err in  failing  to  consider  Article  8.
    However, the error was not material for the reason that the submissions
    made on the Appellant's behalf did  not  have  a  prospect  of  success
    anyhow given the vague and unsubstantiated nature  of  her  submissions
    regarding her Article 8 private  life  and  particularly  in  light  of
    higher court authority by which I am bound.  In  that  respect  I  take
    into account the decision of Patel & Ors v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2013] UKSC 72  wherein  the  Supreme  Court  found  as
    follows at [57]:

         "It is important to remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power.  It is to be distinguished from the Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right.  ...  One  may
         sympathise with Sedley LJ's call in Pankina  for  'commonsense'  in
         the application of the Rules to graduates who have been studying in
         the UK for some years ...  However, such considerations do  not  by
         themselves provide Grounds of Appeal  under  Article  8,  which  is
         concerned with private or family life, not education as such.   The
         opportunity for a promising student to complete his course in  this
         country, however desirable in general terms, is  not  in  itself  a
         right protected under Article 8."

11. That decision of the Supreme Court was followed by this Tribunal in the
    decision of Nasim and others (Article 8) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 25  (IAC)
    wherein it was stated in the head note as follows:

         "The judgments of the Supreme Court in Patel & Ors v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2013]  UKSC  72  serve  to  re-focus
         attention on the nature and purpose of Article 8 of the  ECHR  and,
         in particular, to  recognise  that  Article's  limited  utility  in
         private life cases that are far removed from the protection  of  an
         individual's moral and physical integrity."

12. I am further  fortified  in  my  findings  concerning  the  Appellant's
    private life not having any prospect of success in  this  appeal  given
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Sarkar v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 195 where  Moore-Bick  LJ  at  [20]
    said the following which is of general analogy and application:

         "... I think it is important to bear in mind that this  court  will
         allow an appeal against a decision of the Upper Tribunal only if it
         is satisfied that it involved a material error of  law.   The  most
         that can be said of the decision in the present case  is  that  the
         Tribunal failed to consider the merits of the Appellant's Article 8
         claim.  However, there was no evidence before the Tribunal  capable
         of supporting the  findings  of  fact  necessary  to  enable  their
         argument to succeed.  I find it difficult to see, therefore, how it
         can be said that any such error was material since, if the Tribunal
         had considered that Ground of Appeal, it would have been  bound  to
         reject it."

13.  Similarly,  there  is  no  evidence  other  than  the  vague   written
    submissions made on the Appellant's behalf at the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and again before me  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  These  submissions  are
    incapable of supporting the findings of fact necessary  to  enable  her
    argument to succeed.  Consequently, I cannot see that there is any such
    error that was material since if  Judge  Telford  had  considered  that
    Ground of Appeal he would have been bound to reject it.

14. In light of the above findings the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    is affirmed.




Notice of Decision

15. The appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                  Date 10 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

