
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09444/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 October 2014                           |On 20 November 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                 judge of the first tier tribunal rimington


                                   Between

                              mrs shazia kousar
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, Solicitor of Ali & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appealed against the decision  to  refuse  her  leave  to
    remain on the basis of family life in the UK and to remove her  by  way
    of  directions  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum   and
    Nationality Act 2006.  Her appeal was considered and dismissed  on  the
    papers by Judge C Grimshaw on 30th May 2014.

 2.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth in the following terms

         "in the light of the chronology and evidence of the letter provided
         by Messrs Ali & Co Solicitors dated 9th April 2014 it is clear that
         an oral hearing of this matter should have been listed.  Difficulty
         has  plainly  arisen.   The  determination  is  vitiated   by   the
         procedural background to which I refer.  No criticism can  be  made
         of the Judge".

 3. It was clear at the hearing before me that a  letter  dated  9th  April
    2014 from Ali & Co Solicitors  requesting  an  oral  hearing  had  been
    received by the Tribunal and a copy to that effect was produced at  the
    hearing.  It is unfortunate that this letter was dated 1st July 2014.

 4. As such I found that Judge Grimshaw proceeded through no fault  of  her
    own in error and the matter should be re-listed before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 5. Mr Diwnycz, sensibly in my view, did not resist this.  I set aside  the
    determination of Judge Grimshaw in its entirety and the  matter  should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal further  to  Practice  Statement
    7.2.



Directions

(1)  The matter is listed  for  one  hour  and  the  interpreter  should  be
Mirpuri.




Signed        Date 11th November 2014

Judge Rimington
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal

