
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09299/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21st November 2013                           |On 13th January 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS



                                   Between

                              SUKHWINDER SINGH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Legal Representative on behalf of
                    Lincolns Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 14th July 1970.  He  claims
    to have entered the UK on 5th September 1996.  On 5th July 2012 he made
    an application for indefinite leave to remain under the  fourteen  year
    long residence Rule and for leave to remain based on the fact  that  he
    had established a private and family life in the United Kingdom.   That
    application was refused by the Respondent in a  notice  of  immigration
    decision dated 13th March 2013 and the reasons  given  to  refuse  that
    application were set out in an accompanying reasons for refusal letter.
     It was stated that the Appellant had not established his  presence  in
    the UK for a period of fourteen years and that the documentary evidence
    only indicated a  presence  between  the  years  2006  and  2010.   The
    Respondent also gave consideration to the application  under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules but concluded that  the  Appellant  did
    not meet any of those requirements.

 2. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Meates) on 31st  July
    2013.  In a decision promulgated  on  13th  August  2013  Judge  Meates
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 8).  The judge had the opportunity to  hear  the  oral
    evidence of the Appellant  and  consider  it  in  the  context  of  the
    documentary evidence produced and for  that  to  be  tested  in  cross-
    examination.  It is plain from the  determination  that  he  found  the
    evidence of the Appellant to  "lack  all  credibility"  (see  paragraph
    [24]) for the reasons given in the determination and concluded that  he
    had been unable to substantiate his presence in the UK for  the  period
    1996 to 2006.  Whilst the judge did accept his presence in the UK  from
    2006, it was conceded on the Appellant's behalf that he could not  meet
    the requirements of Rule 276ADE.  In respect of Article 8 at paragraphs
    26 - 29 of the decision, the judge considered  his  claim  outside  the
    Rules, but found that the decision to remove was proportionate for  the
    following reasons; he had spent the majority  of  his  life  in  India,
    there was nothing to suggest that he could not  continue  his  economic
    activity in India upon return, he did not have any close family in  the
    UK and only had a limited number of friends, he was in good health  and
    there was nothing to suggest that he could not re-establish his private
    life in India.  Thus the judge dismissed his appeal.

 3. An application was made to appeal that decision advancing two  grounds;
    firstly that the Secretary of State had issued a removal direction  and
    a refusal to grant leave in the same notice and it was  submitted  "The
    current practice of the SSHD to incorporate both decisions in a  single
    notice is incompatible with the relevant legislation", relying  on  the
    decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Ahmadi  (Section  47  decision:
    validity; Sapkota) [2012] UKUT 00147 (IAC).  The second ground advanced
    was that the judge had failed to deal adequately  with  the  Article  8
    claim.

 4. On 6th September 2013 permission to appeal that decision was refused by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Somerville.  He said this:-

         "The background is that the Appellant entered the UK  illegally  in
         September 1996 and has  lived  and  worked  here  ever  since.   He
         claimed therefore that he was entitled to remain on  the  basis  of
         fourteen years' residence.  The First-tier  Judge  found  that  the
         Appellant's evidence was incredible  and  that  he  had  failed  to
         satisfy him that he had been  continuously  resident  for  fourteen
         years.

         The first ground seeking permission contends that the FTJ erred  in
         law in failing to find that the decision to remove was unlawful  as
         that decision had been made at the same time  as  the  decision  to
         remove.  Reliance is placed on  the  case  of  Ahmadi  [2012]  UKUT
         00147.  This decision was overturned by the Court of Appeal in  the
         case of ( judge Somerville did not complete this sentence).

         The second ground of appeal, in effect is  that  the  FTJ  did  not
         properly and adequately deal with the Appellant's Article 8  claim.
         Although the reasoning was  brief  it  is  apparent  that  the  FTJ
         considered the five steps in Razgar even if he did not mention that
         case by name.  There is no  realistic  prospect  that  a  different
         Tribunal would come to a different conclusion on  the  facts.   The
         grounds are without merit."

 5. The Appellant subsequently renewed his  application  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the same grounds.  On 2nd October 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge
    King granted limited permission to appeal for the following reasons:-

         "The Appellant claims fourteen years' residence.  The judge did not
         accept his evidence or find any basis upon which he  should  remain
         within the jurisdiction.  There is no error in the  findings  which
         were open to be made.  However reliance is placed  upon  Ahmadi  on
         the basis that the decision to remove should not have been made  in
         the same decision letter.  On that limited basis leave is  granted.
         If the Respondent were to agree that such was an error  the  matter
         need not come for hearing as the appeal could be  allowed  on  that
         limited basis with the other findings preserved.

         Directions

         The matter will be listed for oral hearing  unless  the  Respondent
         within 21 days from today concedes the Ahmadi point.  In which case
         the matter will be dealt with on the papers."

 6. Nonetheless the appeal was listed before the Upper Tribunal. As can  be
    seen from the terms of the grant, permission to appeal the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal in respect of Article 8  was  not  granted.  Mr
    Khan relied upon the limited grant of permission  namely  that  it  was
    unlawful for the Secretary of State to remove the Appellant in a single
    notice and this was incompatible with the legislation  relying  on  the
    Upper Tribunal decision of Ahmadi (as previously cited)  and  therefore
    the judge made an error of law in not allowing the appeal by  remitting
    the decision to the Secretary of State.  Mr Saunders on behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State submitted by way of reply that there was no error of
    law in the determination and the judge had dealt with  all  the  issues
    and that the only decision outstanding was to remove the Appellant,  as
    he had failed to establish his claim under the  Immigration  Rules  and
    under Article 8.

 7. We reserved our decision.  Following  the  hearing  we  issued  further
    directions to the parties on 21st November 2013.   At  the  hearing  it
    appeared that both parties sought to submit that the decision to remove
    was one that was still outstanding.   Mr  Khan  still  relying  on  the
    decision in Ahmadi.  As noted in the directions, the  parties  and  the
    judge granting permission appear to have read the decision as one  made
    under Section 47 of the 2006 Act.  As neither party had dealt with that
    at  the  hearing  we  considered  that  the  parties  should  have  the
    opportunity to make any further  submissions.   Thus  the  parties  had
    fourteen days from the date of service of the directions  to  send  any
    further written submissions.  It  was  further  directed  that  in  the
    absence of any response to the directions the Tribunal would  determine
    the appeal on the evidence that  was  before  it.   Neither  party  has
    responded to those directions and neither party has therefore sought to
    make any further representations before the Tribunal.

 8. We consider that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Meates)
    does not disclose an error of law.  The grounds relied upon by Mr  Khan
    and the limited grant of permission appear to have read the decision in
    this case as one made under Section 47 of the 2006  Act.   This  is  in
    error as the decision made by the Secretary of State in relation to the
    Appellant was not one made to refuse to vary  leave  to  remain  and  a
    decision  to remove under Section 47 of the 2006 Act but one made under
    Section 10 of the 1999 Act to remove  an  illegal  entrant.   Thus  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in respect of Ahmadi (relied upon by  Mr
    Khan) (which in any event was considered further by the Court of Appeal
    in Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ 512) does not apply to this  Appellant.   The
    Court of Appeal in that case said that where a Section 47 decision  was
    made at the same time as the decision to vary leave, the proper  course
    was to allow the appeal against the decision to  remove  under  Section
    47.  As we have said, that does not apply  to  this  Appellant  as  the
    decision was not one made under Section 47 of the 2006 Act.   In  those
    circumstances the Appellant has not demonstrated  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law and we therefore uphold the determination.

Decision

 9. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  error  of  law,  the  decision
    stands.






Signed                              Date: 7/1/2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


