
[pic]
IAC-UT

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09478/2015
                                                               IA/09479/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 February 2016                   |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)


                                   Between

                                ROOMILA OREE
                             PRIYA DARSHINI OREE
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Otchie, instructed by Lawrence and Associates,
solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellants, citizens of Mauritius,  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge PJ Holmes) dismissing  their
    appeals against decisions made by the respondent  on  21  January  2015
    refusing their applications for further leave to remain on human rights
    grounds.

Background

2.   In brief outline the background to  this  appeal  is  as  follows.  The
    first appellant, born on 25 August 1972, is the mother  of  the  second
    appellant, born on 19 March 1993. The first appellant was granted leave
    to enter the UK as a visitor in 2005 and subsequently further leave  to
    remain as a student. In December 2009  the  second  appellant  and  her
    father entered the UK with leave to remain  as  the  first  appellant's
    dependants. The second appellant's younger sister is  also  present  in
    the UK as a dependant of her mother. There was no clear evidence  about
    her date of entry but the judge accepted that it may well be  that  she
    arrived with her father and older sister.

3.   The first appellant's leave as a student was valid  until  29  November
    2011. Before the expiration of her leave she made a further application
    on a form for use by dependent relatives  of  a  settled  person.  This
    application was refused on 14  November  2012.  The  first  and  second
    appellants made a human rights application on 14 March 2013  which  was
    refused on 13 May 2013. A notice informing the first appellant  of  her
    immigration status and liability to removal was served on 14  May  2013
    and similar notices on the second appellant and her father  and  sister
    on 16 September 2014. A third daughter was born to the first  appellant
    and her husband in  June  2014  and  she  was  served  with  notice  of
    liability to removal on 6 January 2015.  Further  representations  were
    made on behalf of the appellants and their family. These  were  treated
    as an application on human right grounds and refused  for  the  reasons
    set out in the decision letter of 19 January 2015, the  respondent  not
    being satisfied that removing the appellants to Mauritius would  be  in
    breach of their rights under article 8.

4.   The first and second appellants appealed against this decision  and  in
    their notices of appeal they indicated that they wished the  appeal  to
    be decided without a hearing. The judge therefore  did  not  hear  oral
    evidence or submissions but decided the appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
    documents before him: the appeal bundle filed by  the  respondent,  the
    grounds of appeal and statement of  additional  grounds  filed  by  the
    appellants and their bundles of documents containing supporting letters
    and photographs.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge

5.   The judge reminded himself  of  the  relevant  legal  points  including
    relevant case law and the provisions of s117A and B of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended: [12]-[15].  He set out  his
    findings at [16]-[28] and his conclusions at [29]-[34].    He  accepted
    that the first appellant had entered the UK in December 2005 at the age
    of 33 and subsequently had been joined by  the  other  members  of  her
    family (all citizens of Mauritius) but none of them had had  any  valid
    leave to remain since the  end  of  November  2011  and  their  current
    immigration status was that of overstayers. In the decision letter  the
    respondent had taken the view that the appellant  had  family  ties  in
    Mauritius and the judge commented that the evidence before  him  showed
    that the appellant had done nothing to address  that  issue.  They  had
    also provided no evidence to show that any relatives were currently  in
    the UK. He noted that  the  respondent  had  made  it  clear  that  the
    intention was that the family would be returned as a unit to Mauritius.

6.   The judge noted that there was no account of how  the  first  appellant
    and her husband had been supporting themselves and their dependants  in
    recent years nor any explanation of how the second appellant's proposed
    course at the University of Westminster was to be funded.  He  accepted
    that the appellants and their family would have established  a  private
    life in the UK save for the youngest child who was so young  that  this
    would be most  unlikely.  There  was  no  suggestion  that  the  family
    suffered  from  ill  health  or  any  significant  disability  and  the
    appellants had provided no information about the qualifications, skills
    or employment history of  the  first  appellant's  husband,  the  judge
    commenting that on the face  of  the  matter  he  might  reasonably  be
    expected to be a significant contributor to the support of  the  family
    in Mauritius.

7.   He went  on  to  consider  the  provisions  of  s.55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and  considered  the  welfare  and
    best interests of the children as a primary consideration but  for  the
    reasons he gave in [25]-[27] he concluded that there was unlikely to be
    any significant detriment to their welfare if they now had to return to
    Mauritius with their parents  and  older  sister.  He  found  that  the
    appellants could not meet the requirements for leave  to  remain  under
    the immigration rules set out in appendix FM. He took  the  view  there
    was a case for considering that the appellants' appeals merited further
    consideration under article 8 outside the rules. He was satisfied  that
    article 8 was engaged and that the decision was in accordance with  the
    law and was made for a legitimate aim within article 8 (2).  The  issue
    for  him  to  resolve  was  whether  the  respondent's  decisions  were
    proportionate to that aim. For the reasons summarised in [34] he  found
    that the respondent's  decisions  in  respect  of  each  appellant  was
    proportionate and should be upheld.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

8.   In the grounds of appeal it is asserted that the  appeal  notices  were
    prepared by the  appellants'  previous  legal  representatives  and  in
    consequence evidence relating to the children and the private  life  of
    the appellants was never produced and they did not therefore  obtain  a
    fair and just hearing. It is further argued that the judge did not take
    into account the appellants' remaining family members who had  received
    notices of decision. The judge had  commented  that  he  had  not  been
    provided with documents relating to the refusal on 14 November 2012 and
    that he had seen no documents relating to the application on  14  March
    2013. It is argued that he erred in  law  as  there  was  a  procedural
    irregularity in relation to the fact that the notices relating  to  the
    first appellant's husband and the remaining children did not form  part
    of the appeal which had therefore proceeded on the basis of a number of
    missing documents. It is then argued that the judge failed to carry out
    the relevant assessment under s.55 and to take  into  the  account  the
    relevant statutory guidance. In consequence, the grounds argue that the
    article 8 assessment was flawed.

9.   Mr Otchie adopted these grounds. He submitted that the s.55  assessment
    had  not  been  carried  out  adequately,   there   being   no   proper
    consideration of the interests of  the  two  younger  children  of  the
    family. There had been no true engagement with their best interests. He
    argued that the first appellant's husband was very  much  part  of  the
    appeal and he should have had  an  opportunity  to  take  part  in  the
    proceedings.

10.   Ms Isherwood accepted that decision notices had  been  served  on  all
    members of the family but so far as the  respondent  was  aware  appeal
    notices had only been served by the first and  second  appellants.  She
    submitted that the judge had reached a decision properly open to him on
    the available evidence and it was not arguable that  he  had  erred  in
    law. The appellants had requested a hearing on the papers and  had  had
    the opportunity of producing the evidence they wished to rely  on.  The
    judge had properly considered the welfare and  best  interests  of  the
    children.

11.  On the issue of whether notices of  appeal  had  been  filed  by  other
    members of the family, Mr Otchie accepted that he was not in a position
    to produce copies of those notices or any further evidence  to  support
    the assertion that they had in fact appealed.

Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

12.  The issue for me at this stage of the hearing  is  whether  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge erred in law such that the decision should  be  set
    aside. In the grounds it is asserted that  the  appellants  were  badly
    served by their previous representatives and that accordingly they  did
    not have a fair hearing. It is also argued that there was a  procedural
    irregularity in that appeals by two members  the  family  were  decided
    when there were pending appeals by other family members.  It  was  this
    argument that persuaded Judge Osborne to grant permission to appeal. He
    said that it was clear from the notice  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the appeal was intended to be pursued by all four members
    of the family and that the tribunal appeared to have  linked  only  the
    appeals of the first and second appellants and that due to no fault  on
    their part, the appeals of  the  other  two  members  of  their  family
    appeared not to have been processed by the tribunal and that  they  had
    been denied the opportunity of being parties to  the  appeal.  He  said
    that it was arguable that their non--participation, through no fault of
    their own, adversely affected the appeals of the two appellants.

13.  However,  no  evidence  has  been  produced  to  show  that  the  first
    appellant's husband and her middle daughter did in fact file notices of
    appeal. Both the appellant's notices of appeal at  section  F  identify
    the other appellant as a family member intending  to  appeal  and  both
    identify the first appellant's husband. But instead of  giving  a  Home
    Office reference,  the  form  sets  out  an  appeal  number  from  2007
    (OA/64437/2007). No evidence was produced to support the assertion that
    notices of appeal had been filed from these other  family  members  and
    although the grounds complain of the way their previous representatives
    advised and acted for them, nothing has  been  produced  to  show  that
    these allegations have been put to them or that they  have  been  given
    any opportunity to comment in accordance with the guidance given by the
    tribunal in BT (Former solicitor's  alleged  misconduct)  Nepal  [2004]
    UKIAT 00311.

14.  I am, accordingly, not satisfied that notices of appeal  were  in  fact
    filed by the first appellant's husband and daughter. This is not a case
    where they have been deprived of the opportunity of  being  parties  to
    this appeal. In any event, the appellants indicated  that  they  wanted
    the appeal to be decided without a hearing. They received  notice  that
    this would be the case and were given the  opportunity  of  filing  any
    further evidence or documents they wished to be taken into  account  by
    the notice in form IA35 issued on 26 May 2015. Documents were submitted
    and there was nothing to indicate that there were  pending  appeals  by
    other family members. Further, the documents dealt with all members  of
    the family and it is clear that the judge was fully aware that this was
    an appeal involving a family of five. I am not satisfied that there has
    been any procedural irregularity  causing  unfairness  to  the  parties
    arising from any failure or errors by the previous representatives.

15.  In the grounds it is argued that the judge erred by speculating on  the
    contents of a previous refusal letter at the previous appeal. The judge
    had to deal with the appeal on the basis of the evidence before him. He
    was entitled to comment on the absence of documents  which  could  have
    been produced. More significantly nothing has been produced to  support
    an argument that any missing documents had any material bearing on  the
    outcome of the appeal.

16.  It also argued that the judge did not carry out a  full  assessment  of
    the best interests of the children of the family. There is no substance
    in this ground. The judge properly directed himself on the law and  the
    relevant authorities.  In particular he took into account the  guidance
    in Azimi-Moayed (Decisions affecting  children;  onward  appeals)  Iran
    [2013] UKUT 197. He noted that neither child relevant  to  the  appeals
    was currently within the age-group identified in that decision as being
    of the greatest significance for the development  of  social,  cultural
    and educational ties. He commented that so far as the middle child  was
    concerned she came to the UK when she was 11 and her  most  significant
    formative years  were  therefore  spent  in  Mauritius.  There  was  no
    evidence that  she  had  special  educational  needs  or  any  learning
    disability and the evidence produced was not such that he could  assess
    her own perceptions of who she was or which  culture  and  society  she
    belonged to.

17.  When the decision is read as a whole there was  no  reason  to  believe
    that the judge failed to take into account the statutory guidance. This
    is not a case of a cursory or superficial  examination  of  the  issues
    relating to  the  children  but  one  where  the  judge  has  carefully
    considered all the evidence before him and,  taking  into  account  the
    guidance given in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of State [2014] EWCA Civ
    874 referred to by the judge at [25]), reached a decision properly open
    to him.

18.  For these reasons I am not satisfied that the judge erred in law.





Decision

19.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  it  follows  that  the
    decision to dismiss the appeals stands.  No anonymity order was made by
    the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   H J E Latter

H J E Latter  Date: 15 February 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

