
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09135/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27 March 2015                     |On 28 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                            ASHWINDER SINGH ARORA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a national of India, appeals with permission  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid who, in a determination  of
    no real length, dismissed the appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
    decision  dated  30  January  2914  refusing  the   appellant   further
    permission to stay as a Tier 4 (General) Student and to remove him.

 2. The Secretary of State contended that a bank statement submitted by the
    appellant with his application had been proved to  be  false  and  thus
    refused the application on  the  basis  of  deception  under  paragraph
    322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.  The appellant had failed to meet the
    requirements of paragraph 245ZX(a) as he had been  refused under one of
    the general grounds for refusal set out in paragraph 322.   Furthermore
    as a false document had been provided in support of the application the
    appellant had failed to meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  245ZX(o)
    which required him to be a genuine student.

 3. Although the appellant indicated that he and his representatives, Lewis
    Kennedy Solicitors, would appear at the hearing of his  appeal  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, neither did so and the judge  proceeded  in  their
    absence.

 4. The substance his decision  is  in  the  last  two  paragraphs  of  his
    determination as follows:

         "6.  I cannot ignore the relevant legal  provisions  of  under  the
             Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as  amended).   In  this  case  the
             appellant had to persuade me that he was  wrongly  accused  of
             'deception'. Thus, without cogent rebutting evidence  on  this
             and other issues this appeal cannot succeed.

         7.   Accordingly, bearing in mind  that the burden of proof  is  on
             the appellant,  I find the respondent's decision to  be  sound
             in law and it stands."

 5. As with the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant did  not  appear  before
    me.  Mr Mathews needed little persuasion that  the  judge  was  plainly
    wrong in his self-direction.

 6. The grounds of challenge correctly identify the relevant  decision;  RP
    (Proof of forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086.  It is argued  that  the
    judge had seen "independent evidence" which supported the allegation of
    deception.  The judge made no reference  to  independent  evidence  and
    this aspect of the grounds is misconceived.

 7. The grounds also seek to rely on MH (Respondent's bundle: documents not
    provided) Pakistan [2010] UKUT 168 (IAC) in support of  the  contention
    that the Secretary of State had failed to provide supporting  evidence.
    This ground, too, is misconceived as the bundle before me contains:

      i) A statement from ICICI Bank in respect  of  account  number  ending
         5515;

     ii) A letter from ICICI Bank dated 12 October 20123 referring  to  that
         account and;

    iii) A "Document Centre Oversees Request Form" which includes details of
         the steps taken  to  check  the  authenticy  of  the  statement  in
         question.

 8. By way  of  conclusion  the  grounds  argue  that  the  bank  statement
    submitted is genuine and they remind the  reader  that  the  burden  of
    proof had shifted to the Secretary of State who had provided nothing in
    support of the allegation.

 9. Section 12 of the Courts and Tribunals Act 2007 gives me  a  discretion
    whether to set aside a decision where an error of law has been made. Mr
    Matthews addressed me on the materiality of the error and  argued  that
    the evidence before the judge was sufficient to establish a prima facie
    case of deception and that it was open  to  the  appellant  to  produce
    evidence by way of rebuttal.

10. I conclude that if the judge had set about the task that was before him
    with a correct approach as to the standard of proof, he could only have
    come to the conclusion that the Secretary of State had  established  on
    the balance of probabilities that a false document had been relied  on.
    Although the document verification report has  some  redaction  of  the
    parties involved, in particular the individual spoken to, the following
    matters are evident:

      i) A request for verification  of  a  bank  statement/bank  letter  in
         respect of account number 049901515515 in  the  name  of  Ashwinder
         Singh at ICICI Bank was sent by Jackie Bradshaw to the  Fraud  Team
         on an unknown date after the  application  had  been   made  on  23
         October 2013.

     ii) According  to  a  report  subsequently  provided,  a  visa  support
         assistant working in a department known  as  DVU-Visa  spoke  to  a
         senior officer at ICICI Bank, Nurmahal Phillaur in Hindi.

    iii) ICICI Bank has a core banking facility which means  that  it  as  a
         centralised computer  system.  The  bank  maintains  a  centralised
         record of all their account holders thus irrespective of where  the
         account is held it can be checked at any of the branches.

     iv) The senior officials is stated to have confirmed that  the  account
         in question (identified with reference to the appellant's name  and
         the above account number) belonged to an individual whose name  has
         been redacted as the son of another individual whose name similarly
         has been redacted, the address stated to be Solan Himachal Pradesh.
          The official confirmed the date of birth as 6  July  1991.   These
         entries are followed by an endorsement:

             "Applicant's father's name, address and date of  birth,  given
             on Proviso, does not match up with the bank records,  thereof,
             verified as False."

      v) The statement of account with ICICI Bank provided by the  appellant
         records his name as Mr Ashwinder Singh, house number - 679, Sector-
         13. U,E, Dist: Karnal, Haryana.  The  account  is  described  as  a
         savings account with a balance of 10,20,000,09 rupees.

     vi) The above statement was accompanied by a  letter  from  ICICI  Bank
         dated 12 October 20123 addressed to the appellant  with  the  above
         details and records  the  account  as  a  saving  account  with  Mr
         Ashwinder Singh as the authorised signatory.

11. Mr Matthews pointed out that the date of birth of  the  account  holder
    provided by the  senior  official  at  ICICI  Bank  was  6  July  1991.
    Accordingly it appears that not only was the name of the account holder
    (and that of his father) different from the  information  appearing  on
    the bank  statement  the  appellant  had  produced  together  with  the
    accompanying letter, but in addition the date of birth is different.

12. In his grounds of appeal the complaint is made by  the  appellant  that
    nowhere was it mentioned in the document verification report  that  the
    "verifier" had contacted the authorised manager of  the  bank.   It  is
    also argued that the designation of the person the verifier had  spoken
    to had not been given.  Both these assertions are incorrect.

13. It is also  argued  that  in  the  Home  Office  bundle  there  was  no
    independent evidence from ICICI Bank confirming the document was false.
     The material provided to the appellant indicates that the  information
    was given orally by the senior official.

14. In his grounds of application for permission to  appeal  the  appellant
    asserts that the bank document  was  genuine  for  the  reasons  given.
    Those reasons identify a failure  by  the  respondent  to  provide  any
    independent evidence in support of the allegation  and  that  the  only
    documents before the judge had been the verification report.  Thus  the
    sole basis of the appellant's challenge has been the process undertaken
    by the respondent.

15. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  indicated  that  the
    appellant still sought to rely on the financial documents that had been
    submitted with the application and that nothing further  needed  to  be
    adduced as the Secretary of State had failed to provide any independent
    evidence from the bank proving  the  documents  were  false.  No  human
    rights grounds were advanced.  On  any  reading  of  the  evidence  the
    Secretary of State has discharged  the  burden  on  her.   Without  any
    rebuttal evidence from the appellant it is inevitable that  any  appeal
    is bound to fail.

16. My conclusion is that although infected by error the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal need not be set aside.  Accordingly the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.



Signed        Date 27 April 2015
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

