
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/09894/2014
                                                               IA/09899/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2015                            |On 5 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE GOSS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                      Mr Nazrul Islam (first appellant)
                     Mrs Afroza Akter (second appellant)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Bhuiyan, Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
                     Delivered orally on 28 January 2015

 1. The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh and are husband and wife.  On
    29 November 2013 the first appellant made an application for  leave  to
    remain in this country as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant  (a  PhD
    student  at  Southbank  University).   The  second  appellant  made  an
    application on the same date  as  a  dependent  partner  of  the  first
    appellant. There is no  dispute  that  the  second  appellant's  appeal
    stands or falls with that of the first appellant.

 2. The Secretary of State refused both appellants' applications for  leave
    to remain in decisions of 4 February 2014, making decisions  to  remove
    them pursuant to Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006 at the same time.  The appellants appealed these decisions  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and in a determination promulgated on 9 October
    2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cockrill  dismissed  such   appeals,
    concluding (i) that the appellants did not meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules and (ii) that their removal would not breach  Article
    8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 3. The appellants were granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth in a decision of 26  November
    2014 and thus the matter came before us.

 4. The pleaded grounds are succinct.  Paragraphs 3 and 7  of  the  grounds
    assert that the First-tier Tribunal's decision was  not  in  accordance
    with the Immigration Rules; however, neither ground particularises  why
    this is said to be so and which Rule it is asserted that the appellants
    meet.

 5. At the hearing Mr Bhuiyan quite properly  withdrew  reliance  on  these
    paragraphs of the grounds.  I say  'properly'  because  the  First-tier
    Tribunal considered the issue of whether the Immigration Rules were met
    in paragraphs 46 and 47 of its determination, concluding (i)  that  the
    production of a CAS to the Secretary of State with the application  was
    a mandatory requirement of the Immigration  Rules  and  (ii)  that  the
    first appellant did not produce a valid CAS with his application.   The
    First-tier  Tribunal  was  undoubtedly  correct  in   both   of   these
    conclusions.

 6. For the sake of completeness we also observe that there is no  part  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules which on the facts as  presented  by  the
    appellants is capable of operating in their favour.

 7. The appellant's challenge before the Upper Tribunal turns then  on  the
    First-tier Tribunal's consideration of Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention outside of the Immigration Rules.

 8.  Contrary  to  Mr  Bhuiyan's  submissions,  the   First-tier   Tribunal
    identified the  relevant  factual  matrix,  including  the  appellants'
    unblemished immigration history and the length of time  that  they  had
    spent in the United Kingdom, and took this factual matrix into  account
    when coming to its  conclusions.   This  is  clear  in  our  view  from
    paragraph 40  of  the  determination,  which  immediately  follows  the
    heading "My findings and reasons". Paragraph  40  refers  back  to  the
    Tribunal's earlier recitation of the appellants'  immigration  history,
    which was comprehensively  set  out  in  paragraphs  4  and  5  of  the
    determination. It is inconceivable in our  view  that  having  directed
    itself in this regard in paragraph 40 of the determination the Tribunal
    did not thereafter take such matters into account when  coming  to  its
    conclusions on the Article 8 ECHR ground.

 9. The Tribunal also took into account (i) the first appellant's excellent
    academic record [41, 54 and 56], (ii)  how  it  came  to  be  that  the
    appellants were unable to meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and that this was through no fault of their own [43-45, 48 and 52-
    53] and (iii) that save for the failure to produce a CAS the appellants
    would have met the requirements of the Rules [43 and 56].

10. Further, in paragraph 55 of the determination the  First-tier  Tribunal
    directs itself to Section 117 of the Immigration Act, by which  it  was
    clearly referring to section 117 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, as introduced by Section 19 of the 2014 Act.  Although
    in granting permission Judge Hollingworth thought it arguable that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had failed to provide proper reasons in relation to
    its consideration of Section 117, we do not accept  that  this  is  so.
    There is  nothing  in  section  117  which  is  capable  of  materially
    operating to the benefit of the appellants in  this  case  and  at  the
    hearing before us Mr Bhuiyan confirmed that  no  such  point  had  been
    taken before the First-tier Tribunal.

11. Having taken into account all of  these  material  factors  and  whilst
    expressing sympathies  for  the  position  the  appellants  have  found
    themselves in (as we do), the First-tier Tribunal came to a  conclusion
    which in our view it was unarguably entitled to come to.   Contrary  to
    that submitted in the grounds, neither the Tribunal's reasoning nor its
    conclusions are inconsistent  with  the  ratio  of  Mr  Justice  Sales'
    decision in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720.

12.  We  conclude,  for  the  reasons  given  above,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination does not contain an error on a  point  of  law
    capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal and its decision  is  to
    remain standing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  an  error  on  a
point of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal  and  it  is  to
remain standing.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 3 February 2015


