
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09136/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 January 2014                            |On 03 February 2014          |
|Approved Ex Tempore Judgment                  |                             |


                                   Before

                     The President, Mr Justice McCloskey
                        Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Rima Begum
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mr J Trussler (of Counsel), instructed directly

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Respondent, Mrs Rima Begum, who is now aged 56 years, is a  citizen
    of Bangladesh.  She entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  with
    permission on 4 August 2012.  Her permission was scheduled to expire on
    16 January 2013.

2.    Between  entry  and  expiry  of  leave,  there  were  two  significant
    intervening events.   The  first  is  that  on  16  December  2012  the
    Respondent was  married  under  Islamic  law.   The  validity  of  this
    marriage is not contested.  The second is  that  she  made  an  in-time
    application for permission to remain as the spouse of a person  present
    and settled in the United Kingdom.  That  application  was  made  on  2
    January 2013.  The  application  was  in  due  course  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State.  The decision is dated 2 March 2013 and  an  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal ensued.  The appeal proceeded exclusively on
    the ground of Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  The First-tier
    judge allowed the appeal in a determination promulgated  on  16  August
    2013.

3.   Juxtaposing the application for permission to appeal with the grant  of
    permission to appeal, the thrust of the  issue  before  this  appellate
    Tribunal is whether the First-tier judge erred in law in the Article  8
    assessment  which  was  undertaken.   The  material  passages  in   the
    determination are contained in paragraphs 20, 21 and 22.   We  consider
    that  the  judge  failed  to  formulate  the  correct  tests   and   in
    consequence, also failed to apply them. There  was,  in  particular,  a
    failure to recognise the potency of the  public  interest  underpinning
    the legitimate aim in play, namely the maintenance of firm  immigration
    control.

4.   A further and related error of  law  was  committed  by  the  judge  by
    failing to make a  clear  finding  on  a  critical  issue,  namely  the
    question of future probability - that is to say, whether, as  a  matter
    of probability, the Respondent's husband would, or would not, accompany
    her to Bangladesh.  The accompanying and non-accompanying scenarios are
    significantly different and could not have given rise in  our  judgment
    to the same Article 8 interference and proportionality assessments.  We
    consider that before determining these issues, it  was  incumbent  upon
    the judge to make a  clear  predictive  finding  about  this  important
    future event.  There was a failure to do so which, per se,  constitutes
    an error  of  law  of  unmistakable  materiality.   There  is  also  an
    inconsistency in the judge's approach inasmuch that he  hints  (without
    clearly finding) that the husband would not accompany the Respondent to
    Pakistan: this is irreconcilable with  the  unequivocal  finding  of  a
    loving, strong and  subsisting  husband  and  wife  relationship,  duly
    fortified by the happy event of the expected birth of a child.

5.   For these reasons, we conclude that the  determination  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is contaminated by material errors of law and  cannot  be
    upheld in consequence.  Our order is  that  the  determination  be  set
    aside.

6.    We  turn  to  consider  the  question  of  remaking.   Having   regard
    particularly  to  the  fluctuations  which   have   occurred   in   the
    circumstances of the family unit in question, we consider that  all  of
    the issues bearing on Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights  Convention  and
    Section 55 of the 2009 Act should properly be re-examined afresh  by  a
    differently constituted First-tier  Tribunal.   Accordingly,  we  order
    remittal.









Decision

7.    Thus  we  allow  the  appeal  to  the  extent  of  setting  aside  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal and we order a new hearing  by
    a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.  We are grateful to  the
    parties' representatives for their clear and cogent submissions.




                                                 [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                      Date:  31 January 2014



