
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09654/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th May 2015                     |On 8th  June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                phyllis gain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dinh of Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of the USA born on 5th May 1938.  The
    Appellant has a lengthy immigration history, but suffice it to say  for
    the purposes of this appeal that she arrived in the UK on  18th  August
    2012 when she was given leave to enter as a visitor.  When  that  leave
    was about to expire,  on  31st  January  2013  the  Appellant  made  an
    application  for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds.   That
    application was refused on 20th March 2013 for the reasons set  out  in
    the Respondent's letter of that date.  The Appellant appealed, and  her
    appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ferguson  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 15th July 2013.  He allowed the  appeal  for
    the reasons given in his Determination  dated  8th  August  2013.   The
    Respondent sought  leave  to  appeal  that  decision,  and  after  such
    permission was granted, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury sitting  at
    Field House on 2nd October 2013 found a material error of  law  in  the
    decision of the Judge  and  set  that  decision  aside.   Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hanbury then proceeded to re-make the decision  and  did
    so by dismissing the appeal of the Appellant against  the  Respondent's
    refusal of leave to remain.  The Appellant was granted leave to  appeal
    that decision to the Court of Appeal, and on 25th March 2015 the  Court
    of Appeal ordered inter alia that "the appeal against the  decision  of
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury of 9th January 2014 is  allowed  to
    the extent only that the case is remitted to a  different  constitution
    of the Upper Tribunal for  re-determination  on  the  merits".   It  is
    evident that the decision of the Court of Appeal recorded as PG (USA) v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 118 was that the Judge had erred in law in  coming
    to his decision and therefore that that decision should be  set  aside.
    The issue before me therefore is to re-make that decision on the merits
    of the case.

Evidence

 2. The evidence which I have considered consists of the Appellant's bundle
    submitted with her representative's letter of 10th July 2013  including
    the Appellant's statement dated 24th June 2013 and  statements  of  her
    daughter Angela Stuck and her son-in-law Corey Stuck of a similar date.
     I have also considered the evidence given to  Judge  Ferguson  at  the
    hearing on 15th July 2013 as recorded in  his  Determination  and  also
    that given to Judge Hanbury at the hearing before him  on  2nd  October
    2013 and recorded in his Determination.  Finally I have considered  the
    documents contained in the Appellant's Supplementary  Bundle  submitted
    by her representatives with their letter of 9th May 2015.

 3. The Appellant and her daughter gave evidence at the hearing  before  me
    and were cross-examined.  I have made a note of that  evidence  in  the
    Record of Proceedings and considered it in my deliberations.

Findings of Fact

 4. The credibility of the evidence is not in dispute.   I  find  that  the
    Appellant was born in New York on 5th May  1938.   She  joined  the  US
    Foreign Service (Diplomatic Corp) in  1965  and  thereafter  worked  at
    various posts abroad.  In 1969 the Appellant married another member  of
    the Diplomatic Corp, and on 26th  May  1970  the  Appellant's  daughter
    Angela Louise Stuck was born.  The family continued to live and work at
    postings abroad. However there were matrimonial difficulties, and  from
    1998 until her retirement in 2005 the Appellant worked in the  USA  and
    lived near to Washington DC.  She was divorced in 2000.  The  Appellant
    then moved to York  Town,  Virginia  to  be  nearer  to  her  daughter,
    although  subsequently  the  Appellant's  daughter  moved  to  live  in
    Richmond, Virginia.  The Appellant moved to join her there in 2010.

 5. In Richmond the Appellant lived near to her daughter and her daughter's
    family, and they saw each other regularly.   The  Appellant's  daughter
    had married, and her husband was a Christian minister  and  evangelist.
    They had three children, namely Alexa Renee Elizabeth Stuck born on 8th
    September 1994; Ryan Alexander Stuck born on 9th April 2000; and Jordan
    Ray Stuck born on 1st November 2003.

 6. In 2012 the Appellant's son-in-law was posted to a ministry in  London.
    It was intended that the whole family  including  the  Appellant  would
    move to London to live.  The Appellant applied  for  a  visa  for  that
    purpose but the application  was  refused.   Eventually  the  Appellant
    followed her family to the UK as a visitor since when the Appellant has
    lived with her daughter and her daughter's  family  at  a  property  in
    Sutton.

 7. The Appellant has become an integral part  of  her  daughter's  family.
    She contributes towards the cost of running  the  home,  and  does  the
    cooking.  She has a close relationship  with  her  grandchildren.   Her
    only relative in the USA is her brother aged 84 years.  They have never
    had a close relationship.  The Appellant wishes to remain  living  with
    her daughter and her daughter's family.

 8. The Appellant had various health problems.  In 2006 the Appellant  fell
    and fractured her left arm.  Subsequently whilst  living  in  Richmond,
    the Appellant tripped and dislocated her arm.   Her  daughter  assisted
    her greatly with her recovery.  The Appellant has type 2 diabetes,  and
    in November 2012 fell causing an injury  to  her  head  which  required
    stitches.  In June 2013 the Appellant dislocated her  right  hip.   She
    suffers from chronic iritis affecting her eyesight, and also an erratic
    heart beat known as arrhythmia.  The  Appellant  takes  medication  for
    anxiety, mood swings, blood pressure, and depression.

 9. The Appellant's son-in-law and his family came to the UK as  a  Tier  2
    (Minister of Religion) Migrant and dependents.   The  visa  expires  on
    31st August 2015.  It is their intention to seek leave to remain in the
    UK.

10. The Appellant has effective health insurance and whilst in the  UK  has
    never been any sort of burden on the State.   She  has  a  pension  and
    maintenance from her former husband.  She also  receives  a  rent  from
    properties she owns  in  the  USA.   She  could  occupy  one  of  those
    properties if needs be.

Decision and Reasons

11. It is not in dispute that the Appellant cannot  qualify  for  leave  to
    remain under the Immigration Rules which include paragraph  276ADE  and
    Appendix FM of HC 395.  However, as has been commented often during the
    long history of this appeal, in this case the Immigration Rules do  not
    amount to a complete  code,  and  therefore  I  must  consider  if  the
    original decision of  the  Respondent  amounts  to  a  disproportionate
    breach of the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.  I  will  decide  that
    issue by answering the five questions posed by the late Lord Bingham in
    R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  I must take account of  the  factors
    set out in Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002, and I must bear  in  mind  that  following  the  decision  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 the best interests of any minor children are a
    primary consideration, although not the primary  consideration,  nor  a
    paramount consideration.  The Appellant's two younger grandchildren are
    minor children.

12. The first question posed in Razgar is whether the Respondent's decision
    amounts to an interference by a public authority with the  exercise  of
    the Appellant's right to respect for her private or  family  life.   To
    answer that question, I must first decide if the Appellant has a family
    or private life in the UK.  The Appellant's family in the  UK  consists
    of her adult daughter, her son-in-law, and her three grandchildren  now
    aged 20, 15, and 11 years respectively.  Because of the age of and  the
    nature of the relationship with these people I find that the  Appellant
    does not have a family life in the UK.  The  Appellant  is  financially
    independent, and clearly on  the  evidence  capable  of  looking  after
    herself and therefore I am not satisfied that it has  been  shown  that
    there is a degree of dependency between the Appellant and her family in
    the UK in excess of the normal emotional ties.  However, I am satisfied
    that the Appellant has  a  private  life  in  the  UK  based  upon  her
    relationship with her family and the wider community built up over  the
    years since her arrival in the UK in August 2012.  It is  evident  that
    there would be  an  interference  with  that  family  life  should  the
    Appellant return to the USA.

13. The second question to be answered is whether such  interference  would
    have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as  potentially  to  engage  the
    operation of Article 8.  It was decided in AG (Eritrea) v  SSHD  [2007]
    EWCA Civ 801 and VW  (Uganda)  v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5  that  the
    threshold which has to be  crossed  to  answer  this  question  in  the
    affirmative is not high.  Indeed,  little  more  than  a  technical  or
    inconsequential interference is necessary.  I therefore find  that  the
    interference is of sufficient gravity to engage the Appellant's Article
    8 rights.

14. The answers to the third and fourth questions are not  in  dispute.   I
    find the  Respondent  has  shown  that  the  interference  will  be  in
    accordance with the law, and  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  to
    maintain immigration control which is required for the  economic  well-
    being of the country.

15. The answer to the fifth question is  the  nub  of  this  appeal.   That
    question is whether the interference is proportionate to the legitimate
    public end sought to be achieved by the  Respondent's  decision.   This
    consideration requires a balancing exercise between the public interest
    and the circumstances of the Appellant.

16. I find that the public interest attracts considerable weight.  The fact
    of the matter is that the Appellant cannot qualify for leave to  remain
    under the Immigration Rules.  As noted at paragraph 28 of  PG  (USA)  v
    SSHD, the policy of the government is that "migrant workers should  not
    be able to bring a wide group of relatives or dependants to the  UK  to
    live for an extended period or to settle in this country".

17. The Appellant falls within this category.  The  Appellant  herself  was
    granted leave to enter the  UK  only  as  a  visitor  and  should  have
    departed by 7th February 2013.

18. Turning to the remaining considerations set out in Section 117B of  the
    2002 Act, it is of course the case that the Appellant can speak English
    and that she is not a financial burden on the State.  However,  a  part
    of the Appellant's private life has been developed after her  leave  to
    enter the UK had expired, and therefore when her immigration status was
    precarious.

19. I find that less weight is to be attached to the personal circumstances
    of the Appellant.  I accept that the Appellant has a close relationship
    with her daughter and  her  daughter's  family.   She  lived  in  close
    proximity to them in Richmond, USA from 2010, and it was the  intention
    that she should come to the UK with her  daughter  and  her  daughter's
    family when that family emigrated in connection with the employment  of
    the Appellant's son-in-law.  The Appellant has lived in  the  household
    of her daughter since her arrival in the UK in August 2012.  Since then
    the Appellant has played a full  part  in  the  life  of  that  family,
    assisting, for example, with the cooking.  Further, since  her  arrival
    in the UK the Appellant has formed part of the congregation of her son-
    in-law's  church  and  she  has  many  friends  there.   However,   the
    Appellant's daughter and her family only have limited leave  to  remain
    in the UK until August 2015.  The  evidence  is  that  they  will  seek
    further leave to remain, but at the time of writing their time  in  the
    UK will extend for less than another three months.  If they  do  return
    to the USA, the Appellant can re-establish her private life  with  them
    there.  In the meantime, the Appellant can keep  in  contact  with  her
    daughter and her daughter's family  by  modern  methods  of  electronic
    communication, and if their  separation  extends  beyond  August  2015,
    there can be reciprocal visits.  I understand that it will be difficult
    for the Appellant and her daughter's family to separate at  this  stage
    and that they prefer the daily close contact which they have enjoyed in
    the UK, but there will be no hardship in the Appellant returning to the
    USA where she has property interests and will therefore  have  a  home,
    and also the finance to support herself.  The Appellant appears  to  be
    somewhat accident prone, and does have medical conditions for which she
    receives treatment, but there is no medical evidence to  indicate  that
    she would be unable to look after herself if she resumed living in  the
    USA.

20. The Appellant has enjoyed a close relationship with her  grandchildren,
    particularly those who are still minors, and those  grandchildren  will
    of course miss the Appellant if  she  returns  to  the  USA.   However,
    otherwise there is no evidence  before  me  that  there  would  be  any
    detriment to their best interests if the Appellant is  unsuccessful  in
    this appeal.

21. I therefore find that the public interest carries the  greatest  weight
    and that the decision of the Respondent is not disproportionate.   This
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has already been set aside.   I  re-
make that decision by dismissing the appeal.

Anonymity

There has been no previous anonymity direction and I find no reason to  make
one.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

