
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA097722015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 15 June 2016                          |On 16 June 2016           |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between

                              Mrs SOMIRUN NESSA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Aly, Counsel
      (Instructed by M-R Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS









      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Nicholson on 2 May 2016 against the determination
           of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wylie  who  had  dismissed  the
           Appellant's appeal seeking settlement on Article 8 ECHR  grounds
           as the spouse of British Citizen.  The decision and reasons  was
           promulgated on 3 November 2015.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  She had entered  the
           United Kingdom as a visitor on 6 July 2014 and  on  25  November
           2014 had sought further leave to remain.  She is the second wife
           of her sponsor.  She had lived separately from him for  most  of
           their married life.  She had not  been  eligible  to  apply  for
           entry clearance as a spouse to the United  Kingdom  because  her
           marriage was polygamous, however the sponsor's  first  wife  had
           died in 2012.  The Appellant now wished to live with the sponsor
           and to care for him, as he  was  now  elderly  and  frail.   Her
           children by her marriage to  the  sponsor  live  in  the  United
           Kingdom.  The judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had  shown  no
           private life, having been in the United Kingdom only four months
           as at the date of her application.  The Appellant was unable  to
           satisfy the Immigration Rules.  The judge found that  there  was
           no interference caused by the refusal decision,  because  family
           life between all relevant  persons  could  continue  as  it  had
           always done.  Alternatively the Appellant and the sponsor  could
           live together in  Bangladesh,  where  he  could  access  medical
           attention as he might require.  In any event the Appellant could
           seek entry clearance from Bangladesh in accordance with Appendix
           FM of the Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of State's  decision
           was proportionate.  Hence the appeal was dismissed.


      3.     Permission  to  appeal  was  granted   (with   little   obvious
           enthusiasm) because it was considered arguable  that  the  judge
           had erred in describing the burden of proof for Article  8  ECHR
           purposes.  It was recognised in the grant  that  the  point  was
           possibly academic because the judge had  examined  the  material
           alternatives.


      4.    Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
           notice opposing the appeal was filed by the Respondent.








      Submissions


      5.    Ms Ahmed for the Appellant relied  on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and grant.  In summary she  argued  that  the  judge  had
           erred in her proportionality assessment.  Razgar [2004] UKHL  27
           had not been followed by the judge.  The  burden  had  been  not
           been on the Appellant to show that it was unreasonable  for  her
           family life to be conducted in Bangladesh,  but  rather  on  the
           Secretary of State.  The judge had placed the bar too high,


      6.    Mr Norton for  the  Respondent,  having  noted  the  interchange
           between the tribunal and Ms Ahmed during submissions, wished  to
           rely on the rule 24 notice and wished to add nothing further.




      No material error of law finding


      7.    In the tribunal's view the grant of  permission  to  appeal  was
           generous, as indeed the terms of the grant indicated.  The grant
           identified two apparently conflicting lines of authority on  the
           burden of proof in Article 8 ECHR cases,  AS  (Pakistan)  [2008]
           EWCA Civ 1118 and PG (United States of America) [2015] EWCA  Civ
           118.  Sensibly Ms Ahmed did not seek to invite the  tribunal  to
           make any ruling on the question, which will await  consideration
           by the Court of Appeal in an appropriate appeal.  There  was  no
           skeleton argument and no relevant authorities were provided  for
           the tribunal to consider this interesting  question.  Ultimately
           in the present appeal it was an evaluative exercise rather  than
           one based on notions of burden of proof.   The  legal  framework
           set out by the judge at [29]  to  [30]  cannot  be  said  to  be
           positively mistaken.


      8.    This was plainly the right course for  counsel  to  have  taken,
           because in reality the judge had considered  the  facts  of  the
           appeal in the round, finding with sustainable reasons  that  the
           Secretary of State's decision caused no  interference  with  the
           Appellant's  chosen  form  of  family  life:  see  [59]  of  the
           decision.  It was obvious that the sponsor and the Appellant had
           married in Bangladesh in the knowledge that  she  would  not  be
           able to live in the United Kingdom during the  currency  of  the
           first marriage.  Nevertheless the Appellant and the sponsor  had
           a family together in Bangladesh.  It would, of course, have been
           possible for the Appellant's sponsor and his first wife to  have
           lived in Bangladesh, which was their mutual country  of  origin,
           and where polygamy is recognised, but not extensively practised.
            Later the Appellant's children chose  to  live  in  the  United
           Kingdom. It was open  for  the  Appellant  to  apply  for  entry
           clearance under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  from  2012
           onwards.


      9.    The judge also considered the alternative  position  (see  [63])
           recognising that the threshold for  interference  in  Article  8
           ECHR  terms  is  low.   The  judge  gave  careful  and  thorough
           consideration to the facts on that alternative basis.  She  gave
           full and sustainable reasons for her  proportionality  findings,
           adverse to the Appellant.


      10.   The judge no doubt had in mind Lord Carnwath's statement at [57]
           of Patel [2013] UKSC 72:  "It  is  important  to  remember  that
           article 8 is not a general dispensing  power."  The  grounds  of
           appeal are no more than an expression  of  disagreement  with  a
           properly reasoned decision.


      11.   The tribunal finds that there was no material error of law.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.

      Signed                                  Dated 16th June 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




