
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number:     IA/09336/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                |Determination Promulgated   |
|On: 17th September 2013              |On: 28th October 2013       |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                      Elizabeth Olubunmi Adeolu Bolade
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellants:    Mr Chimpango, Crown & Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria date of birth 4th June  1982.
       She has permission to appeal against the decision of the  First-tier
       Tribunal  (Judge  McGavin)  to  dismiss  her  appeal   against   the
       Respondent's decisions to refuse to vary her leave to remain in  the
       UK and to remove her from the UK  pursuant  to  section  47  of  the
       Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006[1].  Those  decisions
       followed from the refusal to grant the Appellant  further  leave  to
       remain as the dependent partner of a Tier 1 (General) Migrant.




       Error of Law


    2. It is agreed between  the  parties  that  the  Appellant  could  not
       succeed under the Rules if the application fell to be refused  under
       one of the general grounds for refusal. The Respondent  had  refused
       the application with reference to paragraph 322(1C)  which  provides
       that a person applying  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  must  be
       refused if, within 24 months of the date of application,  they  were
       convicted of or admitted an offence with the result that they have a
       criminal record.   The Appellant had  admitted  on  her  application
       form that she had been convicted by way of caution of the offence of
       battery, the caution being administered  on  the  24th  April  2011.
       Since the application was made on the 6th February  2013  this  fell
       within the 24 months period and the Respondent therefore refused the
       application.


    3. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal rejected the  following  arguments
       put forward by the Appellant's representative. Firstly it  was  said
       on her  behalf  that  under  the  terms  of  the  Rehabilitation  of
       Offenders Act 1974 the caution is spent  as  soon  as  the  offender
       leaves the police station.  Judge McGavin referred to s56A of the UK
       Borders Act  2007  (inserted  by  section  140  of  the  Legal  Aid,
       Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act  2012)  which  stipulates
       that  the  rehabilitation  provisions  of  the   Rehabilitation   of
       Offenders Act do not apply in relation to  any  proceedings  brought
       under the Immigration Acts.   The caution  could  not  therefore  be
       regarded as spent. The grounds of appeal challenged this finding but
       before me Mr Chimpango did not seek to  pursue  it,  accepting  that
       Judge McGavin's interpretation of the statute was correct since  the
       relevant section came into operation in October 2012.

    4. Secondly the Appellant's representative  had  argued  that  "it  was
       contrary to natural justice" for Parliament to enact a law which had
       adverse immigration consequences for the Appellant as  a  result  of
       her caution, whereas at the time that the caution was  received,  no
       such adverse consequences existed.  Mr  Chimpango  wisely  distanced
       himself from this submission. There is no breach of natural  justice
       in parliament passing such legislation. That applicants are  refused
       because of past criminal  offending  is  the  express  intention  of
       parliament and this would necessarily involve  some  applicants  who
       had committed  their  offences  before  the  legislation  came  into
       effect.

    5. The only argument put to the First-tier Tribunal that  Mr  Chimpango
       did rely on was this. It is  submitted  that  the  24  month  period
       should run backwards from the date of  decision,  not  the  date  of
       application.   Unfortunately for the Appellant the terms of the rule
       are  clear.  There  is  no  ambiguity  in  paragraph  322  (1C).  An
       application is to be refused:

         (1C) where the person is seeking indefinite leave to enter or
         remain:

         ...


         (iv) they have, within the 24 months  preceding  the  date  of  the
         application, been convicted of or admitted  an  offence  for  which
         they have received a non-custodial sentence or other out  of  court
         disposal that is recorded on their criminal record.

    6. The Judge cannot be said to be in error for applying the wording  of
       the Rule.


    7. Mr Harrison for the Respondent accepted that the determination  does
       contain an error in law in respect of s47. Following the decision of
       the Tribunal in Adamally and Jaferi (section 47  removal  decisions:
       Tribunal Procedures) [2012] UKUT  00414  (IAC)  the  appeal  against
       removal should have been allowed as not in accordance with the  law.
       Mr Chimpango indicated that the Appellant's  husband  has  now  been
       granted indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  and  it  was  the
       Appellant's  intention  to  make  fresh   representations   to   the
       Respondent to be permitted to remain with her husband. No doubt  the
       Respondent would  wish  to  consider  those  representations  whilst
       reviewing the decision to remove.


         Decisions


    8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in respect of the refusal to
       vary leave to remain contains no errors and is upheld.


    9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in  respect  of  the  appeal
       against removal contains an error and is set aside. The decision  is
       re-made as follows:

       "the appeal is allowed as the decision is not in accordance with the
       law".




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           22nd October 2013
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Immigration decisions dated the 16th March 2013

