

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number: IA/09685/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Promulgated:                             |
|On 19 January 2015                |On 22 January 2015                       |
|                                  |                                         |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                    Ms Esperanza Ibe Francis (nee Rivas)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          Determination and Reasons

Details of appellant and basis of claim

 1.   This appeal comes before me following  the  grant  of  permission  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne on 9 December 2014 in respect of  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan  who  dismissed  this
    article 8 by way of a determination promulgated on 27 October 2014.

 2.   The appellant is a Filipino  national  born  on  19  May  1961.   She
    arrived in the UK  as  a  visitor  in  July  2005  and  overstayed.  No
    application to regularise her stay was made until October 2011 when she
    sought to remain as the unmarried partner of a  British  citizen.  That
    application was refused without a right  of  appeal  in  December  2011
    under paragraph 295D. The appellant did not depart and so on 13 January
    2014 directions were given for her removal. She  lodged  an  appeal  on
    human right grounds and argued that her partner  (whom  she  had  since
    married) could not be expected to relocate to the Philippines.

 3.   The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Morgan  at  Taylor
    House  on  15  October  2014.  It  was  conceded  by  the   appellant's
    representative at the hearing that the appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the rules and that only article 8 was  relied  on.  The
    Presenting  Officer  concurred  with  this  approach.  The  judge  then
    undertook an article 8 assessment and dismissed the appeal.  Permission
    to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge had arguably used the
    wrong test when assessing proportionality.

Appeal hearing

 4.   Mr Sowerby made several arguments.  He  submitted  that  although  it
    could be seen from the refusal letter that  the  application  had  been
    decided under paragraph 295D, the old  rules,  the  judge  had  wrongly
    referred to the new rules in  paragraph  3  of  his  determination.  He
    further argued that since the making of the application  the  appellant
    and her partner  had  married  and  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    considered that development. He maintained that as the appellant was an
    overstayer, she was not prohibited from switching categories  and  that
    the judge was wrong to find otherwise; under E-LTRP.2.2  which  invoked
    EX.1, it was possible for her to do so. Finally, he argued that the new
    rules were not a complete code and that when assessing family life, the
    judge had applied the test of insurmountable obstacles rather than  the
    test of reasonableness as he was required to do.  He pointed  out  that
    since the judge appeared to have accepted that the appellant  would  be
    able to satisfy the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  if  she
    applied for entry clearance, she should not be expected  to  leave  the
    country simply  to  comply  with  the  formalities  of  making  a  visa
    application. He argued that  the  matter  should  be  remitted  to  the
    Secretary of State so that the marriage could  be  considered.  Failing
    that, there should be a rehearing.

 5.   Mr Melvin submitted that the decision had been  made  under  the  old
    rules but that the appellant  had  no  right  of  appeal  against  that
    decision as she had been without lawful leave when her application  was
    made. Once a decision to remove her was made, she had the right to rely
    only on her human rights. In any event, it was conceded at the  hearing
    that the rules could not be met and the judge could not  be  criticised
    for proceeding on that basis. The judge had  considered  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27 and Huang [2005] EWCA Civ 105 and found that removal would  not
    be disproportionate. The appellant had overstayed for  some  six  years
    and her relationship had been established at a time when her  stay  was
    precarious. A  review  by  another  Tribunal  would  not  result  in  a
    different outcome and so there was no material error of law.

 6.   Mr Sowerby responded. He argued that the terms of the concession were
    unclear. Moreover, the case law did not support the argument  that  the
    appellant should leave the UK in  order  to  make  an  entry  clearance
    application.  The  credibility  findings  were  unclear  and  the  full
    circumstances were not set out in the determination. The reasonableness
    test of Huang should have been used.

 7.   That completed the submissions. At the conclusion of  the  hearing  I
    reserved my determination which I now give.

Findings and conclusions

 8.   I make the following findings based on the submissions  made  by  the
    parties and the evidence before me.

 9.   First, the appellant's application was made at a time  when  she  had
    been an overstayer for a number of years. She therefore had no right of
    appeal against the refusal of that application and cannot rely  on  the
    submission that the appeal should have been determined  under  the  old
    rules pertaining to unmarried partners (paragraph 295D of HC395).

10.   Second, in any event, as conceded by Mr Sowerby, the appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 295D (i) and  (iv)  as  she  was
    without lawful leave when her application was made.

11.   Third, the application was  for  leave  to  remain  as  an  unmarried
    partner and not as a  spouse  and  the  Secretary  of  State  correctly
    limited herself to consideration of that application when  she  reached
    her decision under the Immigration Rules as applicable at that time. It
    may be seen, however, that she also considered article 8 in a  separate
    letter of the same date (6 December  2011)  and  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect family life to continue in the Philippines.

12.   Fourth, once directions were given for her removal, the appellant had
    a right of appeal but only on human rights grounds. Her  appeal  rights
    under the rules could have been exercised out of country. There  is  no
    entitlement to argue the provisions of paragraph 281 as no  application
    for leave to remain as a spouse had ever been made.

13.   Fifth, her marriage was a factor she was entitled to rely on as  part
    of that appeal but only in the context of her private and family life.

14.   Sixth, as the appeal was heard after Part 5A of  section  19  of  the
    2014 Act had come into force, the judge was obliged to consider article
    8 in terms of the rules and also obliged to consider section  117  when
    assessing the evidence.

15.   Seventh, the judge was required to consider article 8 in terms of the
    post 9 July rules; i.e. within Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE. It  is
    now  well  established  that  if  the  appellant  did  not  meet  those
    requirements then, as the rules were not a  complete  code,  the  judge
    could examine whether there was an arguably good case for consideration
    of article 8 outside the rules.

16.   As submissions were made with regard to 295D,  E-LTRP.2.2,  EX.1  and
    117B, It is helpful to set out the exact terms of these provisions.

17.   Paragraph 295D states:

         The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to  remain  as
         the unmarried or same-sex partner of a person present  and  settled
         in the United Kingdom are that:
             (i) the applicant has or was last  granted  limited  leave  to
             enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  which  was  given  in
             accordance with any of the provisions of these Rules, unless:
                  (a) as a result of that leave he would not  have  been  in
                  the United Kingdom beyond 6 months from the date on  which
                  he was admitted to the United Kingdom;
             ...
             (iv)  the  applicant  has  not  remained  in  breach  of   the
             immigration laws, disregarding any period of overstaying for a
             period of 28 days or less; and.......
             (vi) the parties have been living together in  a  relationship
             akin to marriage or civil partnership which has subsisted  for
             two years or more; and
             ...
             (viii) there will be adequate accommodation  for  the  parties
             and  any  dependants  without  recourse  to  public  funds  in
             accommodation which they own or occupy exclusively; and
             (ix) the parties will be able to maintain themselves  and  any
             dependants adequately without recourse to public funds; and
             (x) the parties intend to live together permanently; and
             (xi)(a) the applicant provides an  original  English  language
             test certificate in speaking and  listening  from  an  English
             language test provider approved by the Secretary of State  for
             these purposes, which clearly shows the applicant's  name  and
             the qualification obtained (which must meet or exceed level A1
             of the Common European Framework of Reference)....


18.   E-LTRP.2.2. provides the following:

             The applicant must not be in the UK -
                  (a) on temporary admission or  temporary  release,  unless
                  paragraph EX.1. applies; or
                  (b) in breach of immigration laws (disregarding any period
                  of overstaying for a period of 28 days  or  less),  unless
                  paragraph EX.1. applies.


    EX.1. states:
             This paragraph applies if
                  ...
                  (b)  the  applicant   has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
                  relationship with a partner who is in  the  UK  and  is  a
                  British Citizen, settled in the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with
                  refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and  there  are
                  insurmountable obstacles to family life with that  partner
                  continuing outside the UK.


             EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
             obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would
             be faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their
             family life together outside the UK and  which  could  not  be
             overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious  hardship  for  the
             applicant or their partner.


19.   117B sets out the public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
    article 8 cases. These are said to be:

             (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
                  the public interest.


             (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
                  interests of the economic well-being of the United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons
                  who can speak English-

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
                  interests of the economic well-being of the United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                  United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
                  persons-

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4) Little weight should be given to-

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                      is established by a person at a time when the person
                      is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5) Little weight should be given to a private life
                  established by a person at a time when the person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

             ....



20.   The meaning of insurmountable obstacles is addressed in the  case  of
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640
    (IAC) where Mr Justice Cranston,  sitting  as  a  Judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, said:

             "The term 'insurmountable obstacles'  in  provisions  such  as
             Section EX1 are not obstacles which are impossible to surmount
             (MF (Nigeria)). They concern the  practical  possibilities  of
             relocation. In the absence of such  insurmountable  obstacles,
             if removal is to be disproportionate it is necessary  to  show
             other non-standard and particular features demonstrating  that
             removal will be unjustifiably harsh by any test."


21.   I now turn to the determination of Judge Morgan. It has  to  be  said
    that this could have been better prepared.  However,  I  must  consider
    whether the criticisms made of the determination are such that  I  must
    set it aside.

22.    Plainly  there  is  some  difficulty  with  paragraph   3   of   the
    determination. The refusal  letters  do  not  address  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE, not surprisingly as they were prepared  before  these
    provisions came into force. The judge therefore errs in setting out the
    respondent's reasons for refusal.

23.   There is also some difficulty with paragraphs  4  and  15  where  the
    judge refers to the agreement  between  the  representatives  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of the rules. I return to  this
    point below (at paragraph 25).

24.   There was no appeal before the judge under paragraph 295D and even if
    I am mistaken about that,  it  is  accepted  by  Mr  Sowerby  that  the
    appellant cannot meet those requirements. The fact that she married her
    partner subsequent to her application does not assist as no application
    for variation of the unmarried partner application was  made  prior  to
    the respondent's decision. Further, as she was  without  lawful  leave,
    any such application could not  have  succeeded.  It  was,  however,  a
    matter which could properly be relied on  as  part  of  the  article  8
    claim.

25.   The judge was, as I have noted above, tasked  with  consideration  of
    the appellant's article 8 grounds. These are set out in her  notice  of
    appeal albeit in brief terms and without any reference to her marriage.
    The judge was obliged to consider the appellant's  family/private  life
    under the terms of Appendix FM and 276ADE notwithstanding the date  the
    application was made. It may be that his reference to  the  'rules'  in
    paragraphs 4 is in this context.

26.   Mr Sowerby argued that the appellant could meet the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM because EX.1 applied to her however this submission totally
    disregards  the  judgment  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker  in  Sabir
    (Appendix FM - EX.1 not free standing) [2014] UKUT 00063  (IAC).  Judge
    Coker found that EX.1 was  parasitic  upon  the  relevant  rule  within
    Appendix FM that otherwise grants leave to remain and that  if  it  had
    been intended to  be  a  free-  standing  element,  some  mechanism  of
    identification would have been used. It may be seen from Judge Morgan's
    determination that no assessment of the other requirements of Section R-
    LTRP was undertaken and indeed there was no submission made to  him  by
    the appellant's representative that those requirements could be met.

27.   What was left for the judge to consider was whether  the  appellant's
    circumstances including those of her spouse, were such as to amount  to
    arguably good grounds for a grant of leave outside the rules on article
    8 grounds. This meant that the appellant had to show some non  standard
    grounds which were not covered by the factors normally considered under
    article 8 within the rules.  The  grounds  pleaded  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant are summarised by the judge at paragraph 14. These  are  that
    the relationship commenced in 2008, that the appellant's  70  year  old
    partner is British, that the couple married  in  January  2013  a  year
    after the appellant divorced her previous  husband,  that  her  current
    spouse is self employed and feared he would not  obtain  employment  in
    the Philippines.  In the spouse's witness statement there is  reference
    to children and grandchildren he has in the UK.  The appellant  herself
    has children in the Philippines. The judge also took into  account  the
    oral evidence of the appellant  and  her  spouse  and  the  documentary
    evidence provided in support of the appeal  (paragraph  13).  He  noted
    that the factual circumstances were not challenged  by  the  respondent
    and indeed broadly accepted the factual evidence as  presented  (ibid).
    His conclusion which is based on that evidence was that those facts did
    not give rise to arguably good grounds for consideration of  article  8
    outside the rules and that even if they had, they  did  not  justify  a
    finding  that  the  refusal  of  further  leave  was   disproportionate
    (paragraph 15). In reaching that conclusion he sets  out  the  step  by
    step approach of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, cites from Huang [2007] UKHL 11
    and notes the principles  of  Beoku-Betts  [2008]  UKHL  39,  Chikwamba
    [2008] UKHL 40, MA (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 953  and  Shahzad  [2014]
    00085 (paragraphs 9-12).

28.    The  judge  then  considers  the  terms  of  section  117B.    Under
    subsections (4) and (5) he is  obliged  to  give  little  weight  to  a
    relationship formed at a time when an applicant is in the UK unlawfully
    or has a precarious status. Notwithstanding other positive findings, he
    properly finds that the appellant was in such a position (at  paragraph
    16).

29.   The  judge  then  proceeds  to  make  observations  on  the  skeleton
    argument. His reference to  the  insurmountable  obstacle  test  raised
    therein is particularly criticised; however, he properly describes that
    phrase as meaning that the appellant and her partner should  face  very
    significant difficulties in continuing their family life outside the UK
    or that they would face very serious hardship in doing so. This  is  in
    accordance with the approach taken in Gulshan.

30.   The final criticism of the determination is  that  the  judge  having
    found that "the appellant is able to satisfy the Immigration  Rules  in
    respect of entry clearance" (paragraph 17), erred in not following  the
    Chikwamba approach. It is argued that no purpose  would  be  served  in
    requiring the appellant to return to the Philippines simply in order to
    make a visa application. I would state, first of all, that there is  no
    clarification of the factors the  judge  considered  when  making  this
    finding. It is wholly unreasoned and unsupported by  any  reference  to
    the evidence. There is no reference to which  rule  the  judge  had  in
    mind, to the provisions the appellant had to meet or  to  any  evidence
    which showed that the requirements were met. For this reason  I  cannot
    attach any weight to Mr Sowerby's submission or indeed to  the  judge's
    finding. The second point to make is  that  Chikwamba  was  an  unusual
    case. Subsequent cases  confirm  this  point.  There  are  no  children
    involved here and the appellant is  a  long  term  overstayer  who  has
    worked here without authority and abused the laws of the  UK.  Further,
    the law has moved on since the days of Chikwamba. We are now made aware
    of the view Parliament takes  towards  relationships  formed  during  a
    period of unlawful stay. It is difficult to see why a blind eye  should
    be turned to a long period of overstaying and a blatant  disregard  for
    the immigration rules of this  country.  The  appellant's  history  and
    conduct cannot just be overlooked because of her relationship. She  can
    legitimately and reasonably be expected to return  to  the  Philippines
    where she has  close  family  in  order  to  make  an  entry  clearance
    application. Her spouse, who has indicated  in  his  witness  statement
    that he would be prepared to accompany her, has the choice of so  doing
    or of supporting her application from the UK.

31.   I therefore conclude that the judge reached sustainable findings  and
    conclusions on article 8 within the rules and that he was  entitled  to
    find that there were no compelling circumstances  which  would  warrant
    consideration outside the rules. The criticisms of his determination do
    not justify it being set aside although I readily agree that  it  lacks
    clarity in certain areas as I have set out above. However  despite  its
    shortcomings,  the  outcome  is  the  only  possible  one  in  all  the
    circumstances. I concur with Mr Melvin's view that a review by  another
    Tribunal would not result in a different decision.

Decision

32.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make an error of law. I  uphold
    his decision to dismiss the appeal.






    Signed:


    Dr R Keki?
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal
    20 January 2015
