
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: IA/09739/2008


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Decision promulgated on      |
|On 12 April 2016                              |On 15 July 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President and
                  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     YM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


                                  ANONYMITY

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) I make an Anonymity Order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original Appellant.   This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

Representation

Appellant:    Ms L Busch QC, instructed by Government Legal Department

Respondent:    Mr  P  Lewis,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Fisher  Meredith
             Solicitors

                                  DECISION

Preliminary

 1. This appeal having been heard on 12 April 2016, we deferred  finalising
    our  decision  in  order  to  give  the  parties'  representatives   an
    opportunity  to  provide  further  submissions  in   respect   of   the
    intervening decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  MM  (Uganda)  -  v  -
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 450.

Introduction


2.   This case is known to many as YM (Uganda) - v - Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department  (reported  at  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1292).   By  its
    decision promulgated on 10 October 2014, the Court  of  Appeal  allowed
    the appeal of YM (the respondent in these proceedings) and,  exercising
    its  powers  under  section  14(2)  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcements Act 2007, set aside the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    which had allowed the appeal of the Secretary of State  (the  appellant
    in these proceedings) and remitted the appeal to this Tribunal for  the
    purpose of remaking the decision.  Aikens LJ, delivering  the  judgment
    of the appellate  court  in  which  the  other  two  Judges  concurred,
    formulated the framework of the further exercise now to be conducted by
    this Tribunal at [63]:

         ".... I would allow the appeal on the Article 8 ground, but dismiss
         it on the Article 3 ground.  The  matter  must  be  remitted  to  a
         differently constituted UT, in order to reconsider  the  Article  8
         issues.  The UT will have to re-find the necessary facts and  apply
         them to the new statutory provisions and the 2014 Rules."

    His Lordship was referring to Part 5A of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act") , together with the  new  versions
    of paragraphs 362, 397, 398, 399 and  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    operative from 10 July 2014.   The  contours  of  the  exercise  to  be
    performed  by  this  Tribunal  at  this  juncture  have  been  designed
    accordingly.

History

3.   The history of this appeal is a rather protracted one,  regrettably  so
    and is summarised thus:

     a) YM  is a national of Uganda, now aged 31 years.


     b) By a decision made on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  dated  09
        October 1993, the application of YM,  then  aged  nine  years,  for
        asylum was refused.  He was, however, granted exceptional leave  to
        remain in the United Kingdom until 09 October  1994.   This  period
        was extended subsequently.

     c) On 13 March 2001 the Secretary of State granted YM indefinite leave
        to remain in the United Kingdom.

     d) By letter dated 11 November 2004, YM received  an  admonition  from
        the Home Office to the effect that consideration having been  given
        to his recent conviction on indictment for the offence of burglary,
        while it had been determined not  to  deport  him,  this  would  be
        reconsidered "....   if you should come to adverse  notice  in  the
        future ...."

     e) By this stage YM's criminal record consisted of an earlier  offence
        of robbery (when aged 14), assault occasioning actual  bodily  harm
        (when aged 15) and assaulting three police  constables  (when  aged
        18).  For the above mentioned further offence  of  robbery  YM  was
        sentenced  to  detention  of  3  �  years  in  a  Young   Offenders
        Institution.  He was released on 18 March 2005.

     f)  Following  his  release,  having  converted  to  Islam  while   in
        detention, YM married and he and his spouse  now  have  three  sons
        aged 10, 6 and 4 years respectively.

     g) On 26 February 2008 YM was convicted of attending at a  camp  where
        terrorist training was taking place, contrary to section 8  of  the
        Terrorism Act 2006, on his plea of  guilty  and  was  sentenced  to
        imprisonment for 3 � years.

     h) YM was released on licence in June 2008.  Meantime, on 22 May 2008,
        a decision had been made on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  to
        make a deportation  order  against  him,  based  on  his  terrorist
        conviction  and  invoking  the  "conducive  to  the  public   good"
        provisions of the Immigration Act 1971 (as amended)  and  paragraph
        364 of the Immigration Rules.

     i) YM appealed.  By its decision promulgated  on  01  July  2009,  the
        Asylum and Immigration Tribunal allowed his appeal under Article  8
        ECHR and paragraph 364 of the Rules.

     j) On 27 November 2009, YM received a further warning, precipitated by
        his contact with a  co-accused  in  contravention  of  one  of  the
        conditions of his release on licence.

     k) In December 2009 YM was recalled  to  prison  on  the  basis  of  a
        suspicion of having committed the offence of  stolen  goods,  which
        did not result in any prosecution and he was subsequently  released
        on licence in January 2010.

     l) On 05 October 2011 YM was formally cautioned arising out of  a  so-
        called "road rage" incident.

     m) On 23 July 2012, having pleaded guilty, YM was convicted  of  fraud
        in connection  with  an  application  for  motor  insurance,  being
        sentenced to a 12 month community supervision order and  a  driving
        disqualification of 12 months duration.

     n) The caution and conviction noted in (l) and (m) above  occurred  in
        circumstances where the Upper Tribunal had set aside  the  decision
        of the AIT and the remaking decision was outstanding.

     o) On 23 October 2013 YM was sentenced to a conditional  discharge  of
        two years for an offence of criminal damage.

     p) On 09 May 2013, the Upper Tribunal allowed the Secretary of State's
        appeal.

     q) On 19 June 2014 the hearing in the  Court  of  Appeal  took  place,
        followed by the promulgation of its decision on 10 October 2014.

     r) Between the two aforementioned dates, on 13 August 2014 YM  pleaded
        guilty to making a false statement to obtain  motor  insurance  and
        breach of  a  conditional  discharge,  giving  rise  to  a  further
        community order.

     s) In the wake of the  Court  of  Appeal's  remittal  order  and  this
        Tribunal's ensuing case management directions dated 03 August 2015,
        further written evidence was adduced on behalf of  YM  and  further
        representations, including a  letter  dated  21  March  2016,  were
        provided on behalf of the Secretary of State.

4.   The flesh to the headlines in [3] above can be found in [1]  -  [7]  of
    the decision of the Court of Appeal, which we gratefully adopt:

         "[1] YM was born in Uganda on 24 June 1984.  He came to the UK with
             his mother and siblings in 1991 when  he  was  aged  six.   He
             obtained indefinite leave to remain in the UK in 2001 when  he
             was  16.   His  mother  and  siblings  have  obtained  British
             nationality, but YM has not.  That is because  he  started  to
             commit crimes when he was 14, his age when he was convicted of
             robbery.  He was subsequently convicted of assault occasioning
             actual bodily harm when  he  was  15,  of  three  assaults  on
             constables, committed  when  he  was  18,  and  of  aggravated
             burglary when he  was  19.   For  this  last  offence  he  was
             sentenced in Croydon Crown Court on  5  September  2003  to  3
             years 6 months in a Youth Offender Institution ('YOI').  On 11
             November 2004 YM was warned in a letter from the Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department ('SSHD') that a serious view was
             taken of the aggravated burglary offence and that  YM  was  at
             risk of being deported if he should 'come to adverse notice in
             the future'".


         [2]   Whilst in  detention  in  the  YOI,  YM  began  seriously  to
             practice Islam, the religion to which he was born.  On the day
             of his release,  18  March  2005,  YM  married  J,  a  British
             citizen, in an Islamic marriage ceremony.  They have  remained
             married and have had 3 children, who were born,  respectively,
             in December 2005 (IS), October 2009 (AQ) and 25 December  2011
             (IL).  J, who converted to Islam  before  marrying  YM,  is  a
             trained midwife who works part-time.


         [3]  After YM's release on licence in 2005 he used  to  attend  the
             Croydon Mosque and that led him to go to meetings at the house
             of a man called Hamid, whom YM  subsequently  admitted  was  a
             fanatical Islamist.  These encounters resulted in YM attending
             two terrorist training camps in the New Forest  in  2006.   He
             was arrested in September 2006 and charged on  two  counts  of
             offences under section 8(2)(a)  of  the  Terrorism  Act  2006.
             Broadly speaking this sub-section  makes  it  an  offence  for
             anyone to attend a place, in the UK or elsewhere, where he has
             instruction or training in (for short) activities that can  be
             used for terrorist purposes or in the use  of  weapons,  where
             instruction or training  is  wholly  or  partly  for  purposes
             connected with terrorism.  Under section 8(2)(a) it has to  be
             proved that the offender knew or believed that instruction  or
             training is being provided at the particular place 'wholly  or
             partly  for  purposes  connected  with   the   commission   or
             preparation of acts or terrorism or Convention offences'.   YM
             pleaded guilty to the two counts and on 26 February  2008,  in
             the Crown Court at Woolwich, Pitchers  J  sentenced  YM  to  3
             years 5 months imprisonment on each count,  the  sentences  to
             run concurrently.  Because YM had been in  custody  since  his
             arrest, he was actually released on licence in June 2008.


         [4]  Meanwhile on 22 May 2008 YM  was  served  with  a  deportation
             notice by the SSHD which stated  that,  as  a  result  of  his
             convictions and sentences for the terrorist offences, the SSHD
             deemed it to be  conducive  to  the  public  good  to  make  a
             deportation order against him pursuant to sections 3(5)(a) and
             5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 as amended.  A  letter  dated
             23 June 2008 set out the SSHD's reasons.  It stated  that  'it
             was not accepted' that the decision to deport would give  rise
             to any interference with the family  life  of  YM  within  the
             terms of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights
             (ECHR), or, if there was any such interference, it  'could  be
             justified in the circumstances' of his case.


         [5]  YM appealed the deportation decision and on 1  July  2009  the
             Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (AIT) allowed his appeal  both
             on human rights grounds under Article  8  and  on  immigration
             grounds under paragraph 364 of the Immigration Rules (HC  395)
             as amended.  In August 2009 YM was warned for having contacted
             a co-defendant to the terrorist charges.  (Non-contact  was  a
             condition of YM's licence).  In December 2009 YM was  recalled
             to prison at the same time as being arrested on  suspicion  of
             handling stolen goods.  Those charges were not pursued and  in
             January 2010 YM was released on  licence  again.   Then  on  5
             October 2011 he was given a caution as a  result  of  a  'road
             rage' incident.  In June 2012 YM was arrested on a  charge  of
             fraud in connection with an application for  motor  insurance.
             He subsequently pleaded guilty and was sentenced to a 12 month
             community supervision order and disqualified from driving  for
             12 months.


         [6]  The SSHD appealed the AIT's decision and on 22 June  2011  the
             Upper Tribunal (UT) set aside the determination of the AIT for
             error of law and directed  that  the  UT  should  re-make  the
             decision.  At the re-determination hearing on 22 February 2013
             the UT heard oral evidence from YM, his wife  J,  YM's  mother
             and also J's mother.  It had before it written  evidence  from
             various witnesses in support of YM's case.  It also had expert
             written  evidence  from  Professor  Silke,  someone   the   UT
             described as  having  'considerable  expertise'  on  terrorism
             generally  and  terrorist  psychology   in   particular,   and
             Professor Allen, an expert on East African and Ugandan affairs
             and professor at the London School of Economics.  Lastly,  the
             UT had reports from an independent social worker who had twice
             visited YM, J and their family to observe and comment upon the
             family relationships and the possible consequences if YM  were
             to be deported.


         [7]  The UT promulgated its decision on 2 May 2013 and allowed  the
             SSHD's appeal.  In summary, it rejected arguments advanced  by
             Mr Lewis of counsel that there  was  a  real  risk  that  YM's
             rights under Article 3 of the ECHR would  be  breached  if  he
             were to be returned to  Uganda.   The  UT  also  rejected  the
             argument that, with regard to YM's Article 8 rights, the  case
             should be dealt with on the basis of the  revised  Immigration
             Rules that had come into force on 9 July 2012.   However,  the
             UT also found that YM could not  have  satisfied  their  terms
             even if they were applicable.  Further, whilst the UT accepted
             that the deportation of YM would interfere with his Article  8
             rights, it concluded that  there  were  very  serious  reasons
             justifying deportation despite YM's long residence in  the  UK
             and the impact deportation would have on his family life.  The
             UT was satisfied that 'the decision to deport the appellant is
             necessary and proportionate to a legitimate aim within Article
             8(2)'.  The effect was that, in re-making the AIT's  decision,
             it dismissed YM's appeal based on  Article  3  and  Article  8
             grounds 'as well as on humanitarian protection and immigration
             grounds'.   Therefore  the  SSHD's  decision  to  deport   was
             upheld."

The Oral Evidence

 1. We heard evidence from  YM.   He  formally  adopted  his  four  witness
    statements.  In the cross-examination and  judicial  questioning  which
    followed, he testified that the activities giving rise to the Terrorism
    Act offence noted in [3]((g) above included the simulation of  shooting
    in standing, crouching and lying  positions.   When  pressed,  he  also
    admitted  to  certain  jumping  activities  in  water.   His   evidence
    regarding his criminality was, in the  main,  vague  and  evasive.   He
    claimed, unimpressively, an inability to remember all  that  had  taken
    place at the camps.  He sought refuge under the assertion that  he  had
    made "a lot of silly mistakes".  He protested, unconvincingly, that  he
    had not acted rationally.  When questioned about his  respect  for  the
    laws of his country and his preparedness to expose his children to  the
    risk of separation from him, he failed to  respond  in  any  convincing
    way.

 1. YM's evidence about separations from his  spouse  and  children  lacked
    spontaneity  and   conviction.    His   acknowledgement   of   multiple
    separations  of  this  kind  was   made   only   under   pressure   and
    reluctantly.  His inability to date the duration of the most recent  of
    these  separations  was  highly  unconvincing.   The  same  observation
    applies to his assertion that he recalls virtually nothing of the first
    nine years of his life, which were spent in Uganda.  This evidence  was
    given in the context of his equally untenable claim that  Uganda  is  a
    country where "I've never been".   The  inconsistent  and  unpersuasive
    nature of YM's responses to questions about a  recent  foreign  holiday
    was unmistakable.  While  he  claimed  that  there  were  "What's  App"
    messages from his children during this period, he followed this with  a
    suggestion (in re-examination) that these were not  received  directly,
    but were relayed to him by his mother-in-law.  Next, he  described  the
    communications as "texts".  When probed further, he asserted  that  all
    of  the  messages  had  been  erased,   without   more.    Given   YM's
    circumstances, this claim is fanciful.  We find all  of  this  evidence
    manifestly untruthful.  Specifically, while there may  have  been  some
    limited contact at most, we find that  there  was  no  contact  of  the
    frequency and intensity claimed during the period in question.

 2. These findings are bolstered by YM's surprising inability  to  describe
    where his wife,  a  healthcare  professional,  has  been  working  most
    recently.  Nor could he say whether she had been working on the day  of
    the hearing or the preceding day.  Self-evidently, the contact which YM
    claims to have with  his  children  must,  if  true,  involve  frequent
    communication with his spouse.  We find that YM's inability to  provide
    evidence of these elementary matters undermines  his  claims  regarding
    the frequency and intensity of such contact.  This finding is fortified
    by YM's evidence that he has not attended any of his children's schools
    for a period of approximately one year.


 3. We treat the written statement of YM's spouse with caution,  since  she
    too airbrushes the multiplicity of marital  separations  and,  further,
    fails to engage  meaningfully  with  the  impact  on  the  family,  the
    children in particular, of YM's repeated criminality.

    The Main Issues Considered


 4. In her exemplary skeleton argument on behalf of the Secretary of State,
    supplemented by appropriately focused and concise oral submissions,  Ms
    Busch QC argued, in particular, that the offences of which YM has  been
    convicted include very serious crimes; YM is a repeat offender who  has
    failed to respond to the sentencing measures applied to him or  to  the
    various admonitions which  he  has  received  from  time  to  time;  in
    particular, he disregarded  warnings  and  advice  in  opting  to  give
    encouragement and support to would-be terrorists;  he  has,  throughout
    the extended history of the legal proceedings  in  which  he  has  been
    involved, continued to show  disrespect  for  the  law;  he  cannot  be
    considered to be culturally  and  socially  integrated  in  the  United
    Kingdom  mainly  on  account  of  his  repeated   offending;   he   has
    demonstrated no obstacles, much less any very significant obstacles, in
    his  integration  in  Uganda  in  the  event  of  returning  there;  in
    particular, no issue relating to age, health, language  or  familiarity
    with Ugandan culture has been raised; should he return to Uganda alone,
    this will not have an unduly harsh effect on his wife or children;  and
    it remains open to them in any event to maintain their family life with
    him in Uganda.

 5. Ms Busch further submitted that in the span of four witness statements,
    including a recent one, coupled with a further witness statement of his
    spouse, YM  has,  firstly,  failed  to  particularise  his  social  and
    cultural integration in the United Kingdom; he has  focused  mainly  on
    the life which he has with his spouse and children; he has provided  no
    evidence demonstrating that his integration in Uganda, his  country  of
    origin,  will  be  compromised  by  very  significant  obstacles.   The
    submissions of Ms Busch further draw attention to the gravity  of  YM's
    offending  and  his  failure  to   express   remorse   or   acknowledge
    responsibility for his actions.

 6. On behalf of YM Mr Lewis, in a comprehensive and tenacious  submission,
    contended that his client's case  has  many  positive  and  meritorious
    features.  While we have considered this submission in its totality  we
    summarise these features as follows: the factors mitigating  YM's  most
    serious  offence;  the  basis  of  his  guilty  plea  and  the  judge's
    sentencing comments; YM's subsequent reconversion to  the  religion  of
    his birth, Islam; his active involvement in  various  community  groups
    and organisations; his cooperation  with  his  probation  officer;  the
    expert evidence that YM presents a low risk of  future  involvement  in
    terrorism-related activity;  the  innocent  nature  of  his  breach  of
    licence conditions; his positive conduct  in  prison  during  a  remand
    period, related to  alleged  offences  of  dishonesty,  which  did  not
    culminate in a  successful  prosecution;  and  the  positive  tone  and
    content of the reports of an independent social worker relating to YM's
    involvement in  his  childrens'  lives.   We  need  not  reproduce  the
    particulars of any of these discrete issues, which we have considered.

     The Statutory Roadmap

 7. We remind ourselves of what we are mandated by Parliament to do, in the
    context of the present appeal, via the new regime contained in Part  5A
    of the 2002 Act:

      a) Since YM is not a British citizen and has  been  convicted  in  the
         United Kingdom of an offence, attracting a sentence of imprisonment
         of at least 12 months,  he  is  a  "foreign  criminal"  within  the
         meaning of Part 5A of the 2002 Act.


      b) We must  have  regard  to  the  public  interest  underpinning  the
         maintenance of effective immigration controls.

    (c)  The potent public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals
is engaged.


    (d)  The aforementioned public interest  is  enhanced  the  graver  the
         offending of the person concerned.


    (e)  YM must be deported unless his case falls within one  of  the  two
         specified exceptions.


      d) The first exception applies where the  subject  has  been  lawfully
         resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life; he is socially
         and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom; and there would be
         very significant obstacles to his integration in Uganda.

      e) The second  exception  is  that  the  subject  has  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
         subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and  the
         effect of his deportation on the partner or child would  be  unduly
         harsh.


      f) Since YM's sentence of imprisonment was of less than four years, he
         does not have to demonstrate "very compelling  circumstances,  over
         and above those described in  Exceptions  1  and  2",  per  section
         117C(6) of the 2002 Act, but is not precluded from attempting to do
         so (infra) in resisting deportation.

 8. This Tribunal has previously held that the factors detailed in  section
    117A - C of the 2002 Act do not  constitute  an  exhaustive  list:  see
    Forman (Section 117A - C Considerations) [2015] UKUT 412 (IAC) at [17].
     We refer also to the analysis adopted in Forman:

         "We consider the correct analysis of sections 117A and 117B  to  be
         as follows


          i) These provisions apply in every case where a court or tribunal
             is required to determine whether a  decision  made  under  the
             Immigration Acts breaches a  person's  right  to  respect  for
             private and family life under Article 8 ECHR and, as a result,
             would be unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
             1998.  Where a Court or Tribunal is not required to make  this
             determination, these provisions do not apply.


         ii) The so-called 'public interest question' is 'the  question  of
             whether an interference with a person's right to  respect  for
             private and family life is  justified  under  Article  8(2).',
             which appears to embrace the entirety of  the  proportionality
             exercise.


        iii) In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must have regard  to  the  considerations  listed  in
             section 117B in all cases: per section 117A(1) and (2).


         iv)   In  considering  the  public  interest  question  in   cases
             concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, the court  or
             tribunal must have regard to the section  117B  considerations
             and the considerations listed in section 117C.


          v) The list of considerations in sections 117B and  177C  is  not
             exhaustive: this is clear from the words in  parenthesis  '(in
             particular)'.


         vi) The court or tribunal concerned has no choice:  it  must  have
             regard to the listed considerations.'


         To this we would add the following.  While the court or tribunal is
         clearly entitled to take into  account  considerations  other  than
         those listed in  section  117B  (and,  where  appropriate,  section
         117C), any additional factors considered must be relevant,  in  the
         sense that they properly bear on the  'public  interest  question'.
         In this discrete respect, some assistance is provided by reflecting
         on the public law obligation to  take  into  account  all  material
         considerations which, by definition,  prohibits  the  intrusion  of
         immaterial factors.  We are not required to decide in  the  present
         case whether there is any tension between section 117A  (2),  which
         obliges the court or tribunal concerned to have regard to the  list
         of considerations listed in section 117B  and,  where  appropriate,
         section 117C) and the contrasting terms of section 117B (5) and (6)
         which are framed as an instruction to  the  court  or  tribunal  to
         attribute little weight to the two considerations specified."

 1. The constituent elements of the legal framework governing  the  further
    determination of this appeal extend beyond Part 5A  of  the  2002  Act.
    They are rehearsed in extenso in the various decisions of the Court  of
    Appeal and do not require  to  be  reproduced.   They  consist  of,  in
    summary:

    (a)  Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

    (b)  Paragraphs 362, 397, 398, 399 and 399A of the  Immigration  Rules,
         operative from 28 July 2014.

    (c)  The binding jurisprudence of the Court of Appeal relating  to  the
         potency of the public  interest  underpinning  the  deportation  of
         foreign offenders, constituted by the decisions in SS  (Nigeria)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 550,  at
         [55] especially; LC (China) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1310, at [17] and [24] especially;  and,
         most recently, Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  CT
         (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at [10] - [14].

      g) The recent  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MM(Uganda)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]EWCA  Civ  450,,
         relating to the "unduly harsh" test, at [24] - [26] especially.


      h) The decision of the Upper Tribunal in Ogundimu  (Article  8  -  New
         Rules) Nigeria v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]
         UKUT 00060 (IAC), relating to the meaning of  "ties",  approved  by
         the Court of Appeal in its decision in the present case, at [50]


      i)  Most recently, NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662, at [22] - [39] particularly.



 9. Part 5A of the 2002 Act is, of course, complemented by the  Immigration
    Rules.  The relevant provisions are found in paragraphs  398,  399  and
    399A.  These are reproduced in many of the reported cases to  which  we
    have referred above: see, for example, MM (Uganda)  at  [5].   Laws  LJ
    summarised the effect of the  new  rules  and  their  interaction  with
    section 117C in the following terms:


         "[17]    The scheme given by the terms of section 117C of the  2002
             Act and  the  amended  Immigration  Rules  has  the  following
             features:


             (1)  Foreign criminals are classified  in  three  groups:  (a)
                  those sentenced to terms of imprisonment of four years  or
                  more, Rule 398(a); (b) those sentenced to  between  twelve
                  months and  four  years,  Rule  398(b);  (c)  those  whose
                  offending in the Secretary  of  State's  view  has  caused
                  serious harm or who are a persistent offender who shows  a
                  particular disregard for the law, Rule 398(c).


             (2)  The  provisions  of  paragraphs  399  and  399A  and  the
                  exceptions set out at section  117C(4)  and  (5)  have  no
                  application to a criminal in  the  first  of  these  three
                  categories.  Such a criminal must  therefore  be  deported
                  unless there are very exceptional compelling circumstances
                  over and above the circumstances mentioned in exceptions 1
                  and 2 at section 117C(4) and (5).


             (3)  Rules 399 and 399A apply where the facts fit to the other
                  two classes of foreign criminal.  Where the facts  do  not
                  fit so that neither rule in fact applies, then  again  the
                  criminal  is  to  be  deported  unless  'there  are   very
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paras 399 and 399A' (see the closing words of Rule 398)."

10. We also remind ourselves of the exacting and  elevated  nature  of  the
    "unduly harsh" test enshrined in  section  117C(5),  formulated  in  MK
    (Section 55 - Tribunal Options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC),  at
    [42] thus:

         "As  regards  the  Appellant's  partner,  we  consider   that   the
         separation caused  by  deportation  and  the  natural  consequences
         thereof would undoubtedly be  harsh  as  it  would  abruptly  sever
         emotional  ties  and  support,  terminate  a  genuine  and  serious
         relationship of some four years vintage and remove the only  father
         figure from the family unit and, hence, the life of  the  partner's
         seven year old son.  However, we  are  obliged  to  recognise  that
         these  are  normal  and  typical   effects   of   deportation,   in
         circumstances where  the  statutory  criterion  of  'unduly  harsh'
         requires something over and above the usual consequences."

     Returning to MM (Uganda), we  take  cognisance  of  how  the  Court  of
    Appeal construed the phrase "unduly harsh".  First, it  held  that  the
    expression has the same meaning in both section 117C(5) and  Rule  399.
    Laws LJ continues, at [22]:

         "I turn  to  the  interpretation  of  the  phrase  'Unduly  harsh'.
         Plainly it means the same  in  section  117C(5)  as  in  Rule  399.
         'Unduly harsh' is an ordinary English expression.  As so often, its
         meaning is coloured by its context.  Authority is hardly needed for
         such a proposition but is anyway provided, for example by VIA  Rail
         Canada [2000] 193 DLR (4th) 357 at paragraphs 35 to 37.


         [23] The context in these cases invites emphasis  on  two  factors,
             (1) the public interest in the removal  of  foreign  criminals
             and (2)  the  need  for  a  proportionate  assessment  of  any
             interference with Article 8  rights.   In  my  judgment,  with
             respect, the approach of the Upper  Tribunal  in  MAB  ignores
             this combination of factors.  The first of  them,  the  public
             interest in the removal of  foreign  criminals,  is  expressly
             vouched by Parliament in  section  117C(1).   Section  117C(2)
             then provides (I repeat the provision for convenience):
                  'The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.'
         [24]  This  steers  the  tribunals  and   the   court   towards   a
             proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation in  any
             given case.  Accordingly the more pressing the public interest
             in his removal, the harder it will be to show that the  effect
             on his child or partner  will  be  unduly  harsh.   Any  other
             approach  in  my  judgment  dislocates  the   'unduly   harsh'
             provisions  from  their  context.   It  would  mean  that  the
             question of undue hardship would  be  decided  wholly  without
             regard to the force of the public interest in  deportation  in
             the particular case.  But in that case the  term  'unduly'  is
             mistaken for 'excessive' which imports a different idea.  What
             is due or undue depends on all the circumstances,  not  merely
             the impact on the child or partner in the given case.  In  the
             present context relevant circumstances certainly  include  the
             criminal's immigration and criminal history."

    We consider that the starting point in cases  of  this  nature  is  the
    central theme expressed in SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 550, namely the powerful weight  to  be
    attributed to the factor of Parliamentary intervention in the field  of
    the deportation of foreign national offenders, beginning with the  2007
    Act and extending through Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act  and  associated
    amendments of the Immigration rules, expressed by Laws LJ  at  [55]  in
    these terms:

         "Proportionality, the absence of an 'exceptionality' rule  and  the
         meaning  of  'a  primary  consideration'  are  all,  when  properly
         understood, consonant with the force to be attached in cases of the
         present kind to the two drivers of the decision maker's  margin  of
         discretion: the policy's source and  the  policy's  nature  and  in
         particular to the great weight which the 2007 Act attributes to the
         deportation of foreign criminals."

    [emphasis added]

    This, Laws LJ added, is an "extremely pressing public interest", driven
    by the "very great weight" which Parliament has chosen to attach to the
    protection of the public and the condemnation  of  serious  wrongdoers:
    see [53].


11.  We have identified in [14] above the subsequent leading  decisions  of
    the Court of Appeal  to  like  effect,  culminating  in  NA  (Pakistan)
    (supra).  There the Court of Appeal devised the dichotomy  of  "medium"
    offenders,  namely  those  who  have  been  sentenced  to  a  term   of
    imprisonment of more than  one  year  but  less  than  four  years  and
    "serious" offenders, being those  whose  sentence  exceeds  four  years
    imprisonment.  Jackson  LJ,  delivering  the  judgment  of  the  Court,
    highlighted the "curious feature" of section 117C(3) that no  provision
    is made for medium offenders who  fall  outside  Exceptions  1  and  2,
    contrasting this with the new version of rule 398 which proceeds on the
    basis that medium offenders do have the right to  seek  to  demonstrate
    very compelling circumstances over and above Exceptions 1 and 2  in  an
    attempt to avoid deportation: see [24].  For the reasons  explained  in
    [25] and [26], the Court construed section 117C(6) to  mean  that  both
    serious offenders and medium offenders falling outside Exceptions 1 and
    2 can avail of the "fall back" protection of section 117C(6).


12. The Court  then  set  about  construing  the  phrase  "very  compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1  and  2",
    noting that the language of paragraph 398 of the Rules mirrors that  of
    section 117C(6), while paragraphs 399  and  399A  reflect  the  subject
    matter of Exceptions 1 and 2 but in greater detail.  The Court provided
    the following construction and guidance:

         "[30]    In the case of a  serious  offender  who  could  point  to
             circumstances  in  his  own  case  which  could  be  said   to
             correspond to the circumstances described in Exceptions 1  and
             2, but where he could only just succeed in such  an  argument,
             it  would  not  be  possible  to  describe  his  situation  as
             involving very compelling circumstances, over and above  those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  One might describe that as a
             bare case of the kind described in Exceptions 1 or 2.  On  the
             other hand, if he could point to  factors  identified  in  the
             descriptions of Exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially compelling
             kind in support of an Article 8 claim, going well beyond  what
             would be necessary to  make  out  a  bare  case  of  the  kind
             described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
             constitute 'very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
             those described in Exceptions  1  and  2',  whether  taken  by
             themselves or in conjunction with other  factors  relevant  to
             application of Article 8.


         [31] An interpretation of  the  relevant  phrase  to  exclude  this
             possibility would lead to  violation  of  Article  8  in  some
             cases, which plainly was not Parliament's intention.  In terms
             of relevance and weight for a proportionality  analysis  under
             Article  8,  the  factors  singled  out  for  description   in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 will apply with  greater  or  lesser  force
             depending on the specific facts of a particular case.  To take
             a simple example in relation to  the  requirement  in  section
             117C(4)(a) for Exception 1, the offender in  question  may  be
             someone aged 37 who came to the UK aged 18 and hence satisfies
             that requirement; but his claim under Article 8 is  likely  to
             be very much weaker than the claim of an offender now aged  80
             who came to the UK aged 6 months, who by dint of  those  facts
             satisfies that requirement.  The circumstances in  the  latter
             case might well be highly relevant  to  whether  it  would  be
             disproportionate and a breach  of  Article  8  to  deport  the
             offender, having regard to the guidance given by the ECtHR  in
             Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47, and hence highly relevant  to
             whether there are 'very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
             above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

         [32] Similarly, in the case of a medium offender, if all  he  could
             advance in support of his Article 8 claim was  a  'near  miss'
             case in which he fell short of bringing himself within  either
             Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be  possible  to  say
             that  he  had  shown  that   there   were   'very   compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2'.  He would need to have a far stronger case  than  that
             by reference to the interests protected by Article 8 to  bring
             himself within that  fall  back  protection.   But  again,  in
             principle there may be cases in which such an offender can say
             that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions  1
             and 2 have such great force for Article 8 purposes  that  they
             do constitute  such  very  compelling  circumstances,  whether
             taken by themselves  or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors
             relevant to Article 8  but  not  falling  within  the  factors
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  The decision  maker,  be  it
             the Secretary of State or a tribunal, must  look  at  all  the
             matters  relied  upon  collectively,  in  order  to  determine
             whether they are sufficiently compelling to outweigh the  high
             public interest in deportation."

13. Jackson LJ followed this with an omnibus observation:


         "[33]    Although there  is  no  'exceptionality'  requirement,  it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in deportation  will  be  rare.   The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient."

    The judgment also provides guidance on the correct approach to the best
    interests of any affected child in this exercise:


         "[34]    The best  interests  of  children  certainly  carry  great
             weight, as identified by Lord Kerr in HH v  Deputy  Prosecutor
             of the Italian Republic [2012] UKSC 25; [2013]  1  AC  338  at
             [145].  Nevertheless, it is a consequence of criminal  conduct
             that offenders may be separated from their children  for  many
             years, contrary to the best interests of those children.   The
             desirability  of  children  being  with  both  parents  is   a
             commonplace  of  family  life.   That   is   not   usually   a
             sufficiently compelling  circumstance  to  outweigh  the  high
             public interest in deporting foreign criminals.   As  Rafferty
             LJ observed in Secretary of State for the Home Department v CT
             (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at [38]:


                  'Neither  the  British  nationality  of  the  respondent's
                  children nor their likely separation from their father for
                  a long time are exceptional circumstances  which  outweigh
                  the public interest in his deportation.'"


    The Court further held that sections 117A - 117D of the  2002  Act,  in
    conjunction with paragraphs 398 - 399A  of  the  Rules,  constitute  an
    exhaustive code.

14. Bearing in mind that YM falls into the category of  "medium  offender",
    the following passage is of particular significance in the  context  of
    this appeal:

         "[36]    In relation to a medium offender,  first  see  whether  he
             falls within Exception 1 or Exception 2.  If he does, then the
             Article 8 claim succeeds.  If he does not, then the next stage
             is to consider  whether  there  are  'sufficiently  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2'.  If there are, then the Article 8 claim succeeds.   If
             there are not, then the Article 8 claim  fails.   As  was  the
             case under the 2012 Rules  (as  explained  in  MF  (Nigeria)),
             there is no room for a general Article  8  evaluation  outside
             the 2014 rules, read with sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act".



    Finally, the Court gave guidance on  the  function  of  the  Strasbourg
    jurisprudence in cases to which this new self-contained regime applies.




         "[38]    ......   The answer is that the Secretary of State and the
             tribunals and  courts  will  have  regard  to  the  Strasbourg
             jurisprudence when applying the tests set out in our  domestic
             legislation.  For  example,  a  tribunal  may  be  considering
             whether it would be 'unduly harsh' for a child  to  remain  in
             England without the deportee; or it may be considering whether
             certain  circumstances  are   sufficiently   'compelling'   to
             outweigh the high public interest in  deportation  of  foreign
             criminals.  Anyone applying these tests (as  required  by  our
             own rules and legislation) should heed the guidance  contained
             in the Strasbourg authorities.  As we have stated  above,  the
             scheme of Part 5A of the 2002 Act and paras. 398-399A  of  the
             2014 rules is to ensure compliance with  the  requirements  of
             Article 8 through a structured approach, which is intended  to
             ensure that proper weight is given to the public  interest  in
             deportation  whilst  also  having  regard  to  other  relevant
             factors as identified in the Strasbourg and domestic case law.
              The new regime is  not  intended  to  produce  violations  of
             Article 8."


    In this context Jackson LJ further noted that by virtue of  the  margin
    of appreciation and the differing conditions prevailing in  Council  of
    Europe states the outcome of Article 8 assessments may  vary  from  one
    state to another.  See [39]:


         "Even then it must be borne in mind that assessments under  Article
         8 may not lead to  identical  results  in  every  ECHR  contracting
         state.  To the degree allowed under the margin of appreciation  and
         bearing in mind that the ECHR is intended to reflect a fair balance
         between  individual  rights  and  the  interests  of  the   general
         community, an individual state is entitled  to  assess  the  public
         interest which may be in issue when  it  comes  to  deportation  of
         foreign criminals and to decide what weight to attach to it in  the
         particular circumstances of its society."

15. In light of the decision in NA (Pakistan), it is appropriate to reflect
    on the nature of the distinction, if any, between medium offenders  and
    serious offenders in the new combined regime of Part 5A of the 2002 Act
    and paragraphs 398 - 399A of the Rules.  In our judgment the answer  is
    found in section 117C(2) and (3), the  effect  whereof  is  that  those
    whose offending attracts a custodial sentence of less than  four  years
    will, subject to some  exceptional  circumstance,  be  considered  less
    serious offenders than those  who  receive  sentences  of  imprisonment
    exceeding four years.  It follows that,  giving  effect  to  the  plain
    language of section  117C(2),  the  public  interest  underpinning  the
    deportation of medium offenders is less potent than that engaged in the
    case of serious offenders.  The scales are tipped most heavily  against
    those belonging to the latter category.  This analysis is reinforced by
    the consideration that those offenders who are punished by  a  sentence
    of imprisonment of less than one year are excluded altogether from  the
    statutory regime.  It follows that the public interest in  play,  while
    of undeniable potency, is oscillating in nature.

Our Conclusions

16. In the judgment of the Court of Appeal in the present case Sir  Stanley
    Burnton, concurring with Aikens LJ, stated at [66]:

         "I add that in my judgment it would in general be difficult to  see
         that in the case of someone who had committed offences  as  serious
         of those of the Appellant the  lack  of  ties  to  his  country  of
         nationality would lead to a breach of his Article 8  rights,  since
         the public interest in his deportation is so strong."

    While Ms Busch QC, understandably, sought to place  substantial  weight
    on this passage, we must treat it as an obiter observation.   We  would
    point out that the exercise to be carried out by this Tribunal, as  the
    framework contained in [10] - [14] above  demonstrates,  is  altogether
    more elaborate than simply focusing on YM's lack of ties to his country
    of origin, Uganda.  We would, further,  highlight  the  intensely  fact
    sensitive nature of every case in  which  this  exercise  falls  to  be
    performed, with the result that comparisons with the factual matrix  of
    other cases will normally be arid.

17. We have taken into account everything embraced within [3] - [11] above.
     We refer also to our earlier assessment  of  certain  aspects  of  the
    evidence.   YM's  case  is  a  classic  curate's  egg.   The  negative,
    unsavoury aspects are, in a nutshell, constituted  by  his  criminality
    and all the offshoots thereof.  He has been a frequent  offender  since
    the age of 14.  His offending has spanned  a  period  of  some  fifteen
    years.  In making this assessment we  disregard  entirely  any  charges
    against him which did not culminate in conviction.  YM has  been  given
    ample opportunities and warnings, outlined in [3] above.   He  has  not
    taken them.  He has, rather, consciously and wilfully  contravened  the
    laws of the United Kingdom with regularity.  In thus acting he has  not
    been deterred by pending Tribunal and court proceedings.  Nor have  his
    parental responsibilities  acted  as  a  check.   Furthermore,  as  our
    findings above indicate, he has not engaged candidly with this Tribunal
    and has in our judgement prevaricated.

18. On the other side of the scales, there are some positives.  These, duly
    distilled, are essentially  twofold.   First,  taking  account  of  the
    absence of any challenge,  we  accept  broadly  YM's  evidence  of  his
    community  activities  during  recent  years.   Within  this   discrete
    equation  we  include  his  positive  interaction  with  the  probation
    officer.  Second, while bearing in mind the findings made in [7] -  [9]
    above, we accept that YM has an important role  in  the  lives  of  his
    children.  Given the findings made, we do not consider this role to  be
    of the highly elevated or  indispensable  nature  asserted  by  YM  and
    claimed in the supporting evidence.  His role is important: but it does
    not qualify for the  more  effusive  eulogies  formulated.   We  cannot
    overlook that YM's criminal career is antithetical to the lifestyle  of
    a truly responsible and devoted father and dedicated husband.  Nor  can
    we overlook  that  his  criminality  has,  not  once  but  on  multiple
    occasions, irresponsibly and recklessly exposed  his  children  to  the
    real risk of long-term separation from their father.  Linked to this is
    the  consideration  that  reoffending  remains  a   possibility.    The
    application of the legal rule that the best interests of YM's  children
    are  a  primary  consideration  falls  to  be  conducted  within   this
    framework.

19. Since the sentencing of the Appellant has not, to date, in  the  course
    of  his  criminal  career  (albeit  by  a   narrow   margin)   entailed
    imprisonment of four years or  more,  the  law  does  not  require  his
    deportation from the United Kingdom if his  case  falls  within  either
    Exception 1 or Exception 2 in Part 5A of  the  2002  Act  or  paragraph
    399(a) or paragraph 399(b) of the Rules.  The first of these  pairs  of
    provisions focuses on  undue  harshness  impacting  on  the  offender's
    children.  The second has a different  focus,  concentrating  on  undue
    harshness affecting  the  offender's  British  citizen  partner.   This
    appeal has been presented with an intense focus on the  first  and  not
    the second.

20.  The  undisputed  facts,  coupled  with  our  findings  and  evaluative
    assessments  rehearsed  above,  lead   indelibly   to   the   following
    conclusions:


        i)  YM's  integration  in  United  Kingdom  society  is  manifestly
           inadequate.  Properly integrated citizens do not pose  the  kind
           of threat to others and the menace  to  society  posed  by  YM's
           criminality.  This assessment is not offset by our acceptance of
           his attempts at redemption or  his  parental  activities,  which
           pale by comparison.  Furthermore, we consider that in a  society
           governed by the rule  of  law  properly  integrated  members  of
           United  Kingdom  society  will  show  respect  for  courts   and
           tribunals  and,  as  a  minimum,   will   be   proactively   and
           unremittingly candid in their dealings with them  and  will  not
           engage in prevarication.


       ii) The evidence falls well short of  demonstrating  that  YM  would
           encounter very significant obstacles  in  integrating  into  the
           country of his birth.


      iii) We are persuaded by a narrow margin that YM has  a  genuine  and
           subsisting relationship with his children.  In this  context  we
           refer to our findings above relating to the  true  strength  and
           profundity of this relationship.


       iv) Having regard to our findings above coupled with the decision of
           the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda), YM's  case  fails,  by  some
           distance, to overcome the threshold of an unduly harsh impact on
           his children consequential upon his deportation.


        v) While the continued presence and role of YM in the lives of  his
           children will, albeit by a far from  decisive  margin,  probably
           further their best interests this undeniably important factor is
           comfortably outweighed by the public interests impelling towards
           YM's deportation from the United Kingdom.


       vi) It follows that YM's case does not fall  within  either  of  the
           statutory exceptions.


      vii) YM did not make the case that there were  any  "very  compelling
           circumstances over and above those described in  paragraphs  399
           and 399A" of the  Rules.   We  find  no  circumstances  of  this
           distinctive and elevated quality in any event.

Decision

21. It follows inexorably from our findings and conclusions above  that  we
    set aside the decision of the FtT, we dismiss YM's appeal  to  the  FtT
    and allow the Secretary of State's appeal.




                                        Signed:


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                          Date: 12 July 2016


