
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/09152/2015
                                                               IA/09154/2015
                                                               IA/09158/2015
                                                               IA/09159/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th July 2016                            |On 28th July 2016             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                            Rana Muhammad Shahzad
                                Nazia shahzad
                                    [L T]
                                    [h T]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Bellara, instructed by Western Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellants are  citizens
    of Pakistan and are a husband, wife and two dependent children.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson allowed their appeals,  under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules and  on  human  rights  grounds,  in  a
    decision dated 13th January 2016.

2.   The relevant immigration history is that on 2nd  June  2006  the  first
    three Appellants were granted entry clearance to  come  to  the  UK  as
    visitors until 2nd December 2006.  They then returned to  Pakistan  and
    the first  and  second  Appellants  were  granted  entry  clearance  as
    students valid from February 2007 to November 2008. The third Appellant
    was granted entry clearance as their dependant. They re-entered the  UK
    on 6th March 2007 when the third Appellant was a year  old.  The  first
    and second Appellants have  remained  in  the  UK  with  student  leave
    followed by highly skilled post study migrant leave and have made an in
    time application to vary their leave to remain.  The  fourth  Appellant
    was born in the UK.

3.   The third Appellant was born on [ ] 2006 and the fourth  Appellant  was
    born on [ ] 2008. They were aged 10 and 6 at the time  the  application
    was made and were 10 and 7 at the date of hearing.  The  judge  allowed
    the appeals, in the case of  the  third  and  fourth  Appellants  under
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules, and in the case  of  the
    first and second Appellants under Article 8.

4.   The Respondent applied for permission to appeal on the basis  that  the
    judge had found that the two child Appellants met the  requirements  of
    276ADE(iv), having both been in the UK for seven years,  and  therefore
    he erred in law in relation to the fourth Appellant who  was  only  six
    years old at the date of application. Accordingly, the fourth Appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the Rules. The  error  was  material
    because it infected the judge's  finding  in  relation  to  the  fourth
    Appellant's circumstances and whether there were compelling exceptional
    circumstances for consideration outside the Immigration Rules.

5.   Further, in relation to the reasonableness test the judge had erred  in
    finding that the academic success of the children  was  a  trump  card.
    The judge failed to consider the public interest element of maintaining
    immigration control in  assessing  the  first  and  second  Appellants'
    appeals under Article 8.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Page  on
    the grounds that the judge's evaluation of the best  interests  of  the
    children gave undue weight to their interests, enabling  their  parents
    to "piggy back on their rights"  and  had  arguably  erred  in  law  in
    finding that the younger child met the requirements of 276ADE(iv).


Submissions

7.   Ms Ahmad submitted that the fourth  Appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules because she had not been residing in the UK for seven
    years at the date of application and the judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    allowing her appeal under the Immigration Rules. This had affected  the
    whole decision because the judge had approached the appeal on the basis
    that both children met the Immigration Rules.

8.   Further, in relation to the third Appellant the  judge  had  considered
    education a trump card and had not considered other factors. There  was
    no  evidence  that  the  minor  Appellants  could  not  continue  their
    education in Pakistan. Ms Ahmad relied on paragraph 39 of AM  (S  117B)
    Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) which stated that:

         "There was  no  reason  to  infer  that  any  interruption  to  the
         education of the elder child upon return to  Malawi  would  be  any
         more significant than that faced by any child forced to  move  from
         one country to another by virtue of the careers of  their  parents.
         Nor should the difficulties of a move from one  school  to  another
         become unduly exaggerated.  It would be highly unusual for a  child
         in the UK to complete the entirety of their  education  within  one
         school. The trauma, or excitement, of a new school, new  classmates
         and new teachers is an integral part of growing  up.  In  too  many
         appeals the First-tier Tribunal is presented with  arguments  whose
         basic premise is that to change a school is to submit a child to  a
         cruel and unduly harsh experience. Indeed, as if to illustrate  the
         point, we note that the  eldest  child  of  this  family  has  been
         required to move schools, and move from one end of the  UK  to  the
         other, as a result of the decisions of her  parents.  The  evidence
         does not suggest she suffered any hardship or ill effect from doing
         so."


9.   Ms Ahmad submitted that the judge had only looked at the  education  of
    the minor Appellants and not at other factors in assessing  whether  it
    was reasonable for them to leave the UK and  return  to  Pakistan  with
    their parents.

10.  Mr Bellara  submitted  that  there  was  no  public  interest  weighing
    against the Appellants in this case. He  accepted  that  their  private
    life was precarious because    the first and second Appellants only had
    leave on a  temporary  basis.  However,  they  had  complied  with  the
    Immigration Rules and remained lawfully in the UK.  None of  the  other
    factors in Section 117 weighed against the Appellants and in fact there
    was a qualifying child, the third Appellant. Therefore, there had to be
    something powerfully countervailing to weigh in  the  balance  for  the
    public interest and the child could not be blamed for  the  immigration
    status or precarious nature of their parents' leave.

11.  Mr Bellara relied on MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705, in particular paragraphs 99 to 117, and
    the case of PD v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKUT
    108 at paragraphs 18 to 26.


Relevant case law

12.  In PD, McCloskey J observed that it would be  absurd  to  consider  the
    child's position entirely independently of, and in isolation from,  the
    position of the parents given that  the  child's  best  interests  will
    usually require that he or she lives as part of the  family  unit.  But
    the focus on the family does sit happily with the language  of  Section
    117B(6). Had Parliament intended to require considerations bearing upon
    the conduct and immigration history of the applicant parent to be taken
    into consideration, I would have expected it to say so  expressly,  not
    for the matter to have been inferred from a test which in turn  focuses
    on an assessment of what is reasonable for the child. This does not  in
    my view mean that the wider public interests have to be ignored; it  is
    simply that Parliament has determined that where the seven year rule is
    satisfied and the other conditions in the section have been met,  those
    potential conflicting public interests  will  not  suffice  to  justify
    refusal of leave if, focusing on the position of the child, it  is  not
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

13.  In MA (Pakistan), the Court of Appeal held at paragraph 46.

         "Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the  fact  that  a
         child has been here for  seven  years  must  be  given  significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise."

14.  The Court of Appeal approved  of  the  approach  in  EV  (Philippines),
    namely that a decision as to what is in the best interests of  children
    will depend on a number of factors such as their  age,  the  length  of
    time that they have been here, how long they have  been  in  education,
    what stage their education has reached, to what extent they have become
    distanced from the country to which it is proposed  that  they  return,
    how renewable their connection with it may be, to what extent they will
    have linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting to  life  in
    that country and the extent to which the course proposed will interfere
    with their family life or their rights if  they  have  any  as  British
    citizens.

15.  In MA, at paragraph 49, the Court of Appeal held  that  the  fact  that
    the child has been in the UK for seven years would  need  to  be  given
    significant weight to the  proportionality  exercise  for  two  related
    reasons. First because of its relevance to determining the  nature  and
    strength  of  the  child's  best  interests  and  second   because   it
    establishes a starting point that leave should be granted unless  there
    are powerful reasons to the contrary.

16.  The Court of Appeal went on to conclude:


         "100. There can surely be little doubt that if  the  reasonableness
         test required a focus on the position of the child alone,  ignoring
         wider considerations of immigration control, the argument  for  him
         being  granted  leave  would  be  overwhelming.  It  would  not  be
         reasonable to require him to leave the UK given that he  has  spent
         virtually all his life here.


         101. But for the reasons I have given, that is not  the  test.  The
         court can have regard to the wider public  interest  including  the
         immigration history of the applicant and his parents. The question,
         therefore, is whether the judge was entitled  to  conclude,  having
         regard to these considerations and all other aspects of the  public
         interest, that it would not be unreasonable to require the child to
         return to Pakistan."


Discussion and Conclusions

17.  It was accepted at the outset of the appeal that the  judge  had  erred
    in law in allowing the fourth Appellant's appeal under the  Immigration
    Rules. She was six years old at the date of application, 23rd  December
    2014, and was unable to satisfy paragraph  276ADE(iv).  Accordingly,  I
    set aside the judge's decision to allow the fourth  Appellant's  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

18.  I therefore consider whether her appeal should be allowed on Article  8
    grounds. I asked Ms Ahmad if she was challenging the  judge's  findings
    in respect of the  third  Appellant.  Ms  Ahmad  submitted  that  those
    findings were challenged and it was apparent from paragraph 13  of  the
    grounds of appeal that that was in fact the case.  Paragraph 13 states:




         "The parents [sic] appeals are challenge [sic] in  respect  of  the
         findings under article 8 and the eldest child (reasonableness test)
         and the youngest child in respect of the Rules and Article 8."

19.  The Respondent challenges the reasonableness test  on  the  basis  that
    the judge in this case considered only the education  of  the  children
    and failed to take into account  other  factors  including  the  public
    interest elements of maintaining immigration  control.  When  asked  to
    identify what those public interests elements were Ms  Ahmad  submitted
    that it was the precarious nature of the parents' private life in  that
    they had been  here  as  students  and  post-study  work  migrants  and
    secondly that the parents could not satisfy the Immigration Rules. I am
    not persuaded by Ms Ahmad's submission that there was any error of  law
    in the judge's assessment  of  reasonableness  in  this  case  for  the
    reasons that follow.

20.  The judge  made  the  following  findings.   The  third  Appellant  had
    resided in the UK since March 2007, a period of nearly nine  years  and
    she was currently 10 years old.  He took into account the fact that the
    family would travel to Pakistan as a family unit.  Also, that the first
    and second Appellants had entered the UK lawfully and  had  resided  in
    the UK lawfully even though they only  ever  had  temporary  leave.  He
    acknowledged  that  their  immigration  status  had   throughout   been
    precarious. The private lives of the Appellants had  been  created  and
    developed in circumstances where  their  status  in  the  UK  had  been
    precarious  although  the  children  themselves  could  not  have  been
    expected to have had any knowledge of their status in  the  UK  or  its
    consequences.

21.  The judge found that the first  Appellant  had  worked  throughout  his
    period of residence and then maintained his  family  accordingly.  They
    had accessed NHS treatment in the UK and  the  children  had  benefited
    from free education.  The Appellants all speak fluent English.

22.  The judge  then  went  on  to  consider  the  education  of  the  minor
    Appellants and commented that  there  was  a  wealth  of  documentation
    before him which was unchallenged.  He concluded that this  established
    that both of the children were  fully  integrated  into  the  education
    system in the UK and they were both doing well.   Both  children  spoke
    basic Urdu, but they were illiterate in the  Urdu  language  and  would
    struggle to cope with the education system  in  Pakistan.  Their  first
    language was English and they would be taught in Urdu if they  returned
    to Pakistan.

23.  The judge concluded that the first  and  second  Appellants'  immediate
    and long-term accommodation and employment prospects were  unclear  and
    the cost of private education  was  unlikely  to  be  cheap.  Therefore
    removal to Pakistan would be  challenging  to  all  Appellants  as  the
    situation was uncertain. The judge concluded that, bearing in mind  the
    children were fully integrated in the education system,  their  removal
    would have significantly harsh consequences on them both  in  terms  of
    their education and their endeavours to  integrate  into  what  is,  in
    reality, an alien society. Neither child had any knowledge of Pakistan;
    the third Appellant was only one year old when she came to the UK.  The
    judge concluded that it was in the best interests of both children, not
    only to continue living with their parents, but to continue  living  in
    the UK bearing in mind their educational history, their  ages  and  the
    length of time the had lived in the UK.

24.  The judge accepted that they had not commenced secondary education  and
    would be able to adjust to life in Pakistan and to the education system
    there, but that  was  not  the  test,  the  test  was  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect them  to  leave  having  considered  all  relevant
    factors. The judge considered all relevant factors and  concluded  that
    there would be unacceptably harsh consequences to expect,  particularly
    that of the third Appellant and to a lesser extent the fourth Appellant
    to be uprooted from the UK.  A separation of the two  girls  from  each
    other was also an inconceivable option.

25.  Accordingly, I find it is quite clear  from  these  findings  that  the
    judge has considered all the factors set out in  EV  (Philippines)  and
    has not considered merely  the  educational  records  of  both  of  the
    children. Whilst  he  had  considered  the  children  together  and  is
    mistaken in respect of the fourth Appellant that does not undermine his
    findings in relation to the third  Appellant  and  he  has  taken  into
    account all relevant circumstances appertaining to  her  situation  and
    integration into the UK.



26.  The judge looked at the evidence in the round  and  his  conclusion  at
    paragraph 34 was consistent with the Court of Appeal in MA.  He has not
    just looked at the child's best interests in isolation, but  considered
    them as a whole against the background of their immigration history and
    that of their parents. There was no error of law in the judge's finding
    that it would be unreasonable for the Third Appellant to leave the UK.

27.  The judge properly considered Section 117B of  the  2002  Act  and  the
    public interest factors referred to therein. There is little weight  to
    be attached to the public interest because the  parents  have  remained
    here lawfully throughout, even  though  their  immigration  status  was
    temporary and their  private  life  precarious.  The  judge  took  into
    account all relevant factors. There was no error of law in his decision
    to allow the appeals of the first and second Appellants  on  Article  8
    grounds.

28.  Given that I have set aside the  decision  in  respect  of  the  fourth
    Appellant, I now consider the circumstances  existing  at  the  current
    time in assessing Article 8. There was no dispute on the facts of  this
    case. I find that the fourth Appellant has lived  in  the  UK  all  her
    life, she is doing well at school and is integrated in the UK. She  has
    no knowledge of Pakistan  and  is  not  literate  in  Urdu.  Her  first
    language is English and she would be taught  in  Urdu  if  returned  to
    Pakistan. Her parents had been residing in the  UK  lawfully  for  nine
    years, although their leave was temporary. Removal  to  Pakistan  would
    have  harsh  consequences  on  the  fourth's  Appellant's  ability   to
    integrate and her education.

29.  I have upheld the judge's decision that it would  be  unreasonable  for
    the third Appellant  to  be  required  to  leave  the  UK.  She  was  a
    qualifying child for the purposes  of  117B(6).  I  attach  significant
    weight to the best interests of the fourth Appellant who has  now  been
    residing in the UK for  seven  years.  Her  parents'  private  life  is
    precarious and they are unable to satisfy the  Immigration  Rules,  but
    they have been residing lawfully in the UK for over nine years. I  find
    that there is little public interest weighing in favour of removal.

30.  Therefore, it would not be proportionate  to  remove  her  parents  and
    equally it would not be proportionate under Article  8  to  remove  the
    fourth Appellant who was dependent on  her  parents  and  part  of  the
    family. There could be no separation of the family unit in that respect
    and it would be disproportionate in the circumstances.

31.  Accordingly, I find that there was no error of law in relation  to  the
    judge's  conclusion  that  the  third  Appellant  satisfied   paragraph
    276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules and the judge allowed  the  appeals
    of the first, second and third Appellants on the correct basis.   There
    was an error in respect of the fourth Appellant and  I  set  aside  the
    decision to allow her appeal under the Immigration Rules and remake it.
    The appeal of the fourth Appellant is allowed on Article 8 grounds.

32.  In summary, the Respondent's  appeal  is  allowed  in  respect  of  the
    fourth  Appellant  and  dismissed  in  respect  of  the   other   three
    Appellants.  The  fourth  Appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  under   the
    Immigration Rules.


Notice of Decision

The  Respondent's  appeal  is  allowed  only  in  relation  to  the   fourth
Appellant. The decision is remade allowing the fourth Appellant's appeal  on
human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



         J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 26th July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


