
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/09715/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th June 2017                       |       On 15th June 2017             |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                             muhammad umar saeed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel instructed by Rainbow
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  22nd
    February  2015  refusing  to  issue  him  with  a  residence  card   as
    confirmation of a right of residence in the UK as the spouse of an  EEA
    national  exercising  treaty  rights.   The  Appellant's   appeal   was
    dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andonian  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 15th February 2016.   The  Appellant  now  appeals  with
    permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant was  granted  leave
    to remain in the UK as a student in June 2013. On 22nd January 2014  he
    applied for a residence card as the spouse of  a  Lithuanian  national,
    Liveta Tamasauskaite (the Sponsor), claiming to  be  exercising  treaty
    rights in the UK under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (the 2006
    Regulations).  In a decision dated 27th February 2015 the Secretary  of
    State stated that immigration officials had undertaken a visit  to  the
    Appellant's home address at 46 Arbour House on 14th February 2015.  The
    report said that a male who said that he had lived at the property  for
    one year initially stated that he did not know the Appellant's name but
    then said that there had been a man who lived  there  called  Umar,  as
    this is the Appellant's middle name the man was shown a  photograph  of
    the Appellant and he confirmed that the  Appellant  had  lived  at  the
    property until about eight months previously  and  that  he  had  lived
    there alone. On the basis of  this  evidence  the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that the marriage undertaken between the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor is one of convenience for the sole  purpose  of  the  Appellant
    remaining in the UK. The Secretary of State therefore refused to  issue
    the confirmation that the Appellant sought with reference to Regulation
    2 of the 2006 Regulations.

 3. The Appellant appealed against that decision. In  his  decision  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andonian considered the report from the Immigration
    Officer's visit noting that the report submitted had  not  been  signed
    and  that  there  was  no  indication  as  to  who  had  prepared   it.
    Nevertheless the judge accepted that it was reasonable to conclude that
    it is a report from the Respondent [5].  The judge set out the contents
    of the report noting also that the statement said to have  been  signed
    by the man who was in the property was not  before  the  Tribunal.  The
    judge also took into account that there was no explanation given by the
    Appellant or his representative as to  why  the  person  who  told  the
    Immigration Officer that the Appellant was not at the property and  had
    not been there for eight months would have said that  if  it  were  not
    true.  The judge considered the oral evidence from  the  Appellant  and
    the  Sponsor  noting  discrepancies  between  their  oral  evidence  in
    relation to a  number  of  issues.   The  judge  also  noted  that  the
    Appellant's landlord gave evidence explaining that  the  Appellant  and
    the Sponsor had changed address to another property owned by  him.  The
    judge  concluded  that  the  couple  were  inconsistent   about   their
    respective personal details in many areas  which  "does  not  give  the
    impression of a couple living together in a genuine relationship  as  a
    married couple" [11].  The judge concluded that the Secretary of  State
    had discharged the burden of proof to show that this was a marriage  of
    convenience and, as there was  in  this  case  reasonable  grounds  for
    suspecting that it was a marriage of convenience, the evidential burden
    had shifted to the Appellant to rebut that evidence and  the  Appellant
    was unable to do so [11].

 4. Permission to appeal was refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  the
    renewed grounds to the Upper Tribunal it is contended on behalf of  the
    Appellant that the evidence produced by the Secretary of State was  not
    sufficient to discharge the evidential burden  upon  the  Secretary  of
    State as set out in the case of Papajorgji [EEA spouse  -  marriage  of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).  It is  further  contended
    that the Appellant's documentary and  oral  evidence  as  well  as  the
    documentary and  oral  evidence  from  the  landlord's  managing  agent
    amounted to cogent evidence that this is a  genuine  marriage.   It  is
    contended that the judge failed to give adequate reasons and had failed
    to make adequate findings on all of the evidence before him.   Reliance
    is placed on the decision in MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan  [2013]
    UKUT 641.  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce granted permission to  appeal  on
    the basis that it is arguable  that  the  decision  contains  deficient
    reasoning  particularly  in  respect  of  whether  the  Respondent  had
    discharged the evidential burden upon her.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Balroop submitted that the  core  issue  is
    the report  from  the  Immigration  Officer  which  is  dealt  with  at
    paragraph 5 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  He  submitted
    that the judge erred in giving full weight to this report in  light  of
    the deficiencies in the document.  He submitted that the Appellant  and
    the Sponsor had provided cogent evidence which the judge had failed  to
    balance and had  failed  to  consider  the  documentary  evidence.   He
    submitted  that,  as  well  as   some   inconsistencies,   there   were
    consistencies between the oral evidence given by the Appellant and  the
    Sponsor and the judge had erred in localising this evidence rather than
    looking at the evidence in the round.  Mr Balroop relied on the case of
    Collins Agho v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 1198.    He submitted that the judge  had  failed  to  address  the
    issues raised at paragraph 4  of  the  grounds  about  the  Immigration
    Officer's report.  He submitted that the judge failed  to  engage  with
    the substantial documentation before him.

 6. In response Mr Tufan relied on the decision  in  the  case  of  Rosa  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCAS Civ 15 which he
    said was decided subsequently to that in Agho.  He relied on  paragraph
    16 which cites the decision of the Tribunal  in  Papajorgji.  Mr  Tufan
    submitted that it is for the Appellant to address the  suspicions  once
    the evidence has been raised by the Respondent and that  this  is  what
    happened here.  He accepted that the Immigration Officer's report could
    be criticised but it was on official paper and had been prepared by  an
    official acting for the Secretary of State.  He submitted  that  it  is
    clear that the Immigration Judge found that the initial burden had been
    discharged by production of this evidence.  He submitted that there are
    serious issues raised in that report which needed to  be  addressed  by
    the Appellant.  In his submission  the  judge  looked  at  all  of  the
    evidence in addressing these issues.  He  submitted  that  the  crucial
    paragraph in the judge's decision was  paragraph  10  where  the  judge
    highlighted a number of discrepancies in the oral evidence.  The  judge
    therefore has given reasons for his conclusions and in  his  submission
    in order to challenge those reasons the Appellant would  need  to  show
    that they were irrational but he had failed  to  meet  that  very  high
    threshold.

 7. In response Mr Balroop submitted that the Immigration Officer's  report
    does not give enough detail to discharge the burden upon the  Secretary
    of State.  It was not clear  how  long  the  Immigration  Officers  had
    stayed when they conducted the visit.  It appeared that the Immigration
    Officers had only asked about the Appellant and not about the  Sponsor.
    He submitted that the landlord's evidence  of  the  landlord  countered
    that in the report.

 8. Mr Balroop submitted that,  if  it  were  accepted  that  the  evidence
    produced by the Secretary of State did discharge the initial burden  on
    the Secretary of State, then it was incumbent upon the judge to look at
    all of the evidence in the round.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to do so as he had not grappled with the evidence in  favour  of
    the Appellant and balanced it with the apparent inconsistencies.

Error of Law

 9. The issue of the burden of proof where there is an  allegation  that  a
    marriage to an EEA national is one of convenience was addressed in  the
    case of Agho where  Underhill  LJ  set  out  the  correct  approach  at
    paragraph 13:

         "... What it comes down to is that  as  a  matter  of  principle  a
         spouse establishes a prima facie case that he or she  is  a  family
         member of an EEA national by providing the marriage certificate and
         the spouse's passport; that the legal burden is on the Secretary of
         State to show that any  marriage  thus  proved  is  a  marriage  of
         convenience; and that that  burden  is  not  discharged  merely  by
         showing "reasonable suspicion". Of course  in  the  usual  way  the
         evidential burden may shift to the  applicant  by  proof  of  facts
         which justify the inference that the marriage is not  genuine,  and
         the facts giving rise to the inference may  include  a  failure  to
         answer a request for documentary proof of the  genuineness  of  the
         marriage where grounds for suspicion have been raised. ..."

10. The issue was recently addressed by the Court of Appeal in the case  of
    Rosa where Richards LJ said;

         "In my judgement, the legal burden lies on the Secretary  of  State
         to prove  that  an  otherwise  valid  marriage  is  a  marriage  of
         convenience so as to justify the refusal of an  application  for  a
         residence card under the EEA Regulations.  The  reasoning  to  that
         effect in Papajorgji as endorsed in Agho is compelling." [24]

11. In this case the  Appellant  submitted  the  marriage  certificate  and
    passports thus establishing a prima facie case that he was  the  spouse
    of an EEA national. The Secretary of State relied  on  the  Immigration
    Officer's report to conclude that the marriage was one of convenience.

12. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  considered  the  Immigration  Officer's
    report at paragraph 5 and the  beginning  of  paragraph  6.  The  judge
    highlighted the concerns in relation to that report, in particular  the
    fact that it was not signed and that it did not contain the  additional
    statement from the man who was at the  property  when  the  Immigration
    Officers visited it.  However it is recorded in that  report  that  the
    man living at the property did not know the Appellant's  name  although
    he did confirm that someone using the Appellant's middle name had lived
    at the property until eight months previously and  that  he  had  lived
    there alone. The judge noted at paragraph 6 that the Appellant had  not
    explained why the person at the property would  have  stated  that  the
    Appellant was not living in the property  and  had  left  eight  months
    before and was living alone there.  It is clear from paragraphs 5 and 6
    read with paragraphs 10 and 11,  where  the  judge  set  out  that  the
    initial burden of proof is on the Respondent, that the  judge  accepted
    that, despite its deficiencies, the Immigration  Officer's  report  was
    sufficient  to  discharge  the  initial  burden  of  proof   upon   the
    Respondent. I do not accept the submission in  the  grounds  that  this
    report has no  evidential  value.  The  judge  considered  the  report,
    acknowledging its deficiencies, along with the Appellant's  failure  to
    give an explanation as to why the man at the property would  have  said
    what he did. In my view this evidence is capable of  being  treated  as
    showing more than a reasonable suspicion. It is clear  that  the  judge
    was entitled, for the reasons he gave, to attach sufficient  weight  to
    this report to discharge the burden of proof upon the Respondent.

13. I accept that the judge has expressed some of his own  opinions  as  to
    what would  be  reasonably  expected  of  a  relationship  amongst  his
    reasons.  For example, at paragraph 9, the  judge  considered  that  it
    "did not make any sense"  that  the  Sponsor  would  not  buy  birthday
    presents for the Appellant. He also considered that it was not credible
    that the Appellant and the Sponsor would not go out and that it was not
    credible that none of  the  Appellant's  family  members  attended  the
    wedding [10]. These conclusions appear to be based on the  judge's  own
    value judgments as to what he would  expect  in  a  relationship.  Such
    value judgements are not adequate reasons for rejecting evidence.

14. However, the judge did more than  make  these  observations  in  giving
    reasons for his decision. At paragraph 6 the judge  took  into  account
    that the Appellant had not given an explanation as to  why  the  person
    living at the property would have said what he did. The judge  went  on
    at paragraph 7 to consider the explanation put forward by the Appellant
    about moving address in  August  2014  whilst  his  application  for  a
    residence card  was  pending.   The  judge  noted  that  there  was  no
    satisfactory explanation as to why the Appellant had not  informed  the
    Home Office of his change of address [8].

15. The judge examined the oral evidence of  both  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor in detail at paragraphs 8, 9 and 10. The judge highlighted  the
    number of inconsistencies between the evidence of both  witnesses.  For
    example, at paragraph 8, the judge noted that  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor gave different colours for the wall  of  their  bedroom  at  46
    Arbour House and gave  different  accounts  of  the  furniture  in  the
    bedroom. The judge also noted at paragraph 10  that  the  Sponsor  said
    that she and the Appellant go for walks sometimes but the Appellant did
    not say that they go for walks, in fact he said they never go out.  The
    judge further noted that the Appellant and the Sponsor gave conflicting
    evidence as to the birthday present he gave her for her last  birthday,
    the Appellant said he had given her a watch and the Sponsor  said  that
    it was a necklace.  Whilst  he  noted  that  the  Sponsor  changed  her
    response in answer to questions from counsel,  it  is  clear  that  the
    judge thought that the Sponsor was led in  her  evidence  and  attached
    little weight to the correction. The judge also took  into  account  of
    the fact that the Appellant and Sponsor  gave  different  answers  when
    asked what they had for dinner the previous  evening  [10].  The  judge
    noted that the matters highlighted were not  of  themselves  enough  to
    raise suspicion but considered that, cumulatively, they were enough  to
    make out the case for the Secretary of State.

16. The judge took account of  the  oral  evidence  from  the  landlord  in
    relation to the couple moving address and the judge noted that  he  had
    read all of the documents on file. It is contended  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant  that  the  judge  gave  insufficient  consideration  to  the
    documentary evidence. It is clear that the judge attached little weight
    to this documentary evidence but attached very  significant  weight  to
    the oral evidence concluding that the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  were
    "inconsistent about their respective personal  details  in  many  areas
    which does not give the impression of a couple  living  together  in  a
    genuine relationship as a married couple" [11].  The judge  heard  from
    the Appellant and the Sponsor and was entitled to reach that conclusion
    based on the oral evidence he heard. In my view  the  judge  has  given
    adequate reasons for his decision to attach more  weight  to  the  oral
    evidence than the  documentary  evidence  and  the  evidence  from  the
    landlord.

17. It is clear to me that the judge took into account all of the  evidence
    as he was required to do. It was open to the judge to conclude that the
    evidential burden had shifted to the Appellant and that he  had  failed
    to discharge that burden and had failed to show that  this  was  not  a
    marriage of convenience.

18. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there is  no  error  in  the
    judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

19. There is no material error in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.



20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

21. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 14 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed there is no fee award.

Signed                              Date: 14 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


