
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09408/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 June 2016                               |On 7 July 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                          mr Rajenalosan Thangrasa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Hassan, Counsel, instructed by A & P Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He came to  the  UK  in  May
    2007 and claimed asylum.  His claim was refused and his appeal  against
    that refusal was dismissed in May 2007.  He subsequently made a  number
    of further representations.  On 4 September 2014 he applied as  an  18
    year old child of parents present and settled.  The respondent  refused
    that application on 18 February 2015, pointing out, inter alia, that as
    he was 33 years  old  he  could  not  bring  himself  within  paragraph
    298(ii)(a) of the Immigration Rules nor could he meet the  requirements
    of paragraph 298(ii)(c)-(e).  The respondent also  concluded  that  his
    claim could not succeed under Appendix FM or private life provisions or
    outside the Rules  on  the  basis  of  compelling  circumstances.   The
    respondent served a One-Stop Notice.

2.   In his grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant
    appealed on asylum grounds and Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.   In  a
    determination sent on 8 September 2015 First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  Judge
    Clemes dismissed the appellant's appeal.

3.   The principal challenges levelled in the grounds  are  that  the  judge
    wrongly treated the findings  of  the  previous  Immigration  Judge  as
    determinative;  wrongly  discounted   evidence,   in   particular   the
    appellant's evidence regarding the disappearance  of  his  brother  and
    father in Sri Lanka; and  wrongly  approached  the  appellant's  asylum
    grounds as a "back door" attempt to create a further appeal  procedure.
    There was also a challenge raised  to  the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    psychiatric report.

4.   I am persuaded that the judge materially erred in law.  Despite  citing
    from Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  D  (Tamil)  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702 (Devaseelan), the judge wrongly construed that case to hold
    in unqualified terms that he must not  go  behind  the  earlier  (2007)
    determination.  The judge stated at [9] that "I am not prepared  to  go
    behind the previous determination - in fact according to Devaseelan, I
    must not do so".  The judge wrongly  treated  that  past  determination
    both as a start and a finishing point that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness.  I also note that the  appellant's  2007  appeal  was
    heard in the fast track and proceeded even though the appellant said he
    needed more time to produce  certain  documents,  considerations  which
    should at least have been treated as  of  potential  relevance  to  the
    efficacy of the first determination.

5.   A second error in the determination is that the judge  appears  not  to
    have taken into account all the relevant evidence.  In [11]  he  stated
    that insofar as the appellant was seeking to  base  his  claim  on  his
    brother (TV) having disappeared in Sri Lanka, "there  is  no  proof  of
    this assertion.  I am not satisfied I need to look at this point of the
    claim at all due to the lack of  any  such  evidence."   This  entirely
    ignored the fact that the appellant had produced on arrest warrant  for
    TV on 16 June 2009 and a letter from British Red Cross confirming  that
    TV had been registered in detention on 17  June  2009,  transferred  to
    Anuradhapura Prison on 15 September 2009 and visited by the ICRC on  11
    October 2009.  Whilst the respondent had considered and  rejected  both
    these items of evidence in the course of rejecting his earlier  further
    representations, this did not justify the judge's failure  to  consider
    them at all.

6.   The fact that the judge in several places  stated  that  he  considered
    the appellant was seeking to pursue an asylum claim by the "back  door"
    is not enough on its own to establish an error of law because, although
    of course the appellant was entitled  by  virtue  of  the  Section  120
    notice to raise asylum grounds, the appellant's actual application  was
    not based on asylum grounds.  However, given  that  these  observations
    went in tandem with a failure to consider the asylum claim  properly -
    by the front or back door - this feature of his determination does add
    to the sum of errors.

7.   There were other arguments advanced on behalf of the appellant  but  it
    is unnecessary for me to address them because the above two errors  are
    more than sufficient to satisfy me that the judge materially  erred  in
    law.

8.   It is most unfortunate, given the length this  appellant  has  been  in
    litigation or conducting further representations that there is still no
    finality.  I see no alternative, however, to the judge's decision being
    set aside for legal error and the case being remitted to  be  heard  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.

9.   For the above reasons:

    The judge materially erred in law and his decision is set aside.


    The case is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  before  Judge
    Clemes).

No anonymity direction is made.




            [pic]
Signed                                  Date: 6 July 2016


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

