
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/09957/2014
     IA/09958/2014
     IA/09959/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 7 December 2015                       |            On 4 January 2016        |
|                                         |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                                     ID
                                     LD
                                     JD
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss D Revill, Counsel, instructed by Peer & Co
(Watford)
For the Respondent:    Miss Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is my extempore determination in  respect  of  the  error  of  law
    hearing that has taken place before me today.  The appellants  in  this
    case are Mr ID (the father), Ms LD (the mother)  and  finally  Miss  JD
    (their child currently aged 14).  The matter comes before  me  pursuant
    to a grant of permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal  Judge  McWilliams
    dated 27 April 2015 when she had considered the matter on the papers.

2.   The original decision now on appeal  is  that  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Wilson dated 5 November 2014.  He had dismissed  the  appellants'
    appeals against the Respondent's decisions to remove them all from  the
    United  Kingdom.   There  were  three  grounds  of  appeal.  They   are
    summarised in the skeleton argument  relied  upon  by  the  Appellants,
    helpfully prepared by Miss Revill in respect of this case.

3.   The grounds are summarised at paragraph 3  as  follows:  (i)  that  the
    judge erred in failing  to  have  regard  to  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others
    (Decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197  (IAC)
    and EV (Philippines) and Others v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 when assessing the reasonableness of the
    third's Appellant's relocation; (ii) that the judge  erred  in  finding
    that the fact that the third Appellant  would  be  accompanied  by  her
    parents made it reasonable for her to leave the UK; and/or  (iii)  that
    the judge erred in failing to have regard to a material matter,  namely
    the public interest consideration in Section 117B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

4.   It is clear to me that the real focus of this case  is  in  respect  of
    the third Appellant, i.e. the child. I  accept  of  course  that  Judge
    Wilson did not have to  refer  specificlay  to  case  law  or  even  to
    statute. In fact he referred specifically to  Azimi-Moayed  and  to  EV
    (Philippines) along with other authorities.

5.   The ground of appeal in reality comes to this: that the  judge  focused
    too readily on the ability of this family to stay united  as  a  family
    for the third Appellant, a 14 year old girl, to be able  to  return  to
    Nigeria where she has not been for a very long time. That time being in
    the region of some eleven years or so.  Questions in  relation  to  the
    reasonableness or whether it would be unduly harsh or even possible for
    the child to return required greater analysis and the Court of Appeal's
    decision in EV (Philippines) is relied upon by the Appellant.

6.   In this case I can well understand the judge's concerns in  respect  of
    the parents' very poor immigration histories  and  indeed  the  limited
    ambit of their private and perhaps family life arguments but  the  case
    was put in a very different context because of the child.

7.   In my judgement, looking at  the  determination  as  a  whole,  despite
    paragraphs 8 and 10 in particular, where the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    said that he was noting this was a difficult matter because  the  child
    had entered the stage of her life when  she  was  beginning  to  become
    independent of her parents, and despite the judge saying  at  paragraph
    10 that each case will inevitably be fact sensitive as there is a broad
    spectrum of cases under the Rules, in my judgement there was much  more
    to this case. That is because as the case law notes, the child had  not
    just been in the United Kingdom from the ages of 0 to 7. She  had  been
    in the United Kingdom attending school, building up  her  private  life
    during the critical ages that are highlighted in the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision in Azimi-Moayed.

8.   In my judgement, in the circumstances  of  this  case,  much  more  was
    required when conducting the best interests analysis when following the
    "Every Child Matters" policy of the Respondent and the Supreme  Court's
    decision in ZH (Tanzania).  Right the judge was to highlight  the  poor
    immigration history of the parents, but in  my  judgement  he  did  not
    provide the required statutory weight nor  did  he  consider  the  very
    difficult position that the third  Appellant  was  in  because  of  the
    stance taken by her parents.  In relation to the  Section  117A-D  NIAA
    2002 issues there was a mandatory obligation upon the judge to consider
    Section 117 in respect of the parents and that was  not  explicitly  or
    clearly undertaken. In my judgement it should have been a task that was
    undertaken.

9.   In the circumstances I conclude that there is an error of law which  is
    material in respect of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision.   In
    the circumstances, without indicating one way or the other as  to  what
    the ultimate result might be, my decision is follows.

    1.   The decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wilson  contains  a
         material error of law and therefore I set it aside in its entirety,
         both in respect of the Immigration Rules and Article 8.


    2.   The matter shall be reconsidered at the First-tier Tribunal  at  a
         substantive hearing at Hatton Cross, not before Judge Wilson.


    3.   The appellants  shall  file  and  serve  any  documents  including
         witness statements 21 days before the  hearing  at  the  First-tier
         Tribunal. Those documents are to include a skeleton argument.


    4.   The Respondent shall file and serve a skeleton argument in reply 7
         days before the hearing.

10.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law.  It
    is set aside. The remaking of the decision  shall  take  place  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross or such other hearing centre as may
    be directed. There is an anonymity direction in respect of this case as
    there is a child appellant.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood






