
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09772/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (Upper Tribunal)         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 10 March 2015                              |On 31 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR MILOS MILIVOJEVIC
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow ( Home office presenting officer)
For the Claimant: Ms A Smith (Counsel instructed by Kingsley Napley
Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   For ease of reference I shall refer to the parties  as  the  "Secretary
    of State" who is the appellant in this matter and to Mr Milivojevic  as
    "the Claimant".

2.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Flynn) decision promulgated on 13 November 2014  whereby  the  Tribunal
    allowed the Claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision
    to remove him from the UK having refused to vary leave to remain  under
    the long residence rules.  The Tribunal allowed the  appeal  under  the
    immigration rules and under Article 8 in the alternative.

Background

3.   The claimant is a citizen of Serbia and his date of  birth  is  26  May
    1984.  He arrived in the UK on 10 September 2002 and was given leave to
    enter as a student until October 2007 thereafter  further  leave  as  a
    student until September 2011.  He was granted leave as a Tier 5 Migrant
    until 15 October 2012.  On 11 October 2012 he submitted an  application
    for indefinite leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  ten  years'  lawful
    residence in the UK.

4.   The Secretary of State considered the application  and  concluded  that
    the Claimant failed to accrue ten years' continuous lawful residence in
    the UK because he had been out of the UK  for  a  total  of  862  days,
    contrary to paragraph 276A(a)(v) of the rules.  The Claimant relied  on
    grounds of appeal that the decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules and was unlawful under Section 6 of the Human  Rights
    Act 1998.

5.    The  case  on  behalf  of  the  Claimant  was  that  as  a  well-known
    professional musician with exceptional talent, travel in and out of the
    UK  was  essential  in  the  course  of  his  career  and  professional
    engagements.  In  addition  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  have  his
    accordion instrument professionally serviced in Italy and  in  Bulgaria
    each year.

6.   At the hearing before the First-tier the Claimant produced  a  schedule
    of days spent outside  the  UK  in  pursuit  of  his  profession  which
    amounted to 779 days in total. Witnesses gave evidence of the fact that
    the Claimant was exceptionally talented and that his career in  the  UK
    should be promoted.  None of the facts were disputed.

7.   In conclusion the Tribunal found at [43] that the  Secretary  of  State
    failed to exercise  discretion in rejecting the application  under  the
    Rules. The Tribunal proceeded to exercise discretion on behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State. The Tribunal found that the Claimant  had  spent  a
    total of 779 days absent from the UK between 2002 and  2012.  Excluding
    the periods of work related absences for concerts,  lessons,  servicing
    his instrument and receiving physiotherapy, all of which were  integral
    to his career as a professional musician which amounted  to  304  days,
    this left a net absence of 475  days  which  was  below  the  permitted
    period of 540 days [42].  It considered public interest  factors.   The
    Tribunal allowed the appeal outright under the Rules [46].

8.   In the alternative the Tribunal considered Article  8  outside  of  the
    Rules and applied the five step test in Razgar which it found to be met
    on the basis of private  life.  In  considering  proportionality    the
    Tribunal also took into account the delay of fifteen months before  the
    Secretary of State reached a decision, that the Claimant  had  complied
    with Immigration Rules and built a professional life  consisting  of  a
    professional career, musical and personal relationships in the UK.

Grounds of Application

9.   The Secretary of State contended that the  Tribunal  erred  in  law  by
    failing to follow  Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307
    (IAC),  and  Mirza  and  Others  [2011]  EWCA  Civ   159   as   regards
    consideration of  Article 8 in circumstances where there can be no safe
    finding of a  disproportionate  breach  where  the  immigration  matter
    awaits a lawful decision.

10.  Ground 2 referring to "the best interests of the UK" was not pursued.

Permission to Appeal

11.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle  on
    6 January 2015.

12.  The judge found it arguable  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to  correctly
    characterise the Secretary of State's residual discretion  outside  the
    Rules and failed to apply Ukus [2012]  UKUT  00307  (IAC).   The  judge
    erred in allowing the appeal outright.  Further it is argued  that  the
    Tribunal gave weight to immaterial matters namely the best interests of
    the UK.

Error of Law Hearing

13.  Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds of appeal.   In  essence  the  Tribunal
    had been wrong to exercise a discretion that  was  not  the  Tribunal's
    discretion to exercise.  Instead of allowing the  appeal  outright  the
    Tribunal ought to have remitted the matter to the  Secretary  of  State
    for reconsideration and to exercise discretion.

14.  Ms Smith relied on a Rule 24 response arguing that the Tribunal  always
    had a residual discretion and that the Tribunal  had  properly  allowed
    the appeal outright or in the alternative under Article 8.  She further
    submitted that that the findings made by the  Tribunal  have  not  been
    challenged by the Secretary of  State.   There  had  been  considerable
    delay on the part of the Secretary of State in reaching a decision  and
    there was likely to be further delay in the event that  the  matter  is
    remitted for reconsideration and this  had  a  significant  impact  and
    restriction on the claimant's career.

15.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    my reasons.

Discussion and Decision

16.  I find that there was a material error of law in the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  The Tribunal failed to follow the approach in
    Ukus (cited above). The Tribunal was required to consider whether or
    not the Secretary of State had discretion and if so whether or not that
    discretion had been exercised, and in the event that it had been
    exercised whether it had been exercised fairly and properly.  The
    Tribunal in Ukus clearly sets out the various stages to be considered.
    This case squarely falls into the category of cases where there is
    discretion and the Secretary of State has not exercised that
    discretion.  As is specified in paragraphs 2 and 3 of the headnote of
    Ukus;

     "2. Where the decision maker has failed to exercise a discretion
    vested in him, the Tribunal's jurisdiction on appeal is limited to a
    decision that the failure renders the decision 'not in accordance with
    the law' (s 86(3)(a)). Because the discretion is vested in the
    Executive, the appropriate course will be for the Tribunal to require
    the decision maker to complete his task by reaching a lawful decision
    on the outstanding application, along the lines set out in SSHD v Abdi
    [1996] Imm AR 148. In such a case, it makes no difference whether there
    is such a statutory power as is mentioned in paragraph 1 above.


     3. If the decision maker has lawfully exercised his discretion and  the
    Tribunal has such a statutory  power,  the  Tribunal  must  either  (i)
    uphold the decision maker's decision (if the  Tribunal  is  unpersuaded
    that  the  decision  maker's  discretion  should  have  been  exercised
    differently); or (ii) reach a different decision in the exercise of its
    own discretion."

17.   At the First -tier hearing the Claimant produced material that was
    not before the Secretary of State that was relevant to the issue of
    breaks in continuous residence, including a revised schedule of
    absences.  The guidance produced by the Secretary of State  (repeated
    in the decision at [38]) clearly sets out the scope of discretion
    exercisable by the Secretary of State.  I find that the Tribunal erred
    by taking the decision to allow the appeal outright when the proper
    course was for the matter to be remitted to the Secretary of State.

18.   Furthermore, I am satisfied that   the  Tribunal  ought  not  to  have
    considered this matter under Article 8 following the Court of Appeal in
    Mirza in which it was stated that "there was no  need  to  travel  into
    article 8 once unlawfulness had been  established".  The  Secretary  of
    State had no opportunity to assess all the  relevant  material  and  to
    make a considered and lawful decision under the Rules and exercise  her
    discretion.  In circumstances where the application is made  under  the
    long residence Rules it must be right that a lawful decision is made by
    the Secretary of State, that in turn would impact on and illuminate any
    assessment of proportionality under Article 8.

19.    It was common ground that  there had been no challenge to the
    findings of fact made by the Tribunal as regards the reasons for  and
    number of absences from the UK and the fact that the bulk of those
    could be treated as absences reasonably pursued in connection with
    professional engagements as a musician [40-42].



Notice of Decision

20.  I find a material error of law in the decision and reasons which  shall
    be set aside.

21.  I remake that decision.

22.  I allow the appeal to the extent that  the  decision  made  is  not  in
    accordance with the law.  I remit the matter to the Secretary of  State
    for reconsideration.

23.  I further make a direction for the reconsideration to be  expedited  in
    view  of  the  considerable  delay  and  restrictions  imposed  on  the
    appellant's professional musical career.

No anonymity order is made.






Signed                                  Date 30.3.2015

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore  there  can  be  no  fee  award.   A
hearing before  the  Tribunal  was  necessary  and  the  Claimant  submitted
further material at that stage.


Signed


Deputy       Upper       Tribunal       Judge        G        A        Black
                          Date 30.3.2015


