
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/06963/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                  |Promulgated                          |
|On May 6, 2016                       |On May 18, 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                              MRs ustine mugabe
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
Appellant   Mr Brown, Counsel, instructed by Arshed & Co Solicitors
Respondent  Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make  an  anonymity  order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

 2. The appellant is a national  of  Zimbabwe.  On  December  8,  2014  she
    applied to her pre-existing leave as a visitor to remain in the  United
    Kingdom as a carer for her  daughter  and  grandchild.  The  respondent
    refused her application in a decision dated February 5, 2015.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision on March 25,  2015  under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  the
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Parker (hereinafter
    referred to as "the Judge" on May 18,  2015  as  a  paper  case.  In  a
    decision  promulgated  on  June  1,  2015  the  Judge   dismissed   the
    appellant's application under both the Immigration Rules and article  8
    ECHR.

 4. The appellant appealed the Judge's decision and  permission  to  appeal
    was refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bartlett on August  25,
    2015. Permission to appeal was renewed and permission  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on October 5, 2015 who found  there  was  an
    arguable error in law on the basis the Judge had failed to have  regard
    to the totality of the evidence concerning the appellant's relationship
    with both her daughter and grand-child.

 5. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response on October  21,  2015  although
    when the matter came before me on the above date Mr. Harrison  did  not
    rely on that document.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

 6. In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce  identified
    an arguable error of law. At the hearing Mr Harrison accepted the Judge
    had not considered the appellant's relationship with the her grandchild
    and given  the  circumstances  of  the  case  and  the  medical  issues
    affecting the appellant's daughter it was incumbent  on  the  Judge  to
    consider Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009. He accepted there had been an error in law.

 7. I raised with both representatives where this appeal  should  be  heard
    and both parties agreed with me that in light of Part 3, Section 7.1 to
    7.3 of the Practice Statement the matter  should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal as fresh oral  evidence  and  documentary  evidence
    would be needed as the appellant had been unrepresented at the original
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. I direct that any additional evidence should  be  served  on  both  the
    Tribunal and other party in  accordance  with  the  current  Procedural
    Rules  and  this  should  include  witness  statements  from  both  the
    appellant and her daughter together with any relevant medical  evidence
    and evidence of income.

DECISION

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

10. The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for these issues
    to be addressed hearing under Section 12 of the Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

11. I direct that the matter be listed before any Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Parker.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
