
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/09510/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 July 2016                        |    On  20 July 2016                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                                     VI
                          (anonymity directioN MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  J
    Bartlett promulgated on 16 December  2015,  in  which  he  allowed  the
    respondent's appeal against a decision to remove her  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever  on
    28 May 2016

Anonymity

 3. No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier  Tribunal  however  I
    consider it appropriate for the following  anonymity  direction  to  be
    made given there is a child involved:

     "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. "

Background

 4. The respondent is a national of Nigeria, born on 10 January 1976. There
    are no records of the respondent's entry to the United Kingdom, however
    she first came to the attention of the Secretary of State on 9 December
    2003, when she sought  a  residence  card  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national. The said  card  was  issued,  valid  until  7  January  2009.
    Thereafter the respondent twice applied  unsuccessfully  for  permanent
    residence and her appeals against those decisions  were  dismissed.  An
    application submitted for the respondent's daughter was refused  on  18
    July 2011. A third unsuccessful application for permanent residence was
    made in 2013 and her appeal against that decision was  dismissed  on  5
    June 2015. In the interim, the respondent sought  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds based on her family life with  her  daughter,  'K'
    who was born in February 2006.

 5. The Secretary of State refused the application  on  18  February  2015,
    concluding that while K had lived in the  United  Kingdom  continuously
    since birth it was not unreasonable to expect her to leave  the  United
    Kingdom. It was considered  that  the  respondent  could  assist  K  in
    adjusting to life in Nigeria. There were  said  to  be  no  exceptional
    circumstances.

 6.  The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant requested an oral hearing of  her  appeal  but  did  not,
    ultimately, attend the hearing which was listed for 22 September  2015.
    The Secretary of State agreed that the  appeal  could  proceed  without
    representation on her behalf. The judge considered the  matter  on  the
    papers on 4 December 2015 and concluded that the  appellant  could  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules; that it was
    not unreasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom with  regard
    to EX.1(a) of Appendix FM but allowed the  appeal  outside  the  Rules,
    finding that the public interest was outweighed by the interests of the
    appellant and her child.

The grounds of appeal

 8. The grounds argue that the judge  materially  misdirected  himself  and
    failed to give any adequate reasons for  his  findings  on  a  material
    matter. Essentially, the judge had found that it would be reasonable to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom when considering the Rules
    and had failed to set out any reasons why the opposite  conclusion  was
    reached in relation to section 117B(6). Furthermore, there was said  to
    be no consideration to the respondent's  overstaying  and  her  use  of
    public services, such as health and education.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted as  it  was  considered  that  it  was
    arguable that there was an inconsistency in the  decisions  reached  on
    the same or very similar tests, without  any  clear  reasons  why  such
    should be the case.

The hearing

10. The respondent did not attend the hearing and nor was she  represented.
    Daniel Aramide Solicitors wrote to the Upper Tribunal on 11  July  2016
    in order to state that the respondent had made  a  further  application
    for leave to remain on the basis that  her  child  was  now  a  British
    citizen. Indeed, a photocopy of the  certificate  of  registration  was
    enclosed with that letter. The letter explained  that  because  of  the
    said application, the respondent would not, therefore, be attending the
    hearing. The Home Office were said to be aware of this development.   I
    therefore proceeded with the hearing by  way  of  submissions  from  Mr
    Melvin.

11. Mr Melvin relied on the Secretary of  State's  grounds  of  appeal.  He
    submitted that the "unreasonableness test" was looked at by  the  Court
    of Appeal in MA (Pakistan & others) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 where the Court
    adopted the findings in MM Uganda v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 450 in relation to taking into  account  the
    whole case including public interest  reasons.  He  argued  that  Judge
    Bartlett should have looked at that matter  through  the  lens  of  the
    Rules. He invited me to find a material error of law and on  the  basis
    of the findings and evidence of  the  judge,  proceed  to  remake  that
    decision and conclude that the appeal fell to be dismissed

12. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision on the error of law.

Decision on error of law


13. The decision  and  reasons  of  the  judge  was  detailed  however,  it
    contained a material error of law and is set aside,  with  no  findings
    preserved, for the following reasons.


14. In MA  (Pakistan),  it  was  established  that  the  reasonableness  of
    expecting a child to leave  the  United  Kingdom,  as  referred  to  in
    EX.1(a) of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules,  paragraph  276ADE(iv)
    of the Rules and section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act should  be  approached
    in the same way.

15. Elias LJ was persuaded to follow the approach taken in MM  (Uganda)  as
    follows;


    "But the critical point is that section 117C(5) is in substance a free-
    standing provision in the same way as section 117B(6) and even  so  the
    court in MM (Uganda) held that  wider  public  interest  considerations
    must be taken into account when applying the "unduly harsh"  criterion.
    It seems to me  that  it  must  be  equally  so  with  respect  to  the
    reasonableness criterion in section 117B(6)."


16. The difficulty with the decision in issue is  that  the  judge  reached
    conflicting decisions on the  same  matter,  in  that  the  appeal  was
    dismissed under EX.1.(a) because the judge did not accept that  it  was
    unreasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  but
    allowed with regard to section 117B(6),  with  the  judge  finding  the
    reverse to be true. Furthermore, the latter  decision  did  not  engage
    with the wider public interest considerations or even  explain  why  it
    would not be reasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside, with no
    findings preserved.

18. Given that the respondent did not attend the hearing before either  the
    First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal, I could see no reason why  I
    could  not  proceed  to  remake  the  decision  on  the  basis  of  the
    information before me.




Remaking


19. I will now revert to the parties' original designation before the First-
    tier Tribunal. The appellant claimed to have entered the United Kingdom
    on 9 June 1997, however it would appear that the respondent was unaware
    of her presence until she sought a residence card as  evidence  of  her
    right to reside in the United Kingdom as the spouse of an EEA  national
    in 2003. That application was granted and  a  card  was  issued,  valid
    until 7 January 2009. Thereafter, the appellant  has  been  pursuing  a
    number of applications and appeals for permanent residence and on human
    rights grounds. At the same time, the appellant has  previously  sought
    to register her child, born on 9 February 2006, as a  British  citizen.
    Ultimately, on 16 May 2016, the child was duly registered.   Otherwise,
    the appellant says in her statement  that  she  worked  in  the  United
    Kingdom, which she was entitled to do at  least  during  the  five-year
    period when she was issued with a valid residence  card.  In  addition,
    her child has resided in the United Kingdom  since  birth  and  attends
    school in this country.  Indeed,  the  appellant  says  that  she,  and
    presumably her child as well, has not left the United Kingdom since her
    arrival here.


20. The sole reason for the refusal of the  appellant's  application  under
    the Rules, was that it was not accepted that  it  was  unreasonable  to
    expect her child to leave the United Kingdom.


21. Reference was made  in  the  refusal  letter  to  the  ability  of  the
    appellant to assist her daughter with her own knowledge and  experience
    of Nigeria.  That is no doubt the case and I have taken that issue into
    account, however, that is not the only  issue  to  be  considered.  The
    child in question is now a British  citizen  and  has  resided  in  the
    United Kingdom continuously since birth for a period of ten  years.  It
    is not in dispute that her best interests are to continue  residing  in
    the United Kingdom with  her  mother  and  in  order  to  continue  her
    education.
22.  Returning to MA (Pakistan), I note  that  a  period  of  seven  years'
    residence would need to be given "significant  weight".  I  consider  a
    period of ten years coupled with British citizenship is equally, if not
    more, deserving of weight.


23. As stated in MA (Pakistan), the starting point is that leave should  be
    granted unless there  are  "powerful"  reasons  to  the  contrary.  The
    Secretary of State has identified no such reasons here  either  in  the
    decision itself or during Mr Melvin's submissions. I  have  taken  into
    consideration the fact that the appellant has  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom for long periods of time without leave, however it is  fair  to
    say that she has spent the best part of the last thirteen years  either
    with a right to reside or actively pursuing applications and appeals.


24. I have placed into  the  balance  the  fact  that  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control is in the public interest.  I also accept  that  it
    is likely to be the case that the appellant has used  public  services,
    if  only  in  relation  to  her  child's  education   and   healthcare,
    nonetheless, I find that these matters, in combination, do  not  amount
    to powerful reasons, sufficient to outweigh the best interests  of  the
    child.  In conclusion, I find that it would be unreasonable  to  expect
    the appellant's child to leave the United Kingdom. The terms of EX.1(a)
    of the Rules are met and leave ought to be granted  to  the  appellant.
    There are no powerful reasons to the contrary. I allow  the  appeal  on
    that basis.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

I remake the decision by allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


Signed                                       Date: 19 July 2016
T Kamara
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
