
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/09103/2015
      IA/09107/2015
      IA/09124/2015
      IA/09127/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On July 6, 2016                 |On August 10, 2016              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  ADIL [S]
                                  FOZIA [B]
                                    [S S]
                                    [H S]
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OFF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brown, Counsel, instructed by Farani-Javid Taylor

      Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellants  were,  at  the  time  of  application,  citizens  of
       Pakistan. On December 23, 2014 the appellants applied for  leave  to
       remain on the basis of family and private life under Appendix FM  of
       the Immigration Rules. The respondent refused their applications  on
       February 17, 2015 and required them to leave the United Kingdom.

    2. The appellants appealed those decisions under section 82(1)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on March 4, 2015.

    3. Their appeals came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Grant
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on February 1, 2016 and in  a
       decision promulgated on February 5, 2016 she refused  their  appeals
       under the Immigration Rules, article 3 and 8 ECHR.

    4. The appellants  lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  February  17,  2016
       submitting the Judge had primarily erred in her approach to the best
       interests of the children although other grounds were raised.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Landes on July 13, 2016  who  found  it  was  arguable  the  Judge's
       approach to the best interests of the children was flawed albeit she
       found the other grounds had less force.

    6. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard  submissions
       from both Mr Bramble and Ms Brown.

    7. No anonymity direction has been made.

SUBMISSIONS

    8. Ms Brown adopted the grounds of appeal  and  submitted  the  grounds
       established the Judge had primarily erred in her approach to Section
       55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  and  that
       this error meant the assessment carried out in paragraphs  [31]  and
       [32] of her decision was flawed.

    9. Ms Brown reminded the Tribunal that:

      a. [HS], the eldest child (the fourth named appellant), had been nine-
         years of age at the date of hearing and was  just  was  two  months
         short of his tenth birthday.  He, like his siblings, had been  born
         in the United Kingdom and they had all spent their life here.

      b. The third-named appellant was eight years of age  at  the  date  of
         hearing.

      c. The first and second-named appellants came to this country  legally
         and had remained here lawfully throughout.

   10. Ms Brown submitted that the Judge erred in her approach in paragraph
       [32] of  her  decision  when  she  stated,  "...  it  was  perfectly
       reasonable to expect children  to  return  to  Pakistan  with  their
       parents" and she referred to the decision of PD and others  (Article
       8-conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC) and  in
       particular, paragraphs [18] and [24] of that decision. She submitted
       the correct approach was  summarised  in  paragraph  [25]  when  the
       Tribunal stated:

    "... We consider that the decision maker  could  not  then  proceed  to
    determine the son's application in isolation from the others, since the
    application of the criterion of reasonableness behoved the official  to
    evaluate all three claims in the round and determine them together. The
    answer to the question of whether the son could reasonably be  expected
    to leave the United Kingdom could  not  realistically  or  sensibly  be
    answered without first examining what the future was likely to hold for
    all three family members."

   11. At paragraph [30] of PD the Tribunal stated:

    "The four dominant factors, summarised, are his length of residence  in
    the United Kingdom, his full integration in United Kingdom society, his
    age and his minimal ties with his country of origin."

Ms Brown submitted the Judge had failed to attach sufficient weight  to  the
fact [HS] had been educated in the United Kingdom, had lived  all  his  life
here and was fully integrated.

   12. Ms Brown further argued the Judge erred by concluding  that  as  the
       parents were returning the children could also return.  She  had  to
       have had regard to the factors in PD (even though it  had  not  been
       promulgated at the date of hearing).

   13. Ms Brown  also  submitted  the  application  by  the  Judge  of  the
       principles set out in EV (Phillipines) and others v SSHD [2014] EWCA
       Civ 874 also amounted to an error in law because in  that  case  the
       children were  all  under  the  age  of  seven  and  the  issue  was
       reasonableness of return.

   14. In assessing reasonableness of return the Judge wrongly referred  to
       the Tribunal's view in Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions  affecting
       children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 when considering  [HS]'s
       case and wrongly found that [HS] might benefit from being taught  in
       his mother tongue in the absence of any  evidence  to  support  that
       finding. The Judge also failed to attach sufficient  weight  to  the
       difficulties [HS] experienced despite there being a large bundle  of
       evidence before her. Whilst [HS] was not at the date  of  hearing  a
       British citizen more weight should have been attached to the fact he
       would have been awarded British  citizenship  when  considering  the
       public issue of removal.

   15. The Judge failed to have regard to regard the fact the  family  were
       and continued to be self-supporting and spoke English.

   16. As regards the other grounds  of  appeal  she  submitted  the  Judge
       failed to consider whether there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
       return as required by paragraph 276ADE (vi) HC 395.  The  Judge  was
       wrong to suggest an asylum claim should have been lodged because the
       claim brought was under article 3 ECHR only.

   17. Mr Bramble adopted the Rule 24 response  dated  July  29,  2016.  He
       submitted the arguments presented amounted to nothing  more  than  a
       mere disagreement with the Judge's decision  and  the  fact  another
       Judge may approach fact finding differently did not mean there was a
       material error.

   18. The Judge  heard  the  appeal  before  PD  was  promulgated  but  he
       submitted the Judge's approach was correct in any event.  The  Judge
       was clearly aware of the evidence as  she  referred  to  it  in  her
       decision. She was not required to summarise each and every piece  of
       evidence. Ms Brown submitted the Judge's assessment in paragraph  31
       was insufficient but anyone reading that paragraph would be able  to
       see the Judge was aware that [HS] attended school,  had  speech  and
       language difficulties and that all  children  had  been  here  since
       birth. The Judge recognised they were integrated  and  noted  [SS]'s
       progress. The headnote in Azimi states:

    "As a starting point it is in the best interests of children to be with
    both their parents and if both  parents  are  being  removed  from  the
    United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point  suggests  that  so  should
    dependent children who form part of their household  unless  there  are
    reasons to the contrary."

   19. Ms Brown had argued this approach was  wrong  and  referred  to  the
       approach taken in EV. Mr Bramble submitted that the  Judge  did  not
       err as she merely started from the position that  the  child's  best
       interests would be with his parents before considering the  evidence
       and making a final decision in  paragraphs  [34]  and  [35]  of  her
       decision.

   20. Mr Bramble submitted the Judge did not state in paragraph [32]  that
       [HS] would benefit from being taught in his mother tongue but merely
       suggested he might benefit. The  Judge  did  not  place  herself  in
       specialist role and this option was something she considered in  her
       assessment of the evidence.

   21. Paragraph [33] of the decision must  be  read  against  the  Judge's
       reciting of facts in paragraphs [6], [7] and  [20].  The  fact  they
       speak English has been deemed to be a  neutral  point  (AM  (Section
       117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)). As regarded the other  grounds
       he submitted  the  Judge  addressed  British  citizenship  correctly
       between paragraphs [18] and [21] as no application had been made  at
       the time the appeal was  heard.  Finally,  he  submitted  the  Judge
       rejected the First-named appellant's claim about what he feared  and
       found the evidence advanced to be an  embellishment.  There  was  no
       need to consider whether there were significant obstacles.

   22. In response Ms Brown accepted adverse findings had been made but she
       maintained the Judge should have assessed whether  there  were  very
       significant obstacles and by not doing she erred. She also failed to
       follow the approach set out in PD or show she had considered all  of
       the evidence.

   23. Following submissions, I reserved my decision.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   24. The appellants are father, mother and two  children  and  they  each
       applied for leave to remain under the Immigration  Rules  and  under
       article 8 ECHR. The first-named appellant also raised an  article  3
       issue. The Judge dismissed their appeals. Permission to  appeal  was
       granted primarily on article 8 and section 55  issues  although  the
       right of appeal was not limited.

   25. Ms Brown addressed me on all issues. At the end of  her  submissions
       she addressed me on the  ancillary  grounds  of  appeal  outside  of
       article 8 and section 55. In effect she argued that Judge's findings
       on risk to  the  First-named  appellant  and  his  family  were  not
       properly considered I am satisfied they were. The Judge both saw and
       heard the  evidence  and  in  her  decision  she  gave  reasons  for
       rejecting that aspect of the claim.  A  full  consideration  of  the
       facts is contained in paragraph  [26]  of  the  decision  and  I  am
       satisfied those findings were open to her. Having  found  they  were
       not at risk the claim under article 3  ECHR  would  fail  and  there
       would be then be no "very significant obstacles" to the  first-named
       appellant returning and the  finding  at  paragraph  [24]  that  the
       appellants could not satisfy paragraph 276ADE HC 395 was one open to
       the Judge.

   26. Ms Brown, like her predecessor in the FTT proceedings,  referred  to
       the fact [HS] would be ten years  old  shortly  after  the  hearing.
       However, the Judge had to consider the position as at  the  date  of
       hearing. At that date [HS] was not a British  citizen  and  was  not
       able to apply for citizenship.  The  Judge  had  to  deal  with  the
       position at the date of hearing (in-country appeal) and she did just
       that.

   27. It would be wrong to argue the Judge had no regard to the period  of
       time he had been here  or  that  he  would  be  able  to  apply  for
       citizenship. The Judge referred to these matters in her decision and
       reminded herself that [HS] could apply for citizenship once  he  was
       ten years of age. I reject the argument that the Judge  should  have
       have considered the appeal on the basis [HS] was soon to be eligible
       to apply to be a British citizen but I, as did the Judge, accept the
       length of time here would  be  a  factor  to  have  regard  to  when
       assessing any claim under the Rules or article 8 ECHR.

   28. Ms Brown's primary submissions are that the Judge's  assessment  was
       flawed  because  she  applied  legal  principles  incorrectly   when
       considering article 8 ECHR and section 55 of the 2009 Act.

   29. The Judge correctly identified  the  appellants  could  not  satisfy
       Appendix FM but went onto consider  their  claims  under  article  8
       ECHR. The Judge's decision must be considered as a whole as  against
       picking out individual paragraphs of the decision. At the First-tier
       hearing great weight was  placed  on  [HS]'s  circumstances  and  at
       paragraph [15] of her decision the Judge commenced her record of the
       the appellants' submissions by stating, "Submissions  on  behalf  of
       the  appellant   were   straightforward   and   short.   Mr   Turner
       (representative at the the first-tier hearing) relies  on  the  fact
       the eldest child [HS] was born on 13 April 2006 and by virtue of the
       British Nationality  Act  1981  ....  [HS]  can  apply  for  British
       nationality and he shall be granted status...."

   30. At paragraph [18] of her decision, at the beginning of her findings,
       the Judge noted the case was presented on  the  basis  it  would  be
       disproportionate to remove as [HS] would soon be a British  citizen.
       The Judge considered this approach between paragraphs [19] and  [22]
       concluding, "... the  issue  for  any  Tribunal  is  whether  it  is
       reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK a consideration which
       can form part of the proportionality balancing  act  exercise  under
       article 8 on the facts of the appeal before me in any event."

   31. The Judge contrary to Ms Brown's submissions did not simply say  the
       children should be removed with their parents but made it clear that
       she had to consider whether such removal was  proportionate  on  the
       facts of the case which is of course in line with  the  guidance  in
       both Azimi and PD.

   32. Although the Judge found  at  paragraph  [25]  that  there  were  no
       exceptional circumstances requiring  consideration  outside  of  the
       Rules she nevertheless went onto consider article 8 and  section  55
       issues from paragraph [28] of her decision. She accepted  that  they
       had established both private and family lives in the United  Kingdom
       but formed the view that as the family could be returned as a family
       unit article 8 would not be engaged.

   33. The Tribunal in PD made clear that where there are conjoined appeals
       it is important to look at  claims  not  only  singularly  but  also
       collectively. The Judge noted the  first  two-named  appellants  had
       spent the majority of their lives in Pakistan where they were  born,
       brought up, educated and where the  first-named  appellant  obtained
       work. The Judge previously found paragraph 276ADE(vi) HC 395 was not
       engaged  as  there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  them
       returning. At paragraph [31], contrary to Ms Brown's submissions,  I
       am satisfied the Judge considered all of the evidence submitted  and
       whilst it had been open to  her  to  set  out  in  more  detail  the
       evidence I find her choice not to do so does not amount to an error.
       Importantly, the Judge noted the evidence and the issues and  before
       deciding proportionality she considered these facts. She referred in
       paragraph [32] to the decision of EV. I accept EV concerned children
       who had been here less than seven years but the  principles  applied
       equally apply here. The fact being the  Judge  was  aware  of  their
       length of stay here and that they were born here and had never  been
       to their country  of  nationality.  All  appellants  were  Pakistani
       nationals including the fourth-named appellant.

   34. The Judge did not make a finding [HS] would benefit from  living  in
       Pakistan but commented he might which is something she could say  as
       his family were Pakistani nationals and they had extended family  in
       Pakistan. The cases quoted in paragraphs [32] and [33] are  relevant
       cases  and  reflects  the  fact  the  Judge  was  aware  of  current
       legislation in place at that time. The finding in paragraph [33]  is
       not a finding against the appellants. It is arguable it reflects the
       fact that weight should be given [HS]'s situation  and  pointed  out
       the  difference  between  the  third  and  fourth-named  appellant's
       situations.

   35. The Judge pulled all the matters together and  what  is  clear  from
       case law is that if the finding made was one open to the Judge  then
       the mere fact a different Judge  may  conclude  otherwise  does  not
       amount to an error in law.

   36. Although Ms Brown argued that the Judge had  erred  I  am  satisfied
       that the Judge was fully aware of the  family's  circumstances.  She
       considered the best interests of the children  by  considering  what
       awaited the family as a whole in Pakistan  and  she  concluded  that
       these factors outweighed the family's desire to remain in the United
       Kingdom. The Judge acknowledged  Section  17B(6)  of  the  2002  Act
       applied but  concluded,  as  was  open  to  her,  that  it  was  not
       unreasonable for the family, all Pakistani  nationals,  to  live  in
       Pakistan. She  had  regard  to  the  fact  the  children  were  well
       integrated and had been educated here and spoke English and she also
       had regard to the parents' unblemished immigration histories.

   37. Mr Bramble submitted the arguments amounted to nothing more  than  a
       mere disagreement and  having  carefully  considered  the  arguments
       above, the grounds of appeal and the rule 24 statement I find  there
       is no error in law and I uphold the original decision.

DECISION

   38. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a  point  of  law.  I  uphold  the
       decision and dismiss these applications.

Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made.

Signed                                       Dated

 [pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
