
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09968/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th November 2016                |On 18th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                          mr chawki mounie oulmane
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Garrod, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of France born  on  12th  March  1980.   His
    extensive immigration history is set out at paragraph 2 of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's  decision  and  I  take  due  note  of  it.   The
    Appellant's last sentence was a custodial sentence imposed in July 2014
    for twelve months' imprisonment following which he was removed from the
    UK as the subject of a deportation order in March 2015.  He was however
    thereafter arrested in Belfast in May  2015  and  held  in  immigration
    detention  until  granted  bail  in  June  2015.   The  Appellant   had
    previously made application by letters dated  12th  and  24th  February
    2015 for consideration of  his  rights  for  private  and  family  life
    pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.  That
    application was refused by way of a detailed Notice  of  Refusal  dated
    12th March  2015.   Within  that  Notice  of  Refusal  the  Appellant's
    extensive immigration and criminal history was noted at paragraphs 4 to
    10 of the decision, the various sentencing remarks of the Crown  Courts
    and their effect thereon at paragraphs 11 to 23 and  consideration  was
    given to Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009 at paragraph 24.  Thereafter the Secretary of State considered the
    Appellant's Article 8 claim noting the Appellant had a common law wife,
    Samsam Ali Jama Jibril born in Somalia on  9th  September  1984  and  a
    child Ayah Oulmane born in the United Kingdom on 14th July 2014.   That
    family life was  considered  thereafter  as  well  as  the  Appellant's
    private life.

 2. The Appellant appealed the decision of the Secretary of State  and  the
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Colvin  sitting  at
    Hendon Magistrates' Court on 19th May 2016.  In a decision and  reasons
    promulgated on 24th June 2016 the Appellant's  appeal  was  allowed  on
    human rights grounds.

 3. On 1st July 2016 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the
    Upper  Tribunal.   Those  grounds   are   extensive.    However   their
    predominant thrust is that the judge failed to  fully  understand  that
    the wordings of the EEA Regulations are plain and that the need to make
    an application out of country is  mandatory.   They  contend  that  the
    Secretary of State did not have discretion to consider  an  application
    that firstly, has not ever been made and secondly, was not made out  of
    country as required by secondary legislation and therefore  the  entire
    basis for finding that the decision was disproportionate under  Article
    8(2) ECHR was misconceived.  It was  consequently  contended  that  the
    judge had materially erred in effectively deciding that  the  Secretary
    of State should exercise a discretion that the Secretary of  State  did
    not have.  Further it was also  unlawful  that  even  if  there  was  a
    discretion for the Secretary of State to exercise  (which  the  grounds
    contend clearly was not the case), the judge  had  no  jurisdiction  to
    review that discretion it being a discretion outside of the  Rules  and
    Regulations.

 4. On 11th October 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E B Grant granted
    permission to appeal noting that there were merits in the grounds  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in law by  considering  matters
    he had no jurisdiction to  consider  and  which  were  not  before  the
    Tribunal.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  For the purpose  of  continuity  throughout
    the appeal process Mr Oulmane is referred to herein  as  the  Appellant
    and the Secretary of State as the Respondent albeit  that  this  is  an
    appeal by the  Secretary  of  State.   The  Appellant  appears  by  his
    instructed Counsel Mr Garrod.  The Secretary of State  appears  by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Armstrong.

Statute, Regulations, and Case Law

 6. Prior to referring to the submissions in this matter it is  appropriate
    to consider the issues that are outstanding before me.  Regulation  24A
    of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (as
    amended) states:

         "(1) A deportation or exclusion order shall remain in force  unless
             it is revoked by the Secretary of State under this Regulation.

         (2)  A person who is subject to a deportation  or  exclusion  order
             may apply to the Secretary of State to have it revoked if  the
             person considers that there has been a material change in  the
             circumstances that justified the making of the order.

         (3)  An application under paragraph 2 shall set  out  the  material
             change in circumstances relied upon by the applicant  and  may
             only be made when the applicant is outside the United  Kingdom
             ..."

 7. The Regulation is assisted by  recent  case  law.   Firstly  in  Badewa
    (ss117A-D and the EEA Regulations) [2015] UKUT 329 (IAC)  it  was  held
    that the correct approach to be applied by Tribunal Judges in  relation
    to Sections 117A to D of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (as amended) in the context of EEA removal decisions is:

      i) first to decide if a  person  satisfies  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006.   In  this
         context Sections 117A-D has no application;

     ii) where a person has raised Article 8 as a Ground of Appeal,  Section
         117A-D applies.

    Further in Gheorghiu  (Regulation 24AA EEA  Regs  -  relevant  factors)
    [2016] UKUT 24 (IAC) it was held that when considering whether  or  not
    to suspend certification of EEA appeals pursuant to Regulation 24AA  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, the decision-
    maker should take into account inter alia:

      i) the status of the EEA national;

     ii) the impact of removal on family members;

    iii) evidence of continuing risk to the public; and

     iv) the role oral evidence may play.

Submissions/Discussions

 8. Mr Armstrong starts by relying on the Grounds of  Appeal  stating  that
    the determination is fundamentally flawed.  He points out  that  it  is
    recorded in the decision that the Appellant is a  repeat  offender  and
    that  between  December  2001  and  July  2014  he  has  amassed  seven
    convictions for 27 offences in the UK.  He submits that the  judge  has
    noted that it is clear that the Appellant has no regard to the criminal
    law of the country, that there are concerns  that  the  Appellant  will
    reoffend and that the NOMS Report states that he is a  medium  risk  of
    harm to the public and medium risk of reoffending.  He states that  the
    main thrust of the Appellant's original  appeal  are  to  be  found  in
    paragraphs 22 to 26 of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision.   He
    submits that the judge has given undue weight on the  Appellant  having
    no family in France.  He points out that the Appellant is a 36 year old
    adult who speaks French and that it is a  matter  for  the  Appellant's
    partner and child if they decide to go to France with him.   He  refers
    to the authorities mentioned  above  addressing  considerations  to  be
    given on suspending certification and of  the  two  stage  step  to  be
    addressed by the judge in appeals of this nature.  He asked me to  find
    that there are material errors of law in the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal and to remit the matter back for re-hearing before  a  freshly
    constituted First-tier Tribunal.

 9. Mr Garrod starts by adopting the skeleton argument that was before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I have read this document.  He acknowledges
    that he is not the author of it but  points  out  that  the  judge  has
    looked at the head notes in Badewa which explains the judge's approach.
     He takes me to paragraphs 28 and 29 of the decision emphasising  their
    importance setting out Regulations that the judge considered  gave  her
    the authority to consider the matter and to  allow  the  appeal  on  an
    interim basis.  He claims that most of the grounds fall away bearing in
    mind this finding.  He submits that there is no definitive  ability  to
    remit the matter to the Secretary of State although he believes  it  is
    possible to do so and then limit the scope which it is allowed and give
    advice to the Secretary of State.  He submits that there is no guidance
    available as to the position  under  the  EEA  Regulations  relying  on
    paragraph 22 of Badewa.  He  further  contends  that  Badewa  does  not
    assist because it imposes a two stage test as set out  above  and  that
    the judge has gone on to consider Article 8 under the EEA Regulations.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. The issue herein turns on whether or not the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    has properly applied the EEA Regulations.  This is not a case  of  mere
    disagreement with the decision of the Secretary of State.  The relevant
    paragraph is actually highlighted in the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal namely paragraph 24A(3).  That paragraph is recited above  but
    both the Grounds of Appeal and Mr Armstrong  strongly  make  the  point
    firstly that it is necessary to make an application and that  that  has
    not ever been made and secondly the application can only be made whilst
    the applicant is outside the United  Kingdom  i.e.  it  is  an  out  of
    country appeal.  Consequently I agree with the contention  made  by  Mr
    Armstrong that the judge has erred in considering that the Secretary of
    State should exercise a discretion which Regulations indicate that  the
    Appellant does not have.

13. It may be that the Appellant could however  have  made  an  in  country
    appeal and that would have been addressed under Regulation 27(3) of the
    EEA 2006 Regulations.  Mr Armstrong concedes that this Regulation would
    by  virtue  of  transitional  provisions  apply  to  this  appeal   and
    consequently if that were to be followed then the correct  approach  is
    to follow the principles set out in Badewa.  That is not  the  approach
    that has been adopted in this appeal.  It  may  be  that  it  would  be
    appropriate for that to be addressed but this is not the approach  that
    has been carried out by the judge.

14. Consequently I am satisfied that for these reasons there  are  material
    errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  the
    correct approach is to set aside the decision and to remit  the  matter
    back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing  with  none  of  the
    findings of fact to stand.  Directions are given hereinafter within the
    decision paragraph for the future conduct of this matter.



Decision and Directions

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains material  errors
    of law and is set aside.

 2) The decision is remitted for re-hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
    sitting at Taylor House (or such nominated court as the  administration
    considers appropriate) on the first available date 28 days  hence  with
    an ELH of 3 hours.

 3) That the appeal is to be before any judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    other than Immigration Judge Colvin.

 4) That there be leave to either party to file at the Tribunal and serve a
    copy upon the opposing party a  bundle  of  additional  subjective  and
    objective evidence upon which they intend to rely along with copies  of
    any relevant case law relied upon and skeleton arguments relied upon at
    least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

 5) That the Appellant do attend the restored hearing.

 6) That in the event that the Appellant requires an interpreter then it is
    the responsibility of his instructed solicitors to notify the  Tribunal
    within seven days of receipt of this decision.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date: 12th January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed                              Date: 12th January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

