
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA092132015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 3rd June 2016                         |On 15th June 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Mrs Akua Asamoah Tweneboah-Kodua
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Collins, Counsel; instructed by Kilic & Kilic


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For ease of  comprehension,  the  parties  are  referred  to  by  their
    appellate status and positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Rose allowing the Appellant's appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision  to  refuse  her  application  for  a
    permanent residence card, the appeal being allowed on the basis of  the
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal promulgated its decision on 17th July 2015.

 4.  The  Respondent  appealed  against  that  decision  and  was   granted
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  on  all
    grounds with particular note that the appeal in question was not a One-
    Stop Appeal and it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    considering Article 8 ECHR given the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in
    Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human rights)  [2015]  UKUT  00466
    (IAC).



Error of Law

 5. I find that there was an error of law in  the  decision  such  that  it
    should be set aside.  My reasons for so finding are as follows.

 6. Having heard submissions from Mr Collins on behalf of the Appellant and
    Mr Duffy I find that the First-tier Judge was  wrong  in  hindsight  to
    consider the Appellant's Article 8 rights given  the  decision  of  the
    Presidential panel in Amirteymour.  The decision in  Amirteymour  makes
    clear that in the absence of Section 120 additional Grounds of  Appeal,
    Article 8 claims cannot  arise  in  of  themselves  by  virtue  of  the
    Secretary of State's consideration of an application  for  a  residence
    permit.

 7. I am aware that Amirteymour is  currently  pending  appeal  before  the
    Court of Appeal.  However, there is an indication of a  view  from  the
    Court of Appeal already in the decision of TY (Sri Lanka)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1233 where  the  Court
    of Appeal for reasons similar  to  those  in  Amirteymour,  albeit  not
    expressed in as much detail, states that the  Tribunal  were  wrong  to
    consider Article 8 in such scenarios.

 8. At paragraph 36 of that judgment Jackson LJ states as follows:

         "In the result therefore I reach a similar decision on  the  issues
         before us  to  the  decision  reached  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         Amirteymour v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2015]
         UKUT 00466 (IAC).  The Upper Tribunal in Amirteymour  distinguished
         JM  (Liberia)  on  a  different  basis  from  that  which  I   have
         identified.  See Amirteymour at [50].  Nevertheless in the end  the
         Upper Tribunal has come to the same decision as myself.  The  Upper
         Tribunal in Amirteymour has analysed the statutory  provisions  and
         the authorities in formidable detail.  I shall not seek to traverse
         all that material.  Nor will I seek to plant yet more trees in  the
         impenetrable jungle referred to  by  Lord  Carnwath  in  the  first
         paragraph of Patel.  I reach my decision by the  simple  route  set
         out in paragraphs 27 to 35 above."

 9. At [27] of the judgment, Lord Justice Jackson makes  clear  that  since
    there were no Section 120 (One-Stop  Notice)  grounds  of  appeal,  the
    appellant in that matter was confined to  the  subject  matter  of  the
    original decision, which was a decision  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    fulfil the requirements of the EEA Regulations.   Mr  Collins  did  not
    seek to challenge the decisions in Amirteymour or TY (Sri Lanka).

10. Given the identical nature of the issue on appeal before me I find that
    the judge erred in considering the Appellant's Article 8 rights.

11. However, this error of law should not  reflect  anything  more  than  a
    technical criticism in Judge Rose's decision  given  that  the  judge's
    decision was promulgated on 17th July 2015 and Judge  Rose  would  have
    had no way of knowing that the  Upper  Tribunal  would  promulgate  its
    decision in Amirteymour on 4th August 2015 highlighting  the  error  in
    the decision in going on to consider Article 8 ECHR.  Consequently  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  in  respect  of  the
    consideration of Article 8 ECHR.




    Remaking the decision on Article 8 ECHR

12. I remake the decision by stating for the record that the Tribunal  does
    not have jurisdiction to consider Article  8  given  the  decisions  in
    Amirteymour and TY (Sri Lanka) as discussed above.

13. Therefore there is no decision  that  the  Tribunal  can  make  on  the
    Appellant's Article 8 claim and the only decision that shall be carried
    forward is the decision on the application for permanent  residence  to
    which extent the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  affirmed  (it
    not being challenged by the Appellant on appeal) and the remainder  set
    aside.




Notice of Decision

14. The Respondent's appeal is allowed  in  respect  of  an  error  of  law
    concerning Article 8 ECHR. There is no decision that  the  Tribunal  is
    able to take in respect of Article 8 given the ratio decidenci  of  the
    decisions in Amirteyamour and TY (Sri Lanka). Given that the sole issue
    on appeal was the Appellant's EEA residence permit,  the  determination
    of which she did not seek to challenge, the appeal remains dismissed.

15. The appeal in respect of the EEA residence  permit  was  dismissed  and
    remains so, thus there can be no fee award.




Signed                                  Date 10 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
