
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09592/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 March 2016                               |On 18 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           MRS FEVEN YEMANE HAILE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Secretary of State:                  Mr A McVeety, Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:        Mr M Moksud,      Legal Representative,
                                   International Immigration Advisors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pooler sitting at Bennett House on  4
    August 2015) allowing on  Article  8  grounds  outside  the  Rules  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse to vary her leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  Zambrano
    grounds, and against her concomitant decision to remove her by  way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction,
    and I do not consider that the claimant requires  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On  29  December  2015  Judge  Adio  granted  the  Secretary  of  State
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         1.   The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
             Decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pooler) promulgated
             on 27 August 2015 whereby he allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal
             under article 8 outside the  rules  against  the  Respondent's
             decision to refuse leave to remain under Appendix  FM  of  the
             immigration  rules on grounds of family and private life.  The
             Respondent's  application  argues  that  the  judge  erred  in
             failing  to  consider  whether  there  were   any   compelling
             circumstances for  considering  the  appeal  under  article  8
             outside the immigration rules.

         2.   At paragraph  19  of  his  decision  the  judge  considered  2
             reported decisions of the Upper  Tribunal  and  rightly  notes
             these were not to be read as imposing a threshold  requirement
             for exceptional circumstances to be shown before the  Tribunal
             considers whether an appellant can benefit from the provisions
             of Article 8.  However, the judge failed to apply the decision
             of SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ  387  which  requires
             that if the requirements of the rules are not  met  compelling
             circumstances justifying an assessment outside the rules  need
             to be  identified.   The  judge  omitted  to  do  this  before
             applying the approach in Razgar 2004 UKHL  27.   There  is  an
             arguable error of law identified and permission to  appeal  is
             granted.

Relevant Background

 3. The claimant is a national of Ethiopia, whose date of birth is 25 March
    1973.  In March 2005 she met her future husband, Mr David  Graham,  who
    was working in the UAE, and they subsequently  married  on  10  January
    2007.  Mr Graham is a British citizen.  On 9 May 2007 the claimant gave
    birth to their first child, and on 11 September 2008 she gave birth  to
    their second child.  Both children are British nationals,  and  at  the
    date of the hearing  before  Judge  Pooler  they  were  aged  8  and  6
    respectively.

 4. In November 2012 the claimant moved from the UAE with the rest  of  the
    family to live in Portugal where  they  owned  a  farm  property.   Her
    husband then obtained employment in Qatar and the family moved there in
    November 2013.  In June 2014 the family travelled to the UK for a  two-
    week vacation.  Although they had plans to settle  in  the  UK  in  the
    future, the intention of the claimant and her husband was to return  to
    Qatar in June 2014 for her husband to resume his employment there.

 5. A few days after they arrived in the United Kingdom,  the  husband  was
    offered employment in the UK, commencing on 1 August 2014.  He  decided
    to take up this offer of employment, and thus the  plan  to  return  to
    Qatar was abandoned.

 6. The claimant had entered on a visit visa which had been issued  to  her
    on 14 May 2014.  On 12 December 2014, shortly before  its  expiry,  she
    applied to remain in the UK on a permanent basis as the partner of  her
    British national husband,  and  the  parent  of  her  British  national
    children.

 7. The Secretary of State refused the application on 20 February  2015  as
    the claimant did not meet the eligibility requirements of Appendix  FM.
    She was currently in the UK with leave as a visitor.  So she failed  to
    meet the requirement of E-LTRP.2.1.  Although she  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her partner,  and  that  she  also  had  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  her  children,  her
    application  failed  to   comply   with   the   mandatory   eligibility
    requirement.  So she could not benefit from the  criteria  set  out  at
    EX.1.

 8. A decision had also been made on exceptional  circumstances.   She  had
    entered the UK as a visitor, claiming on her visa application that  her
    visit was for 30 days, for the purposes of tourism,  with  her  husband
    and children staying in a hotel.  But on 25 June 2014 she  had  entered
    into a rental agreement on a property  in  Crewe  for  a  term  of  six
    months.  It was not accepted that her intention to  enter  the  UK  was
    solely for the purposes of tourism as stated in  the  application.   It
    was thus not unreasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom  to
    make arrangements to return with the correct entry clearance.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 9. Both parties were  legally  represented  before  Judge  Pooler.   Judge
    Pooler received oral evidence from the claimant and  her  husband,  and
    took into account the documents which she provided in  support  of  her
    appeal.

10. In his subsequent decision, Judge Pooler accepted that the claimant had
    entered the United Kingdom as a genuine visitor.  Although it had  been
    suggested in the course of cross-examination  that  this  was  not  the
    case, he was satisfied that there was no ulterior motive at the time of
    her entry into the UK.  He accepted that the husband had  been  offered
    employment within a few days of their arrival in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The oral  evidence  on  this  issue  was  consistent  with  documentary
    evidence, including a letter from Mr Sebastian Fisher of  Ground  Water
    Engineering.  He said he had met the claimant's husband on 20 June 2014
    following which he had made the offer of employment.   The  reason  for
    the delayed start date was to allow time for Mr Graham to find suitable
    accommodation.  The children had begun attending primary  school  on  3
    July 2014, as confirmed  by  a  letter  from  the  school.   The  judge
    accepted the unchallenged evidence of the claimant and her husband that
    Mr Graham was able on occasions to work at home but he was required  to
    attend his employer's office in Wakefield on two  or  three  days  each
    week and that he was also required to work at sites across  the  United
    Kingdom.  So his employment sometimes entailed him  staying  away  from
    home overnight, if he had travelled a long distance.   Accordingly,  he
    accepted the claimant's evidence that she had thus been the main  carer
    of the two children, taking them to and collecting them from school and
    attending to their needs both before and after school  and  during  the
    school holidays.  He also accepted the unchallenged  evidence  that  no
    member of Mr Graham's family in the UK was  in  a  position  to  assist
    significantly with child care in substitution for the claimant.

11. Having made his findings on the primary facts, Judge Pooler  turned  to
    consider whether the claimant  qualified  for  a  derivative  right  of
    residence under Regulation 15A of the 2006  Regulations.   He  accepted
    that the  claimant  was  the  primary  carer  of  two  British  citizen
    children, who were both residing in the UK.  He was not persuaded  that
    either child would be unable to reside in the  UK  or  in  another  EEA
    state if the claimant was required to leave.  Although there  would  be
    financial consequences, Mr Graham frankly accepted that he  would  have
    to give up work in order to care for the children.  His presence in the
    UK and his ability to  care  for  the  children  if  the  claimant  was
    required to leave was such that the claimant had failed to  prove  that
    she met all the necessary requirements  to  qualify  for  a  derivative
    right of residence.

12. The judge turned to consider Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules.
    He was satisfied  that  the  children's  best  interests  lay  in  them
    remaining in the United Kingdom.  They were British nationals  entitled
    to the benefits of their nationality, including  education  and  health
    care.  Theirs was a settled family unit and their best interests lay in
    them remaining in the care  of  both  parents.   If  their  mother  was
    removed to Ethiopia, they would be separated from one or other of their
    parents which would impact negatively  on  their  best  interests.   At
    paragraph [28] the judge observed that little weight was to  be  placed
    on the private life established by the claimant in the UK  because  she
    had always had no more than limited leave and  her  immigration  status
    was therefore to be regarded as precarious.  It was however her  family
    life which weighed heavily in the appeal.  At paragraph [29] the  judge
    observed that subsection (1) of Section 117B of the 2002  Act  required
    the  Tribunal  to  regard  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls as being in the public interest.   It  was  therefore  in  the
    public interest for the claimant to return to Ethiopia  and  apply  for
    entry clearance.  The judge continued:

         30.  There are, however, factors which  weigh  against  the  public
             interest in  maintaining  immigration  control.   I  note  the
             appellant's good immigration history; she entered the UK  with
             leave as a genuine visitor.  The only significant issue is her
             failure to have obtained entry clearance as a  partner  rather
             than as a visitor.  The  appellant  is  entitled  to  rely  on
             Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL  40  and  the  principle  that  a
             requirement that the appellant leave the UK in order to  apply
             for entry clearance may be disproportionate.

         31.  I am satisfied in the circumstances outlined  above  that  the
             decision is not proportionate and that the public interest  in
             removal is outweighed by the other factors and principally  by
             the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  children.   I   am
             fortified in this conclusion  by  the  provisions  of  section
             117B(6).  I am satisfied that the appellant has a genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with both of her children who
             are, as British citizens, qualifying children  as  defined  in
             section 117D.  I find that, having regard  to  the  children's
             nationality, which gives then a  right  to  education  in  the
             United Kingdom in which they have been settled for  more  than
             twelve months, it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  either
             child to leave the UK.  The public interest therefore does not
             require the appellant's removal; and her  appeal  in  reliance
             upon Article 8 must succeed.

Discussion

13. Ground 1 is that the judge failed to engage with the  requirement  that
    compelling circumstances need to be identified to support a claim for a
    grant of leave to remain outside the new  Rules  in  Appendix  FM.   In
    support of this proposition, the pleader cites  the  following  extract
    from the judgment of Richards LJ in SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387 at paragraph [33]:

         In our judgment, even though a  test  of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say the general position outside the sorts  of  special
         context referred to above is that  compelling  circumstances  would
         need to be identified to support a claim for grant of  LTR  outside
         the new Rules in Appendix FM.

14. In the same judgment, Richards LJ considered at some length  the  Court
    of Appeal decision in MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985,  and  noted  at
    paragraph [26] that the Court of Appeal in MM  (Lebanon)  did  not  say
    there could never be cases falling outside the LTE rules where, on  the
    particular facts of a specific case, Article 8 might required that  LTE
    be granted by the Secretary of State outside the Rules, in the exercise
    of her residual discretion.

15. The test propounded by Richards LJ at paragraph [33] was in the context
    of giving guidance as to the weight to be given to the LTE  rules  when
    the Secretary of State's officials or a court or Tribunal  are  invited
    to balance individual interests and the  public  interests  in  a  case
    where an application for LTE outside the Rules is made.

16. Accordingly, the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) was not laying  down  an
    intermediate or threshold test  that  has  to  be  addressed  before  a
    decision maker embarks on  a  proportionality  assessment  outside  the
    Rules.

17. At paragraph [19] of his decision, Judge Pooler said that it was  clear
    from MM (Lebanon) that the test propounded by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640
    (IAC) was not to be  read  as  imposing  a  threshold  requirement  for
    exceptional circumstances to be shown  before  the  Tribunal  considers
    whether an applicant can benefit from  the  provisions  of  Article  8.
    Similarly, SS (Congo) does  not  impose  a  threshold  requirement  for
    compelling circumstances to be  shown  before  the  Tribunal  considers
    whether an appellant can benefit from the provisions of Article 8.  The
    essential  requirement  is  that,  in  the  course  of  the  Tribunal's
    consideration of the five-point Razgar test,  compelling  circumstances
    need to be identified in order for the Tribunal to reach  a  conclusion
    on proportionality which favours the claimant.

18.  The  Secretary  of  State   continues   to   refer   to   "exceptional
    circumstances" in decision letters  when,  following  SS  (Congo),  she
    really means "compelling circumstances". So I do not consider that  the
    judge has  misdirected  himself  in  paragraph  [19]  by  referring  to
    exceptional rather than compelling circumstances.

19. The real issue is whether  the  judge  in  the  course  of  his  Razgar
    analysis  has  identified  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
    recognised by the  Rules  which  justify  the  claimant  being  granted
    Article 8 relief outside the Rules.

20.  I  answer  this  question  in  the  affirmative.  Firstly,  the   only
    justification given in the refusal decision for requiring the  claimant
    to go back to Ethiopia to seek the correct entry clearance was that she
    had not entered the UK as a genuine visitor.  The judge found that  she
    had entered the UK as a genuine visitor, and so the sole  justification
    given for requiring her to go back to  Ethiopia  to  seek  the  correct
    entry clearance fell away.  Secondly, it was plainly  contrary  to  the
    children's best interests to be separated  from  their  primary  carer,
    even if the separation was  a  temporary  one,  measured  in  weeks  or
    months.  Thirdly, the judge found that  Section  117B(6)  applied,  and
    there is no appeal against this finding.  Since the claimant cannot  be
    removed in consequence of the finding under Section 117B(6), she has to
    be granted leave to remain under the Rules.

21. Ground 2 is that the judge erred in not  giving  consideration  to  the
    fact that exceptional circumstances must be shown  when  considering  a
    grant of leave outside the Rules in cases concerning precarious  family
    life, citing Agyarko and Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440.

22. Ground 2 contradicts Ground 1.  The complaint in Ground 1 is  that  the
    judge  did  not  postulate  a  threshold  requirement   of   compelling
    circumstances.  The judge did not err in law in  that  regard  for  the
    reasons which I have given above.

23. Ground 3 is that the  judge  failed  to  consider  whether  or  not  an
    application from abroad would be successful, and that there was also no
    consideration as to whether there would be a  significant  interference
    in the family life by temporary removal, citing R (on  the  application
    of Chen) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Appendix  FM  -
    Chikwamba - temporary separation -  proportionality)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT
    00198 at paragraph [39] where the Tribunal said as follows:

         "If it is shown by an individual (the burden being upon him or her)
         that an application  for  entry  clearance  from  abroad  would  be
         granted and that  there  would  be  significant  interference  with
         family life by temporary removal, the weight to be accorded to  the
         formal requirement of attaining entry clearance is reduced."

24. At paragraph [10] of his decision, Judge Pooler said the  Tribunal  had
    been provided with a copy of the husband's P60 for the year to 5  April
    2015, and with pay slips and bank statements.  He  found  that  all  of
    these documents were consistent with the  husband's  employment  having
    started in August 2014 on an annual salary of �42,000.

25. The judge did not direct himself in terms  of  the  guidance  given  in
    Chen.  But it was implicit in his findings on where the best  interests
    of the children lay that requiring the mother to return to Ethiopia  to
    seek entry clearance, leaving behind her two children who are in  full-
    time education here, would constitute a significant  interference  with
    family life.  Moreover, consistent with Hayat v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1054, there was no good  reason  to
    require the claimant to return to Ethiopia to obtain the correct  entry
    clearance, and thus the public interest in requiring her to do  so  was
    reduced.

26. I consider that the  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal on Chikwamba  grounds,  taking  account  of  all  the
    relevant considerations arising under Section 117B  of  the  2002  Act.
    Indeed, the judge's finding on Section  117B(6),  which  has  not  been
    challenged  by  way  of  appeal,  was  sufficient  by  itself  to  lead
    ineluctably to a decision in the claimant's favour.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal by the Secretary of  State
to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

