
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/09710/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 2nd August 2016                            |On 17th August 2016          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  M Z ABBAS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shoaib, of Shoaib Associates


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is Muhammad Zahir Abbas, born on 5th May 1977, a  citizen
    of Pakistan.  He has not sought an anonymity order.  On  18th  February
    2015 the SSHD refused his application for a derivative  residence  card
    as the primary carer of his father, a UK citizen  and  resident,  under
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 3. The SSHD was not satisfied that the appellant is his  father's  primary
    carer, and further found insufficient  evidence  that  the  appellant's
    father would be unable to reside in the UK or another EEA state if  the
    appellant were required to leave the UK.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Debra Clapham allowed the appellant's  appeal
    by a  decision  promulgated  on  17th  December  2015.   She  found  at
    paragraph 25 that the appellant  was  "without  a  doubt  the  main  or
    primary carer of his father".   At  paragraph  29  she  said  that  the
    appellant "also meets the father's religious  needs  in  terms  of  his
    dietary requirements, something which Social  Services  I  think  would
    find difficult to do".

 5. The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  are  based  on  the
    absence of a finding in terms of  regulation  15A(2)(b)(iii)  that  the
    appellant's father would be unable to remain in the UK if the appellant
    were required to leave.

 6. The grounds fortify this proposition by reference to Ayinde and Thinjom
    [2015] UKUT 00560, which states at headnote (ii)  that  the  regulation
    "requires the carer to establish as a fact  that  the  British  citizen
    will be forced to leave the territory of the Union".  The full terms of
    that case will be relevant in the remaking of the decision.

 7. Mr Shoaib strove valiantly to argue that the judge made  all  necessary
    findings, at least implicitly, that Ayinde could be distinguished, that
    the father's care could be provided only by his son and by no one else,
    and that there was no error of law.  He sought  to  found  on  evidence
    from a charitable organisation by way of a letter dated 28th  May  2015
    which describes the services provided by the appellant  to  his  father
    and also states, "He [the appellant]  needs  to  go  to  Dundee  or  to
    Glasgow to buy Halal meat and other groceries, some Asian foods are not
    available in Perth".

 8. That rather weak item of evidence is  not  rationally  capable  of  the
    interpretation that without the appellant's presence, his father  would
    have to leave the UK.

 9. Mrs O'Brien submitted that local authorities, the NHS, and other public
    services in the UK are required by law to respect the religious dietary
    needs of clients and patients. She also pointed out that the charitable
    organisation did not say that there was no other way that  the  dietary
    needs of the sponsor could be met.

10. There is no scope for the argument that but for provision  through  his
    son such requirements would drive the sponsor to leave the country.

11. While Mr Shoaib did not in course of debate concede any error  of  law,
    it was common ground if there were error, the UK should not  substitute
    a decision, but remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a further
    decision.

12. The grounds of appeal do not challenge the finding that  the  appellant
    is his father's primary carer.  That part of the decision stands.

13. I raised the question whether the case should go back to the same judge
    or to a different judge.  Neither party thought there was any reason to
    exclude Judge Clapham from further decision making.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  Its findings  in
    respect of the appellant being a primary carer are to stand.   The case
    is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a decision to be reached  in
    terms of regulation 15A(2)(b)(iii) on whether  the  appellant's  father
    would be unable to remain in the UK if the appellant were  required  to
    leave.

15. In remaking the decision, Judge Debra Clapham  is  not  excluded.   The
    case need not be listed before another judge, unless for any reason  it
    proves impractical  to  have  it  remade  by  Judge  Clapham  within  a
    reasonable period.


            [pic]
            15 August 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




