
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/09667/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 29 November 2017                        |On 20 February 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    O. A.
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Uzoechina, Principal, Patterson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who entered the UK on  3  October
    2005 lawfully as a student with the benefit of a visa  granted  to  her
    until 31 October 2008.  That leave to remain was varied subsequently on
    a number of occasions and on 24 November 2015 the  Appellant  made  her
    most recent in time application for a variation of her leave to remain.
     That application was refused on 26 February 2015, and a  decision  was
    made in addition to remove her from the UK by reference to  Section  47
    of the 2006 Act.  The Appellant appealed those decisions to the  First-
    tier Tribunal ["FtT"] and her appeal came before Judge Morron at Taylor
    House  on  29  November  2016.  He  dismissed  the  appeal  under   the
    Immigration Rules and on  Article  8  grounds  by  way  of  a  decision
    promulgated on 16 January 2017.

 2. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal  to  the  FtT  was
    refused but undaunted the Appellant  renewed  her  application  to  the
    Upper Tribunal when it was considered by Judge Gill in a decision of 14
    September 2017.  I say  considered  because  in  a  lengthy  series  of
    reasons Judge Gill  adjourned  the  grant  of  permission  to  an  oral
    hearing. That is what comes before me today, with  her  intention  that
    should I grant permission, which would necessarily involve in her  view
    a consideration of whether or not  time  should  be  extended  for  the
    making of that application, I would go on and address the merits of the
    application.

 3. Judge Morron noted that leave had been  granted  to  the  Appellant  to
    amend her Grounds of Appeal at some earlier point in the history of the
    appeal in order to advance the argument  that  she  had  completed  ten
    years of lawful residence in the UK prior to the date of  the  hearing.
    He also noted [54] that the Respondent's case before him was that there
    had been two significant gaps in the sequence of  grants  of  leave  to
    remain that had been extended to the Appellant; the first  lay  between
    31 July 2009 and 27 May 2010, and the second lay  between  15  November
    2011 and 17 January 2012.  He  noted  that  the  Respondent's  argument
    before him was that those periods were lengthy,  and  of  significance,
    and that there was no application to renew or to vary  leave  that  had
    been made within time so as to engage the benefits of Section 3C of the
    1971 Act. If s3C had been engaged then the effect would have been  that
    the  Appellant's  leave  to  remain  continued,  whilst  the   relevant
    application was under  consideration.  He  noted  that  the  Respondent
    therefore argued that the Appellant could not  show  a  period  of  ten
    years' continuous lawful residence in the UK and that as a  consequence
    she had no entitlement to a grant of indefinite leave to  remain  under
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

 4. Following a subject access request for documents from the  Respondent's
    files that was made by the Appellant after the hearing before the judge
    on 16 December 2016, but before his  decision  was  promulgated  on  16
    January 2017, the Respondent examined her files held in relation to the
    Appellant  and  produced  a  number  of  relevant  documents   to   the
    Appellant's representative.  Sadly, those documents  were  produced  by
    the Respondent too late to enable a request to be made to Judge  Morron
    to reconvene the hearing before him, or, to take into account  evidence
    that had now come to light that was relevant and germane to the  issues
    before him before his decision was promulgated.  Promulgation  of  that
    decision had occurred four days  before  the  Respondent  answered  the
    disclosure request.

 5. Before me it is accepted on behalf of the Respondent that the  position
    as advanced to Judge Morron by the Presenting Officer at the appeal was
    inaccurate.  In truth there were no gaps in the  periods  of  leave  to
    remain granted to the Appellant that were not covered by  the  benefits
    afforded to her through the operation of section 3C. As a result it  is
    now accepted before me that the Respondent should  have  accepted  that
    this was the case at the hearing, and  should  in  turn  have  formally
    accepted that the Appellant's application did demonstrate that she  met
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules. She had indeed  accrued  ten
    years' lawful residence and  thus  her  application  should  have  been
    granted. In turn it is now accepted that there is no public interest in
    continued opposition to the appeal, and it should therefore be allowed.



 6. It is plain that what went wrong in the course of this appeal  was  not
    the fault of the Appellant who had throughout maintained that  she  had
    accrued the relevant period of leave. It is equally  plain  that  Judge
    Morron proceeded upon  an  incorrect  analysis  of  what  in  fact  had
    happened through no fault of his own, and because he had relied upon an
    incorrect chronology provided to him by the Respondent.

 7. I turn then to the question that was deferred  to  me  by  Judge  Gill;
    whether the renewed application for permission to appeal was  made  out
    of time, and if so, whether time to make it should be extended so as to
    admit the application.

 8. With the benefit of both the Appellant's representative's file, and the
    Tribunal  file,   and   after   some   discussion   before   me,   both
    representatives are now agreed on the  following  sequence  of  events.
    Judge Morron's decision was promulgated by post on 16 January 2017. The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge refused permission to appeal by  decision  of
    27 July 2017 and the decision was promulgated to the parties by post by
    way of a notice dated 9 August 2017. That date is  the  operative  date
    for  the  calculation  of  time  for  the  submission  of  the  renewed
    application to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  It  is  now  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's  initial  proposition  that  time  for  submission  of  the
    application for permission only expired on 24 August 2017 is incorrect;
    the true deadline was the close of business on 23 August 2017.

 9. I have now had the benefit of sight of the fax transmission report that
    is said to relate to the transmission of the permission application  to
    the Upper Tribunal. That document records that the fax was  transmitted
    on  23  August,  although  only  after  the  close  of  business.   The
    transmission of 30 pages began at 18:41 hours, so the reality  is  that
    although the Appellant needs an extension of  time  for  one  day,  the
    error that led to that is a failure to send the fax some one  hour  and
    40 minutes earlier than it was actually sent.

10. Mr Uzoechina informs me that he is a sole  practitioner  trading  under
    the name of Patterson & Co Solicitors and he accepts that  it  was  his
    error to miscalculate the time required.  He told me  that  he  thought
    the deadline for submission of the application  expired  on  24  August
    (consistently with the position he had adopted  prior  to  the  hearing
    before me) . He accepted that this was a simple error on his  part  and
    nothing to do with any fault or failure on the part of  the  Appellant.
    That being so I am satisfied that this is an appropriate case for  time
    to be extended given the merits  of  the  substantive  application  for
    permission to appeal as analysed above.

Notice of decision

11. In conclusion then my decision is as follows.  I extend time  to  admit
    the application for permission to appeal to the  extent  necessary.   I
    grant permission to appeal upon all of the Grounds of  Appeal  advanced
    in the application submitted  on  24  August  2017.  I  set  aside  the
    decision of Judge Morron promulgated on 16 January 2017 on  the  ground
    of common law fairness. I remake the decision of the appeal  so  as  to
    allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules, and on Article 8 grounds.



12. No fee award is appropriate.   When  the  original  application  for  a
    variation of her leave was made the Appellant was  not  entitled  to  a
    grant of ILR; her entitlement to such a grant arose subsequently and in
    the course of the appeal. Thus a fee award is inappropriate.

13. An anonymity direction is made.







Signed                              Date: 20 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes






