
[pic]
IAC-FH-ar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09121/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 June 2015                      |On 22 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                PRONOY barua
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  whose  date  of  birth  is  1
    January 1985. He appealed against the respondent's decision  to  refuse
    to vary his leave to remain to that of  a  Tier  1  Entrepreneur.   The
    respondent's decision was dated 31 January 2014.   He  appeals  to  the
    Upper Tribunal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke
    who dismissed his appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  24  September
    2014.

2.   The appellant entered the UK on 6 February 2010  with  entry  clearance
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student that was valid until  30  November  2011.
    On 29 December 2011 he was granted an extension of leave to remain as a
    Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  until  29  December  2013.   On  28
    December 2013 he applied to vary his leave to remain to that of a  Tier
    1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.  He proposed to enter into an entrepreneurial
    team with Mr MD Emran Hossain to run  an  IT  services  company  called
    BETech solutions Limited.

3.   The application was refused by the Secretary of  State  on  31  January
    2014.  The Secretary of State noted that the appellant  had  failed  to
    provide a number of documents that were relied by paragraph 41SD of the
    Immigration Rules.  These included a recent bank  or  building  society
    statement.  He  had  also  failed  to  provide  relevant  documentation
    relating to third party funding.  He had failed to provide contracts of
    evidence of trading of the company.  He had also failed  to  provide  a
    current appointments report as evidence to show that he was a  director
    of the company.

4.   The Secretary of State also pointed out that other pieces  of  evidence
    were not in  the  correct  format  and  did  not  contain  the  correct
    information.  This included  the  letter  from  the  Halifax  dated  27
    December 2013 but did  not  show  the  appellant's  account  number  as
    required, and also included a letter relating to Mr  Md  Emran  Husain,
    also dated 27 December 2013  which  the  Secretary  of  State  rejected
    because it did not state as required by the Rules  that  the  appellant
    had access to the funds held in the account.

5.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  on  the  grounds  that  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  have
    consideration  to  the  evidential  flexibility  policy   outlined   in
    paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules.  The grounds also argued that
    the judge failed to give adequate consideration to Article 8  in  light
    of the fact that it was asserted that the appellant had  established  a
    private life in the UK and had also established a business in the UK.

6.    On  9  March  2015  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan   granted
    permission to appeal because it was at least arguable  that  the  judge
    had failed to give consideration to paragraph 245AA although the  judge
    said "It is far from clear that the  appellant's  failings  would  have
    been saved by paragraph 245AA".  In response the  respondent  submitted
    that the number of failures in the evidence means that  the  provisions
    of paragraph 245AA would not in any event avail the appellant and  that
    there is no error of law in the judge's decision.

7.   The matter comes before the Tribunal today to decide whether  there  is
    any error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  decision.   The  appellant
    did not appear at the hearing and was unrepresented.  The Tribunal  was
    satisfied that a notice of hearing was sent  to  the  appellant  giving
    notice of the hearing date on 17 June 2015.  Although the  top  of  the
    notice erroneously states that it was issued  on  28  June  2015,  that
    clearly could not be  correct.   After  having  made  enquiries  I  was
    satisfied that the Tribunal records showed that the notice was in  fact
    sent to the appellant on 28 May 2015 and that the date at  the  top  of
    the notice on file was obviously a typographical error. As such  I  was
    satisfied that the appellant had given  no  explanation  for  his  non-
    attendance and that the Tribunal could go on to decide the  appeal.   I
    am satisfied that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke does
    not disclose any material errors of law.  Although the  judge,  as  was
    pointed out, did not deal explicitly with paragraph 245AA as argued  by
    the appellant, and that this could amount to an error of  law,  I  find
    that it is not a material error for the following reasons.

8.   Paragraph 245AA states the following:

         "(a) Where Part 6A or any appendices referred to in Part  6A  state
             that specified documents  must  be  provided,  the  UK  Border
             Agency will only consider documents that have  been  submitted
             with  the  application,  and  will  only  consider   documents
             submitted after the application where they  are  submitted  in
             accordance with subparagraph (b).

         (b)  If the applicant has submitted:

             (i)  A sequence of documents and some of the documents in  the
             sequence have been omitted (for example, if one bank statement
             from a series is missing);

             (ii) A document in the wrong format; or

             (iii)    A document  that  is  a  copy  and  not  an  original
                  document;

             The  UK  Border  Agency  may  contact  the  applicant  or  his
             representative in writing, and request the correct  documents.
             The requested documents must be  received  by  the  UK  Border
             Agency at the  address  specified  in  the  request  within  7
             working days of the date of the request.

         (c)  The UK Border Agency will  not  requested  documents  where  a
             specified document has not  been  submitted  (for  example  an
             English language certificate is  missing),  or  where  the  UK
             Border Agency does not anticipate that addressing the omission
             or error referred to in subparagraph (b) will lead to a  grant
             because the application will be refused for other reasons.

         (d)  If the applicant has submitted a specified document:

             (i)  in the wrong format; or

             (ii) that is a copy and not an original document;

             the application may be granted exceptionally, provided the  UK
             Border Agency is satisfied that the  specified  documents  are
             genuine and the applicant meets all  the  other  requirements.
             The UK  Border  Agency  reserves  the  right  to  request  the
             specified original documents in  the  correct  format  in  all
             cases where (b) applies, and to refuse applications  if  these
             documents are not provided as set out in (b)."

9.   Although the judge did not specifically refer to  paragraph  245AA,  it
    was quite clear that the judge had taken into account the fact that the
    appellant had failed to provide a number of the documents  required  by
    the Immigration Rules.   It  was  accepted  at  the  hearing  that  the
    appellant had failed to provide some of the documents but it  was  said
    that this was merely an oversight or that some of  the  documents  were
    merely in the wrong format.  The judge was  correct  to  say  that  she
    could only consider documents that were submitted with the  application
    and was unable to consider the further evidence that  was  produced  at
    the hearing by virtue of Section 85A of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 as it was at the relevant date.

10.  The appellant's grounds of appeal sought to argue that his  failure  to
    provide the contract was merely part of a series of  documents  because
    he had supplied two invoices relating to the trading contact  with  the
    companies.  The grounds also sought to argue that the omissions of  the
    company current appointment report was merely minor document which  was
    omitted by the appellant with the application.   However  it  is  quite
    clear to me that the provisions of 245AA would not  have  assisted  the
    appellant in any material way even if  the  judge  had  considered  the
    paragraph specifically in her decision.

11.  Paragraph 245AA(c) states quite clearly that the UK Border Agency  will
     not request further documents where it is  not  anticipated  that  the
    omission or error would lead to a grant because the  application  would
    be refused for other reasons.

12.  In this case, although there were arguably  some  documents  where  the
    wrong format had been provided,  for  example,  the  letters  from  the
    Halifax, there were other documents  that  were  just  clearly  missing
    including the recent bank statement, contacts as  evidence  of  trading
    and the current appointments report to show that the  appellant  was  a
    director of the company.  In such circumstances, paragraph 245AA  would
    simply not be engaged because the appellant had failed  to  provide  so
    many  fundamental  pieces  of  evidence  that  were  required  for  the
    application that it would not lead to a grant and there was no onus  on
    the Secretary of State to contact the  appellant  when  he  had  simply
    failed to produce sufficient evidence to support the application.

13.  Whilst it is of course the case that there may on  occasion  be  errors
    made by applicants for leave to remain when a large number of documents
    are now required for such  applications,  the  onus  is  still  on  the
    applicant to ensure that they have  checked  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and have provided the evidence required.

14.   For  these  reasons  I  conclude  that  whilst  the  judge   did   not
    specifically refer to paragraph 245AA of the  Immigration  Rules,  this
    was not a material error of law because it  would  not  have  made  any
    difference to the outcome of the appeal because that paragraph did  not
    apply.

15.  I find that the grounds  relating  to  Article  8  are  unarguable  and
    disclose no error of law.  Nothing more than a bare assertion  relating
    to the appellant's private life in the UK has been  made,  the  witness
    statement that the appellant prepared before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not contain any detail about the ties that he has to  the  UK.   He
    has only been resident for a period of some five years and very  little
    evidence was produced relating to the running of the  business  in  the
    UK.  The appellant has produced wholly insufficient  evidence  to  show
    that such removal in  consequence  of  the  decision  would  have  even
    engaged the operation of Article 8 and for these reasons  I  find  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings could not be found to disclose
    any error of law in relation to Article 8.

Notice of Decision

16.  I conclude for the reasons given  above  that  there  are  no  material
    errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision and that the decision
    shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Judge Canavan
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal

