
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09294/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Oral judgment given at hearing                |                             |
|On 3 October 2014                             |On 5 November 2014           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                           mr Muhammad Usman Qadri

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant did not attend the hearing today.  I am satisfied that he
    had notice of the hearing or that reasonable steps have been  taken  to
    notify him of the hearing (he was sent notice of  the  hearing  to  the
    address notified to the Tribunal) and that it is in  the  interests  of
    justice to  proceed  with  the  hearing  in  his  absence.   I  have  a
    discretion under rule 38 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    rules 2008 to proceed in his absence in these circumstances,  which  is
    what I have decided to do.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  21  October  1992.   He
    made an application on 14 December 2013 for further leave to remain  as
    a Tier 4 Student Migrant.  I take the date of the application as  being
    the date on the application form.

 3. A decision was made on 28 January 2014 to refuse the application and  a
    decision was also made under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 to remove him.  The  appellant  appealed  and  his
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham  on  21  May  2014,
    whereby the appeal was dismissed.

 4. The basis on which the initial application for further leave to  remain
    was refused was as follows.   The  appellant  was  last  granted  leave
    pursuant to an application made on 3 August 2012 as a Tier 4  (General)
    Student Migrant to study with Metro  College  of  Management  Sciences.
    However, according to the notice of decision  in  the  instant  appeal,
    documents had been supplied confirming that he was actually studying at
    Hendon Business School from 3 September 2012  to  26  June  2013.   The
    current  application  was  made  to  study  with  LIT_LON   LTD.    The
    application was made after his previous leave expired  on  14  December
    2013.  LIT_LON confirmed that he started studying at their  institution
    on 6 January 2014.

 5. Insofar as the decision seems to suggest that he made this  application
    after his previous leave expired, I do not think that is  correct.  But
    in any event that is not the basis on which the appeal proceeded before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The point in issue was that at  the  time  of
    his leave he was subject to Section 50 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 which imposed certain conditions on the  grant  of
    leave to remain. One of those conditions was that  he  study  at  Metro
    College of Management Sciences.  It seems that  the  appellant  accepts
    that that was a condition on which he  was  granted  leave  or  further
    leave, because he relies on the suggestion that he sent a letter  dated
    5 September 2012 to the UKBA to the effect that  he  was  proposing  to
    change college to study at Hendon  Business  School.   A  copy  of  the
    letter that he relies on is in his bundle at page 6.

 6. Returning to the decision of the First-tier Judge, she  concluded  that
    there was no evidence that that letter requesting a switch of  colleges
    was ever sent. She concluded that there was no confirmation of  postage
    and nothing else to support the contention that it was  actually  sent.
    It was on that basis that she concluded that she was "bound to dismiss"
    the appeal.

 7. The decision of the Secretary of State was  based  on  a  discretionary
    ground of refusal  which  is  contained  at  paragraph  322(3)  of  the
    immigration  rules,  that  is  to  say  "failure  to  comply  with  any
    conditions attached to the grant of leave to enter  or  remain".   That
    plainly is a discretionary ground of refusal but  judging  by  the  way
    that Judge Graham expressed herself, it seems that she dealt  with  the
    appeal on the basis that  this  was  a  mandatory  ground  of  refusal,
    stating that she was bound to dismiss the appeal.

 8. It also appears, and was flagged up in the grant of permission  by  the
    Upper Tribunal Judge, that Judge Graham seems  to  have  dismissed  the
    appeal on other bases, contained at [8] and [9] of  the  determination,
    being bases that are not founded in the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State.  One of them relates to bank statements.  The  first  matter  at
    [8] suggests that the appellant had already breached the terms  of  his
    leave by switching to Hendon Business School without permission.   That
    conclusion at [8] is more ambiguous in terms of whether it  was  relied
    on by the Secretary of State, than the conclusion at  [9]  relating  to
    bank statements. The issue  in  relation  to  the  bank  statements  is
    undoubtedly is a matter that was not raised  by  the  respondent.   The
    notice of decision does not take issue with the question of maintenance
    (funds) and the appellant  was  awarded  the  points  claimed  in  that
    respect.

 9. So, dealing with the submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    before me today, Mr Duffy submits that if there was an  error  of  law,
    and I think it is right to say that it is more or  less  accepted  that
    there may well have been, it is not an error of law that  requires  the
    decision to be set aside as it is not material.  He submitted  that  it
    was for the appellant to establish why it would be the  case  that  the
    normal course of events being to refuse an application  with  reference
    to the discretionary ground at paragraph 322(3), should not  follow  in
    this particular case.  He  also  submitted  that,  in  effect  'reading
    between the lines' of the judge's determination, it does not seem as if
    she accepted that the appellant had actually sent the letter requesting
    a change of college to Hendon Business School from Metro  College.   He
    further submitted that sending the letter making a request for a change
    of course would not have been sufficient.  It would have been necessary
    for the appellant actually to receive consent.

10. I am satisfied that there is an error of law in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, at the very least in dealing with  the  appeal  on
    the basis that the appellant was  apparently  subject  to  a  mandatory
    ground of refusal  when  it  plainly  was  a  discretionary  ground  of
    refusal.  The judge earlier in the determination  seemed  to  recognise
    that fact but in her reasons did not appear to have dealt  with  it  on
    that basis. Whilst I can see some force in  Mr  Duffy's  submission  in
    terms of it not actually making any difference,  I  consider  that  the
    appropriate course of action is to  set  aside  the  decision  for  the
    decision to be re-made.  In making that judgement I also have  in  mind
    that the judge seems to have decided the appeal  with  reference  to  a
    matter that was never raised as an issue by the Secretary of State.

11. So I do set aside the decision and I now proceed to  re-make  it.   The
    judge's finding to the effect that there was no evidence to  show  that
    the letter was sent is a finding that is unaffected  by  any  error  of
    law.  There is no need for me to revisit that finding.

12. It follows from that, that it is a fact found by Judge Graham that  the
    appellant did not seek consent to switch courses  because  he  did  not
    send the letter.  In any event, even if he had, the Secretary of  State
    did not in fact consent because there is no evidence from the appellant
    that he received any such consent.  His contention in  the  grounds  is
    that the Secretary of State did not reply to him, but having regard  to
    Judge Graham's finding that the letter was never sent  that  contention
    goes nowhere.

13. There is also another matter to be considered relating to  whether  the
    discretion to refuse should have been exercised in the way that it was.
     The letter that the appellant relies on is copied at  page  6  of  his
    bundle.  It is dated 5 September 2012.  It states that he  advises  the
    Home Office  that  he  is  no  longer  enrolled  at  Metro  College  of
    Management Sciences, and he refers to problems there.  He  states  that
    he has managed to enrol himself at  the  Hendon  Business  School.   In
    fact, from evidence in a letter dated 22 July 2013 from Hendon Business
    School, which the appellant produces at page 5 of his bundle, indicates
    that the course start date was 3 September 2012.   That  was  two  days
    before the appellant purports  to  have  written  the  letter  dated  5
    September 2012. It would appear therefore, that the  appellant  started
    at Hendon Business School before he ever wrote the letter.  Again,  one
    must bear in mind the First-tier Judge's finding that  the  letter  was
    never sent.

14. It seems to me that there is no basis from which to conclude  that  the
    normal course of events involved in a failure to comply with conditions
    should not follow in this case.  The appellant has  not  presented  any
    arguments or facts upon which it would be possible for me  to  conclude
    that  the  discretion  should  have  been  exercised  differently.   He
    switched college without permission.  He did not  ask  for  permission.
    He started at the college before he even wrote the  letter,  which  was
    not in any event sent. It seems to me that there is no basis from which
    to conclude that the Secretary  of  State  should  have  exercised  her
    discretion contained within the rules any differently.

15. In those circumstances, I am satisfied that the appellant has failed to
    establish that he meets the requirements of  the  relevant  immigration
    rules and the appeal is therefore, dismissed.

16. Article 8 of the ECHR is not  raised  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    therefore does not call for consideration by me.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            3/11/14
