
[pic]
IAC-HX-MH/11-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09280/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 May 2015                       |On 14 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway


                                   Between

                              Ms Grace kwarteng
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hoshi
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born in 1970.  She appealed against
    the decision of the Secretary of State  made  on  30  January  2014  to
    refuse a residence card as the former spouse of an EEA  national  under
    Regulation  10(5)  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006.

 2. The history is that on 26 October 2009 the Appellant was issued with  a
    residence card as a confirmation of a right to reside in the  UK  valid
    until 29 July 2014.

 3. On 15 August 2013 she made application for  a  residence  card  on  the
    basis that she had retained a right of residence following divorce from
    an EEA national.  This was refused on the basis that the Appellant, who
    it was accepted was divorced, had failed to provide evidence  that  her
    EEA national sponsor was exercising  treaty  rights  at  the  point  of
    divorce. Her existing card was revoked.

 4. She appealed.

 5. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 30 September 2014 Judge  of  the
    First-tier M A Khan dismissed the appeal under the EEA Regulations  and
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 6. In his decision the judge (at paragraph [6]) noted that Counsel for the
    Appellant had made an application at the hearing for an adjournment and
    that the judge should make directions requiring the Respondent to  make
    enquiries concerning the Appellant's ex-husband's treaty rights  status
    in the UK.  The Appellant had raised issues of domestic violence in her
    divorce statement and that was the basis of the  divorce.   The  family
    court accepted the Appellant's statement in her petition for divorce.

 7. The adjournment application was opposed by the Presenting Officer.

 8. The judge refused the application because the Appellant had not  raised
    domestic violence as  the  basis  of  her  application  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 9. In his conclusions (at [29]ff)  as to the merits of the case the  judge
    having heard evidence from the Appellant and the father  of  her  young
    child, Mr Eric Blair,  found  them  both  to  be  'vague  and  evasive'
    witnesses particularly in relation to how  often  Mr  Blair  saw  their
    child and his involvement in the child's life.  The judge found that Mr
    Blair had only seen the child twice.

10. The judge also found that the Appellant had met her  ex-husband  a  few
    weeks before.  The meeting had been brief but cordial.   The  Appellant
    had not asked him what he was doing or about  his  immigration  status.
    There had been opportunity for her to raise  these  matters  with  him.
    Noting the onus was on her to establish that her  ex-husband  had  been
    exercising treaty rights at the time of the grant of the  divorce,  the
    judge concluded that she had not done so.

11. The judge went on to consider the claim  that  the  Appellant  was  the
    victim of domestic violence.  He noted that she produced  her  petition
    which states that the marriage had broken  down  as  a  result  of  her
    husband's behaviour, and that the proceedings  were  uncontested.   The
    judge also noted, however, that the Appellant did not mention  domestic
    violence  in  her  application  to  the   Respondent   and   that   her
    representatives only raised the issue with the Respondent  in  February
    2014 after the refusal.  Also, that there was no police, medical report
    or any form of court order against her ex-husband.

12. On the evidence the judge did not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    victim of domestic violence as claimed, adding that, as such, there was
    no obligation on the Respondent to provide information with  regard  to
    the Appellant's ex-husband.

13. He concluded that on the evidence before him the  Appellant  failed  to
    meet the requirements of Regulation 10(5).

14. Moving on to consider Article 8 the judge did so in  brief  (at  [37]).
    He noted that the child is a British citizen and  that  his  father  Mr
    Blair is settled in the UK and 'has some contact with the child'.   The
    child 'has some one to care for him in the UK, if they choose to remain
    in the UK'.

15. The judge went on: 'The child is only 21 months and is young enough  to
    accompany his mother to Ghana.  Mr Blair is a Ghanaian citizen.  He has
    a very large family in Ghana.  They can return  to  Ghana  if  they  so
    wish.  The child obtained his British citizenship  through  Mr  Blair's
    settlement'.  The judge considered that the Appellant  can  'return  to
    Ghana with the child or if she choose the child to be brought up in the
    UK,  Mr  Blair  is  present  to  take  over  the  responsibility.   The
    Appellant's family/private life can continue in Ghana'.

16. The Appellant sought permission to appeal.   This  was  refused  on  10
    December 2014 but was granted on reapplication to the Upper Tribunal in
    a decision made on 31 March 2015.

17. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Hoshi sought to  rely  on  the
    renewed grounds.  He made two points.  First, the judge  had  erred  in
    refusing the application for an  adjournment.   Domestic  violence  had
    been raised in the  divorce  petition.   Even  if  such  had  not  been
    reported to the police and there was no medical evidence, it would have
    been fair for the adjournment to have been granted and  the  directions
    made.  It would not have been onerous for the Respondent to  have  made
    the checks about the ex-husband's treaty status.  It was accepted  that
    no mention had been  made  of  domestic  violence  when  she  made  the
    application but she had been unrepresented at that time.

18. The second point was the  judge's  treatment  of  Article  8.   It  was
    inadequate, failing to show proper analysis.  The best interests of the
    child  had  not  been  considered,  nor  had  the  s.117  issues.   His
    conclusion that the child could live with his father was irrational  in
    light of his finding that he had met the child only twice.

19. In brief reply Mr Tarlow submitted that the judge had been correct  for
    the reasons he gave to refuse the adjournment application.   There  was
    no unfairness.

20. Mr Tarlow  agreed  that  the  judge's  analysis  under  Article  8  was
    inadequate.

21. I raised the issue of whether, even though it  was  accepted  that  the
    judge's consideration  of  Article  8  was  legally  flawed,  such  was
    material as no removal decision had been made.  Mr Hoshi submitted that
    it was material.  Reference in that regard had been made to the  First-
    tier judge to Ahmed (Amos;  Zambrano;  reg  15A(3)(c)  2006  EEA  Regs)
    [2013] UKUT 00089 which gave support to the claim  that  Article  8  is
    potentially engaged in such circumstances.

22. I reserved my decision.

23. In considering this matter I look first at the decision of the judge to
    refuse an adjournment and make directions for the Respondent to enquire
    about the Appellant's ex-husband's treaty status, she being  unable  to
    do so as, she claimed, she had been the victim of domestic violence  by
    him.

24. In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)  it  was
    indicated that the test to be applied is that of  fairness:  was  there
    any deprivation of the affected party's right to a fair hearing?

25. It may well be, as the judge appeared to  accept,  that  the  Appellant
    raised domestic violence in her uncontested divorce petition.  However,
    as he also noted, domestic violence was not raised as the basis of  her
    EEA application  to  the  Respondent  in  August  2013  (when  she  was
    represented).  Nor was there any police  or  medical  evidence  or  any
    court order against her ex-husband. Nor was it raised in the Grounds of
    Appeal. I note, indeed, that in her application (at 4.7)  she  answered
    'No' to the question 'Were you...a victim of domestic violence or other
    difficult circumstances during the marriage...?' The first  it  appears
    to have  been  raised  before  the  Tribunal  was  in  the  Appellant's
    statement lodged for the hearing. In  these  circumstances  and  noting
    that the adjournment application  was  only  made  at  the  hearing,  I
    consider that the judge, for the reasons he gave was correct to  refuse
    the application.  I do not see there to have been  any  deprivation  of
    the Appellant to a right to a fair hearing.

26. The other issue is Article 8.  There was no dispute between  Mr  Tarlow
    and Mr  Hoshi  that  the  judge's  treatment  of  Article  8  had  been
    inadequate in law.  I agree.  The judge's analysis amounts, in  effect,
    to one brief paragraph.

27. If suffices to say that the judge amongst other points, failed to treat
    the Appellant's young British  citizen  child's  best  interests  as  a
    primary consideration.  Further, it was irrational  for  the  judge  to
    find that the child could stay in the UK with  his  father,  Mr  Blair,
    having earlier found that he  had  only  seen  his  father  twice.   In
    addition,  the  judge  failed  to   apply   the   mandatory   statutory
    considerations in s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002, in particular s.117B(6).

28. These failings indicate that the judge erred  in  law.   The  remaining
    issue is whether such errors are material.

29. I conclude that they are not.  In that regard I note  the  decision  of
    the Presidential Panel in Amirteymour and Others  (EEA  appeals;  human
    rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC) where it concluded:  'Where  no  notice
    under section 120 of the 2002 Act has been  served  and  where  no  EEA
    decision to remove has been made, an Appellant  cannot  bring  a  Human
    Rights challenge to removal in an appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations.
    Neither the factual matrix nor the reasoning  in  JM  (Liberia)  [2006]
    EWCA  Civ  1402  has  any  application  to  appeals  of  this  nature'.
    (Headnote)

30. In this case there was no s.120  notice  and  no  decision  to  remove.
    Indeed the decision to refuse to issue a residence card states  '...  a
    separate decision may be made at a later date to enforce  your  removal
    from the United Kingdom.   Any  such  decision  and  associated  appeal
    rights will be notified separately'.

31. In summary, no challenge is made to the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant does not satisfy Regulation 10(5)  of  the  EEA  Regulations.
    There was no procedural unfairness. Whilst the judge erred  in  law  in
    his analysis of Article 8 such was not a material error.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows no material error of  law  and
that decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
