
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/09141/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 September 2016                    |On 4 October 2016                    |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                                    s N b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Bustani, Counsel instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a determination sent on 14 June 2016 I  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wyman erred in law  in  dismissing  the  appeal  of  the
    appellant against a decision made by the respondent refusing  to  grant
    her leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.   I  identified  two  errors:
    failure to consider the appellant's claim as one  based  on  family  as
    well as  private  life;  and  failure  anywhere  to  address  the  best
    interests of the child.  I further decided, however, that the case  was
    to be adjourned as  I  considered  it  important  for  the  appellant's
    representatives to have the opportunity to produce a psychiatric report
    that did not emanate  from  a  doctor  in  the  same  practice  as  the
    appellant's son.

2.   Amongst the further evidence submitted in  response  to  my  directions
    were [in addition to the witness statement of the  appellant's  son-in-
    law and a letter from Dr Kana dated 1 June 2016 which had been produced
    at the error of law hearing] a letter from Dr K Nandy, a consultant  at
    Holly Hospital, dated 15 August 2016, who stated that the appellant had
    a long history of back pain and left sided  sciatica,  her  knee  pains
    affect her mobility, she suffers from hypertension and has had two mini
    strokes, she suffers from chronic abdominal  and  pelvic  pain  due  to
    evasive gastritis and adhesions.  She is on regular analgesics and  has
    seen a pain management specialist and osteopath.  The doctor noted that
    Dr Kana had recorded that she had been suffering  from  depression  and
    had chronic medical problems that affect the quality of her  life;  she
    had seen a consultant psychiatrist  in  2007  when  she  suffered  from
    abnormal grief reaction following her  husband's  death  and  developed
    major depression.  She suffered  from  claustrophobia  and  generalised
    anxiety as well and "[o]ne  contributing  factor  was  the  uncertainty
    regarding her immigration status in the UK".  The  appellant  has  been
    tried on various  antidepressant  medication  which  have  either  been
    ineffective or not tolerated.  The  appellant  reported  that  she  has
    become withdrawn and has not been able to  participate  in  social  and
    recreational activities and has generalised anxiety and panic symptoms.
     She continues to suffer  from  panic  attacks  and  can  relapse  into
    current depressive disorder.

3.   At the resumed hearing  I  heard  submissions  from  the  parties.   Ms
    Bustani submitted that there was no real dispute  as  to  the  material
    facts affecting the Article 8 grounds of  appeal.   The  appellant  had
    very close ties with her grandchildren.  In response to  my  directions
    there was now a medical report from a doctor not in the  same  practice
    as the appellant's son and it confirmed  what  had  been  said  by  the
    doctor who was in the same practice (Dr Kana).  The  appellant  is  63,
    she has been in the UK over  ten  years,  her  immigration  history  is
    adverse, she having entered as a visitor and remained  since,  but  she
    had not evaded the  authorities,  having  made  one  application  after
    another to stay.  She has private life ties with her younger son who is
    a pharmacist.  She enjoys family life with her older son,  daughter-in-
    law and she has three grandsons.  She had been a second mother to these
    three boys.  She had mental health difficulties.  She had no real  ties
    in Pakistan.  The grandchildren could not be expected  to  return  with
    her to Pakistan, yet her  departure  from  their  lives  would  have  a
    devastating effect.  Although the Tribunal was required  by  s.117B  of
    the NIAA  2002  as  amended  to  have  regard  to  enumerated  factors,
    including her precarious immigration status,  those  factors  were  not
    determinative.  Although she had previously received NHS-funded medical
    care, she now had private health insurance.  Her case  was  similar  on
    its facts to Dasgupta [2016] UKUT 00028 (IAC) where  the  85  year  old
    appellant had an NHS doctor daughter.

4.   Mr Tufan submitted that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements
    of the Rules and that  was  significant  when  it  came  to  assessment
    outside the Rules, on SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387  principles.   He
    maintained that the appellant's circumstances could not be said  to  be
    compelling; she was  not  elderly,  her  medical  problems  were  long-
    standing; she had had no serious illness  although  she  suffered  from
    depression; her relationships with her grandchildren did not go  beyond
    normal emotional ties between family  members  who  live  in  the  same
    house; even if it could be said she had family life ties  with  her  UK
    family members, her circumstances were not compelling.   There  was  no
    evidence of her English language abilities; she was plainly financially
    dependent, although she appeared to have been able to live in  the  UAE
    for a number of years; she had deceived  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    about her visit intentions.

5.   In response Ms Bustani submitted that the Rules were not exhaustive  of
    potential Article 8  claims  and  it  was  necessary  to  consider  the
    appellant's circumstances cumulatively.  The appellant had had physical
    mobility difficulties.  Her relationship with her grandchildren was  in
    the nature of a family life one  and  it  was  unusually  strong.   Her
    immigration history was poor but she had arrived lawfully.  The purpose
    of s.117A  was  to  treat  adversely  persons  who  were  a  burden  on
    taxpayers; the appellant was not as she now  had  full  private  health
    insurance.  The provisions of s.117B(5) were confined to private  life.
    Her entire life was with her family in the UK.

6.   I am grateful to  the  representatives  for  their  careful  and  well-
    directed submissions.  With all due respect  to  Mr  Tufan,  I  do  not
    consider the  appellant's  medical  and  family  circumstances  can  be
    minimised as much as he submitted, and I agree with Ms Bustani that the
    Article 8 assessment had to approach matters cumulatively, so that both
    her medical and family circumstances are weighed along with  all  other
    relevant factors.

7.   However I am unable to accept that her grounds of appeal are made out.

8.   I accept that the appellant enjoys a family life with  her  eldest  son
    and his family and that she also enjoys  private  life  ties  with  her
    youngest son.  I concur with Ms Bustani that the appellant  appears  to
    have been living with her eldest son and  his  family  in  a  situation
    where over the last ten years she has developed  a  close  relationship
    with them and that the importance of these  relationships  to  her  has
    been magnified by her social isolation from the outside community.

9.   I am not able to accept, however, that  the  respondent's  decision  to
    refuse her leave to remain is disproportionate. In this regard  I  must
    give effect to the principles set out in SS (Congo) and similar  cases,
    in particular that the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  reflect
    the importance to be attached to the public interest in the maintenance
    of immigration control.

10.  I should record that during the course of submissions I saw  fit,  with
    the help of Ms Bustani, to question the appellant about her ability  in
    English.

11.  In weighing up the competing considerations I count in the  appellant's
    favour:

    (i)  the fact that she is a widow and that  the  loss  of  her  husband
         caused her to suffer depression, that she  remains  susceptible  to
         depression and continues to be prescribed various drugs to help her
         cope with depression;


    (ii) the fact that since her marriage she spent most of her life in the
         UAE, which means her ties with siblings and other family members in
         Pakistan are not strong and some of them have health problems;


    (iii)    that the appellant has family life ties with her youngest  son
         and has family in  the  UK  and  that  in  relation  to  her  three
         grandchildren she lives in daily interaction with  them  and  there
         are strong bonds of affection between them.   The  statements  from
         the grandchildren are heartfelt;


    (iv) that whilst  her  English  language  ability  lacks  fluency,  she
         understands and can communicate in basic  English  and  has  indeed
         qualifications  in  her  past  in  English   language   (an   ESOL)
         certificate and had worked as a teacher using English in Abu Dhabi;




    (v)  whilst she has had recourse to NHS treatment in the past, she  has
         done her best, since learning from the First-tier Judge  that  this
         went against her case, to obtain private health insurance with  the
         result that at least in the immediate future she will  not  fall  a
         burden on the NHS again;


    (vi) when the appellant came to the UK in 2006, she entered lawfully;


    (vii)    that whilst she has been an overstayer since 2006/7,  she  has
         not sought to conceal her presence from the immigration authorities
         and has indeed maintained contact  with  them  in  the  process  of
         pursuing various applications and representations in an  effort  to
         gain permission to stay.

 12. Regrettably, however, I consider the above  factors,  even  when  taken
    cumulatively,  to  be  significantly  outweighed  by  factors  counting
    against the appellant.  Although her health is poor it is not described
    by the doctors as extremely poor and all indications are  that  she  is
    able to  manage  daily  life  with  a  combination  of  treatments  and
    medications.  Her mental health, although characterised by a history of
    depression, has not been such as to require her or her  family  on  her
    behalf to require treatment from psychiatric or mental health  services
    since 2006/2007.  It is clear that if she is returned to  Pakistan  her
    sons will ensure she receives quality medical treatment and care as and
    when necessary.

13.  As regards her relationships with her eldest son,  her  daughter-in-law
    and her grandchildren, I have already noted that I consider these to be
    close but there are two particular features about them that I  consider
    of particular relevance.

14.  First, although the children consider the appellant a "second  mother",
    there is no suggestion that she is the "first  mother"  or  that  their
    parents do not provide a strong, loving, caring environment  for  their
    own children.  As regards the best interests of the  children  this  is
    important because although the appellant's departure would obviously be
    a loss to them, there is nothing to suggest that their  primary  family
    life ties with their parents would suffer any disruption.

15.  Second, the fact that  the  appellant  now  comes  before  a  court  or
    Tribunal seeking to rely on these ties  is  a  direct  consequence  and
    function of her own choice to breach immigration  law  by  becoming  an
    overstayer.  So far as concerns her private life ties, I am obliged  by
    s.117B(5) to treat such ties as of  little  weight  by  virtue  of  her
    precarious immigration status.  So far  as  concerns  her  family  life
    ties, it is clear from established case law (as summarised in Rajendran
    (s117B -  family  life)  [2016]  UKUT  138  (IAC)),  that  the  plainly
    precarious nature of her immigration status reduces the  weight  to  be
    attached to the solidity of the family  life  ties.   I  consider  that
    subsequent Court of Appeal judgments e.g. Rhuppiah v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 803 to fortify me in that view.  The cases of Dasgupta [2016]  UKUT
    00028 and JO & Others [2014] UKUT 00517  turn  on  factually  different
    scenarios and do not assist the appellant.

16.  I have already observed that I accept that the  appellant  has  English
    language abilities but I consider that,  at  best,  a  neutral  factor,
    particularly because the  evidence  of  her,  the  doctors  and  family
    members was that she was not integrated in the wider community.    I do
    not consider the fact that  the  appellant  has  not  sought  to  evade
    immigration control assists her case much if at all,  since  the  clear
    message of the repeated refusals of  her  various  representations  and
    applications has been that she has no valid basis to remain in the  UK;
    yet she has not left.

17.  I have already found that the appellant does  not  have  strong  family
    ties in Pakistan  and  I  have  studied  the  various  statements  made
    regarding the current situation of her various  siblings  and  extended
    family members.  Whilst they satisfy me that she may have on return  to
    live in a domestic situation which is outside  the  norm  of  a  mother
    living with her sons as she becomes old, the evidence does not  suggest
    that some solution would be found, with the help of her sons in the UK,
    to ensure she has some local network of family and/or friends  to  look
    out for her, if not live with her.  Despite living in  the  UAE  for  a
    number of years she clearly retains strong cultural ties with Pakistan.
     It is clear that her family in the UK  would  take  especial  care  to
    ensure she was well provided for both financially and  as  regards  any
    domestic or medical care she may need.  It is also  relevant  that  her
    return to Pakistan would not result in any permanent disruption of  the
    relationship with UK family members as there would  be  viable  options
    for visits to see her and, of course an ability on her part to keep  in
    contact through Skype etc.

18.  It is never a happy task for  a  judicial  decision-maker  to  reach  a
    decision that has the effect of requiring a person of  good  character,
    who suffers from medical problems and has become used  to  living  with
    her eldest son in an extended family situation, to leave the  UK.   But
    the appellant does not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  (as  is
    conceded)  and  I  do  not  consider  that  her  circumstances,  viewed
    cumulatively, are compelling.

19.  For the above reasons the appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed        [pic]                          Date 4 October 2016

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

