
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09279/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th August 2016                           |On 22nd August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                 Asad Iqbal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel, instructed by Veja & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge McWilliams
    made without a hearing on 5th January 2016.

    Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 2nd October  1988.   He
    entered the UK with entry clearance as a student with a valid  visa  to
    21st October 2013.  On 2nd May 2012 he entered into a marriage with  an
    EEA national and twelve days  later  submitted  an  application  for  a
    residence card on the basis of that marriage which was issued  on  16th
    October 2012.  On  24th  November  2012  the  Tier  4  sponsor  licence
    relevant to his studies was revoked.

 3. The appellant came to the attention of the respondent on 26th  November
    2013 when he was visited by an Immigration  Officer.   The  Immigration
    Officer could not find any evidence of a female living at his  address.
    The appellant was interviewed.  The respondent noted that he  had  been
    unable to give the names of  his  stated  sponsor's  parents  or  their
    address and did not know his spouse's then whereabouts.

 4. As a consequence the respondent suspected that the marriage was one  of
    convenience and considered that the appellant  had  ceased  to  have  a
    right to reside in the UK.  On  23rd  February  2015  she  revoked  the
    appellant's residence card in accordance  with  Regulation  22  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, and it was this decision which  was
    the subject of the appeal before the Immigration Judge.

 5. The appellant elected to have his appeal considered without a  hearing.
    The judge applied the relevant law and agreed with the respondent  that
    the marriage was indeed not a genuine one. The judge concluded that the
    respondent was entitled to revoke the residence card.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal, mainly on  the  ground  that
    there had been unfairness as he said that there had  not  been  a  full
    disclosure of all of the material upon which the Tribunal  had  relied.
    In particular the full  interview  record  was  not  disclosed  to  the
    appellant.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on this basis by Judge Hollingworth on
    12th July 2016.

 8. The respondent served a reply  on  25th  July  2016  arguing  that  the
    appellant was abundantly aware of the points taken against him  by  the
    Secretary of State and had had the  opportunity  to  opt  for  an  oral
    hearing and adduce evidence from himself  and  others  to  address  the
    respondent's concerns.  Furthermore the  documents  relied  on  by  the
    respondent were included in  the  respondent's  cover  sheet  including
    excerpts from the interview record.

 9. The respondent also served an interview record of  an  interview  which
    took place on 18th September 2015 in the mistaken belief that this  was
    the full record of the interview which was the basis  of  the  decision
    but of course it was not having taken  place  after  the  decision  was
    made.

    The hearing

10. Mr Bellara relied on his grounds and  submitted  that  there  had  been
    procedural unfairness.

11. However, I am not persuaded that there has been any such unfairness  in
    this case.  The refusal letter which was  disclosed  to  the  appellant
    sets out the questions in the interview which were  relied  on  by  the
    judge.  There is no  evidence  that  the  judge  relied  on  any  other
    evidence not disclosed to the appellant.

12. The situation since the decision has in fact been made more complicated
    for him in that there is now a further Immigration Officer's report and
    also a letter from his wife  saying  that  they  are  no  longer  in  a
    relationship.

13. There is no error of law in the judge's decision and  in  fact  in  the
    light of subsequent events  it  is  plain  that  any  error  could  not
    possibly be material.

14. The original judge's decision will stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 20 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
