
IAC-FH-nl-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09236/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2015                   |On 16 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                       ms bamitale rebecca ikuyinminu
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Ariyo, instructed by Apex Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  7  July  1987  and  she
    entered the UK as a Tier 4 Student on 7 October 2010 and she sought  on
    7 December 2011 a residence card by virtue of the EEA Regulations which
    was rejected on 17 January 2012.  A further application on 17  February
    was again rejected on 11 May 2012.   On  6  March  2013  she  sought  a
    derivative residence card under the Zambrano ruling which  was  refused
    on 17 January 2014.

 2. The appellant had a child on 24 August 2012, now aged 2, his father was
    stated to be Abayomi Temidayo Olatunji who had ILR in the UK.

 3. The respondent noted that the father registered the child's birth  with
    the appellant on 1 October 2012 which indicated he  had  some  parental
    contact.  It was accepted that the appellant had provided some  limited
    evidence that the child lived with her  and  she  made  some  decisions
    regarding her welfare but she had not provided evidence  that  she  was
    responsible for the child.

 4. The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Horvath on
    1 October 2014 and he  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all  grounds  on  10
    October.

 5. An application for permission to appeal was submitted on the basis that
    the judge had failed to deal with the point that the decision  was  not
    made in accordance with the law, in particular with  reference  to  the
    Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  Family  Migration  Appendix  FM,
    guidance which stated that a case with respect  to  a  British  citizen
    child  "must  always  be  assessed  on  the  basis  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to  leave  the  EU  with
    that parent or primary carer".  The judge accepted that  the  appellant
    had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship (paragraph 42 of the
    determination) and should have allowed the appeal  to  the  extent  the
    respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.

 6. The judge further failed to deal with the assessment of Section 117B(6)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  in  assessing  the
    appellant's family life, in particular -

             "117B  Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in
             all cases

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom."

 7. Bearing in mind the judge failed to consider the  effect  of  Sanade  &
    Others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT  00048  (IAC)
    which confirmed that it was not possible to require a  citizen  of  the
    European Union to relocate outside the EU or submit that  it  would  be
    reasonable for them to do so.

 8. One of the issues which concerned the appellant's  representatives  was
    that the judge appeared to proceed  on  the  basis  that  the  previous
    marital relationship of the appellant with another man was  undisclosed
    to the respondent and this was not in fact the case.  The appellant had
    previously made an application on the basis of her  marriage  but  this
    was refused by the respondent.  It was submitted that their father  had
    abandoned any care for the child and was not in any way in contact with
    the appellant and the judge had misunderstood the  material  facts.   A
    parental biological relationship was distinct from  the  assumption  of
    care responsibility.

 9. The judge concluded that the appellant was not the primary carer of the
    child and this was unsupported by the material evidence submitted.   In
    fact the appellant had relied on  letters  from  the  GP,  the  child's
    school and documentary evidence showing that  the  child  resided  with
    her.  The judge failed to give effect to  Omotunde  (best  interests  -
    Zambrano applied - Razgar) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00247.  The  nationality
    of a child as a British citizen was said to be a primary  consideration
    in an assessment of the best interests of the child.

10. In the last sentence at paragraph 48 of the determination the judge  in
    assessing the family life of the appellant's child stated on the  facts
    as found, "I find there is no family life as such between  Mr  Olatunji
    and the appellant/the child since they do not live together in a single
    family unit".

11. Having made this finding the judge erred and was  inconsistent  in  not
    finding that there was no family life.  SEN  v  Netherlands  (2003)  36
    EHRR 81 was proposition that  a  biological  parent/child  relationship
    will always give rise to family life.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    who found that the independent  evidence  from  the  GP  and  from  the
    Maryland Children's Centre indicated the appellant was  her  daughter's
    primary carer and in those  circumstances  it  was  not  reasonable  to
    assume the child's biological father would be  able,  willing  or  even
    suitable to take full responsibility for the child.

13. Submissions were made at length at the hearing by Mr Ariyo and Mr  Nath
    responded in stating that it was a thorough determination and the judge
    had gone through the various  areas  required  of  him,  in  particular
    Section 55 and the derivative rights of residence as set out.

Conclusions

14. Under The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 15A(4A)
    in order to be  entitled  to  a  derivative  rights  of  residence  the
    appellant (P) satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

         (a) P is the primary carer of a British citizen ("the relevant
         British citizen");

         (b) the relevant British citizen is residing in the United Kingdom;
         and

         (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in the
         UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave.

15. Mr Nath submitted that there were issues in relation to the appellant's
    credibility and that the question  over  the  paternity  of  the  child
    should be taken into account in the credibility assessment.

16. It was not the production of the marriage certificate or  the  previous
    marital relationship as  being  a  fresh  disclosure  which  the  judge
    recorded but the revelation in the appellant's oral evidence  that  she
    was having a sexual relationship with two men at  once  and  hence  the
    issue regarding paternity  which  the  respondent  raised  as  a  fresh
    disclosure. That said the  judge  recorded  at  paragraph  18  that  in
    relation to the child's British passport "unless and  until  the  birth
    certificate and the British passport are revoked they have to be  taken
    at face value.  I therefore have to assume for  the  purposes  of  this
    determination that Mr Olatunji is the child's father".  Thus the  judge
    accepted the child as British for the purposes of the  hearing.   I  do
    not accept that it can be a sustainable attack  on  the  decision  that
    this revelation influenced the judge's reasoning.  He gave  a  detailed
    assessment of why he rejected the appellant's evidence.

17. The judge moved on to assess that the child was a British citizen, that
    her status  had  been  derived  from  her  biological  father  who  had
    settlement status in the UK but the judge recorded that the information
    provided by the appellants  was  very  limited  [20].  The  judge  also
    recorded that there was inconsistency in the evidence and this was  set
    out clearly within the determination [21] and [22].

18. In particular the judge did not find the appellant to be a credible and
    honest witness or that she had given full and  frank  disclosure  about
    the father.  The judge was criticised at the lack of questioning of the
    appellant but it is the responsibility of the appellant to put  forward
    her case and in essence the judge was not satisfied that she had  given
    full and frank disclosure about Mr Olatunji.  In particular  the  judge
    found that the father had taken part in the registration of  the  birth
    certificate and obtaining the British passport  and  as  Mr  Olatunji's
    family traditionally forbids the rejection of their children the  judge
    was not satisfied as to the required  standard  that  Mr  Olatunji  had
    rejected or abandoned the child [21].   Indeed,  at  paragraph  22  the
    judge found that:

         "There was no credible or cogent evidence from the  appellant  that
         Mr Olatunji has rejected the child.  On the contrary it was  stated
         on the appellant's behalf (in the representative's letter) that the
         father of the child is not in a position to  permanently  care  for
         the child because of accommodation issues and the tender age of the
         child."

19. The  judge  was  criticised  for  failing  to  take  into  account  the
    Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  Family  Migration  Appendix  FM,
    guidance which stated that a case with respect  to  a  British  citizen
    child  "must  always  be  assessed  on  the  basis  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to  leave  the  EU  with
    that parent or primary carer" but the judge  found  it  "more  probable
    than not that Mr Olatunji would be able to  and  could  undertake  care
    responsibilities for the child since his tradition forbids rejection of
    their children".  And further the judge cited that "as pointed  out  in
    the refusal letter any unwillingness to assume care  responsibility  is
    not by itself sufficient for  the  appellant  to  assert  that  another
    direct relative or guardian is unable to care for the child".  As  such
    the judge proceeded on the basis that the child would not have to leave
    the UK with a parent. Nor, therefore did the judge ignore Sanade.

20. Further the judge cited at  paragraph  23  that  an  extract  from  the
    child's red book showed that Mr Olatunji had been involved in  the  BCG
    administered to the child and in effect the judge found:

         "I am not satisfied that the appellant is the sole primary carer of
         the child.  I find that Mr Olatunji can and probably does undertake
         care responsibilities for the  child  including  making  day-to-day
         decisions on  her  upbringing,  even  if  there  is  no  subsisting
         relationship between the appellant and Mr Olatunji  as  claimed  by
         the application".

21. The judge found further inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence  in
    relation to the accommodation and her financial  support.   Indeed  the
    judge rejected the appellant's evidence given the appellant's  lack  of
    veracity.

22. That said, I find there are two issues in the decision which need to be
    addressed.  The judge, despite the copious evidence  produced  rejected
    the concept that the appellant was the  primary  carer  of  the  child.
    Bearing in mind the  evidence  from  the  Lime  Tree  Surgery  and  the
    Maryland Children's Centre that the appellant was  known  to  them  and
    that she participated in all activities provided to support her and the
    child, I find that the conclusion that at [27] that the  appellant  was
    not the child's primary carer is not necessarily accurate  in  relation
    to Regulation 15A(4A)(a).  The question, however, is  further,  whether
    under 15A(c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside  in
    the UK or in another EEA state  if  P  were  required  to  leave.   The
    appellant must also satisfy this limb of the regulations. The judge did
    not consider that she could.

23. Although the judge found at paragraph 48 that "on the facts as found  I
    find that there is no family life as such between Mr Olatunji  and  the
    appellant/the child since they do not live together in a single  family
    unit" , Mr Olutunji has in fact  a  biological  relationship  with  the
    child and thus family life.   This was an error but I do not,  however,
    find this material.   The judge clearly accepted that Mr  Olutunji  did
    have a continuing relationship with the child.  At paragraphs 22 and 23
    the judge found Mr Olatunji would be able to and could  undertake  care
    responsibilities for the child.  Indeed  paragraphs  27  and  28  would
    appear to contradict each other.

24. At paragraph 33 the judge clearly states "I find it more probable  than
    not that the child has contact with Mr Olatunji... I  have  found  that
    the British citizen child could stay in the UK with Mr Olatunji  should
    this be the appellant's and Mr Olatunji's choice".

25. Having stated that and  found  that  the  child  has  contact  with  Mr
    Olatunji the judge clearly has addressed the issue of whether the child
    would be required to leave.

26. I find therefore that the  judge  has  in  effect  taken  into  account
    whether it would be unreasonable to expect a British citizen  child  to
    leave the European Union with the  parent  or  primary  carer  and  has
    applied Regulation  15A(4A)(c).   The  judge  confirmed  that  she  was
    satisfied that the child's proper place is with either of  her  parents
    and that the child's overall wellbeing  and  best  interests  would  be
    served if she was to continue in the care of either parent.

27. Alternatively the judge found on the basis of the child's age that  the
    child's activities may be different in another country but her  private
    life would continue in respect of all its essential elements  and  that
    the child would be able to adapt to new environment in  Nigeria  should
    she be removed there.  Indeed the judge had  regard  to  ZH  (Tanzania)
    [2011] UKSC 4 and stated that she found it would not be unreasonable to
    expect the child to leave the UK with the appellant should this be  the
    parent's wish.  Thus the judge was alive to the fact that it was not  a
    requirement that the child should leave.

28. Once again the judge found at paragraph 43 that Mr Olatunji was in  the
    UK.  He was stated as having ILR and there was no  persuasive  evidence
    that the child  did  not  have  a  subsisting  relationship  with  him.
    Indeed, the judge earlier in the determination  found  that  there  was
    evidence pointing to the fact that she did.

29. The judge then proceeded to consider the facts on Article 8 outside the
    Immigration Rules and it is at this  point  that  she  moves  on  to  a
    consideration of proportionality  in  terms  of  Article  8  and  makes
    reference to Section 117B.  The judge factors in the consideration that
    the appellant has temporary leave to remain in the  UK  and  it  was  a
    condition of her entry that she should return home upon expiry  of  her
    student visa.  The judge also  finds  that  her  parents  and  siblings
    should be able to assist her whilst she finds  suitable  employment  in
    Nigeria [51]. Further to Section 117B(6) the judge is  not  finding  it
    reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  United  Kingdom  for  the
    reasons given in the decision.

30.  The  judge  clearly  found  that  the  decision  was   justified   and
    proportionate.  The judge was clearly apprised of  the  fact  that  the
    child was a British citizen but noted that it "is  reasonable  for  the
    child to leave the UK with the appellant  should  this  be  her  wish".
    Sanade & Others (British children -  Zambrano  -  Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT
    00048, at paragraph 95 confirmed:

         "This means that where a child or indeed the remaining spouse is  a
         British citizen and therefore a citizen of the European  Union,  it
         is not possible to require them to relocate outside of the European
         Union or to submit that it would be reasonable for them to  do  so.
         Their case  serves  to  emphasise  the  importance  of  nationality
         already identified in the decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  ZH
         (Tanzania).  If interference with family life is to be justified it
         can only be on the basis that the  conduct  of  the  person  to  be
         removed gives rise to considerations of such weight as  to  justify
         separation".

31. This is the point.  The judge found that  it  was  reasonable  for  the
    child to live with either parent and that Mr Olatunji continued to have
    contact with the child and therefore it was the choice  of  the  parent
    whether to relocate with the child or leave the child in  the  UK  with
    the other parent.

32. I find that  the  evidence  overall  the  appellant  was  not  believed
    regarding the claimed  distant  relationship  between  herself  and  Mr
    Olatunji.  The judge clearly found Mr  Olatunji  was  involved  in  the
    child's upbringing.  The judge gave reasoning  for  this  and  separate
    from the mere absence of Mr Olatunji from the court  hearing  [21].  As
    such, should the mother wish to return to Nigeria without the child  it
    was a matter for her.  In sum the child was not being required to leave
    the European Union.

Notice of Decision

33. I find that there was  no  error  which  would  materially  affect  the
    outcome of the decision and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 14th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

