
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09509/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 November 2013                           |On 6 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                                Lord Matthews
                  Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD USMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C H Bexson, Counsel instructed by Ali Sinclair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born on 11 September  1984.
     He is the husband of the sponsor, Ifara Ayub  whom  he  married  on  8
    December  2011  at  Ealing  Town  Hall  Registry  Office.   There   was
    subsequently an Islamic marriage ceremony on 23 July 2012 when a  Nikah
    certificate was issued by the Imam of the West London Islamic Centre.

2.   He arrived in the United Kingdom on 27 March 2011  on  a  student  visa
    whose expiry was 11 August 2012.   While  in  the  UK  he  built  up  a
    relationship  with  his  now  wife,  who  is  a  British  citizen.   An
    application for further leave to remain  was  sent  to  the  UK  Border
    Agency by his solicitors on 7 August 2012.  The application was both in
    terms of paragraph 295D of the Immigration Rules and under reference to
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  and  Fundamental
    Freedoms.  His application was refused on 4 March 2013.

3.   The refusal letter indicated that he failed to  meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules in a number of respects.  He  had  provided  a
    speaking test certificate as evidence of meeting the  English  Language
    Test but had not provided any certification in respect of the listening
    test.  Furthermore he was unable to meet the financial requirements  of
    the Rules.

4.   The Article 8 claim was considered in  terms  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Rules which it was said govern such matters from 9 July 2012.   It  was
    said that the appellant was unable to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    exceptions paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.  At that time at least he did
    not have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a  child
    under the age of 18 years who was in the  UK  and  who  was  a  British
    citizen or who had lived in the UK  continuously  for  at  least  seven
    immediately preceding the date of application.   It  was  not  accepted
    that there were any insurmountable obstacles which  would  prevent  him
    from continuing his family life outside the UK in Pakistan.

5.   An appeal against that  decision  was  dealt  with  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 8 July 2013, the determination refusing  the  appeal  being
    promulgated on 22 August 2013.  In the interim a female child, who is a
    British citizen, was born to the sponsor and the appellant on  24  July
    2013.

6.   Evidence was led before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  sponsor  was
    found to be a credible young woman and it was accepted that the  couple
    married as previously indicated.  It was found that  she  continued  to
    live in her parents' home and that they were initially unaware  of  the
    marriage.  The evidence disclosed that at the end of November 2012  she
    and the appellant told her parents of their marriage, showed them their
    marriage certificate and informed them that she was in the early stages
    of pregnancy.  Her parents were understandably displeased and told  her
    to leave.  The following day, on 1 December 2012, the sponsor left  her
    parental home and went to live with  her  husband  at  the  home  of  a
    friend.  Before this they had not lived together after  their  marriage
    as a family unit.  The First-tier Tribunal  found  and  indeed  it  was
    accepted by all parties that the appeal could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  There was something of a discrepancy in relation to
    the certification of the English language requirements but in any event
    the maintenance provisions could not be met.  The only hope within  the
    Rules was  to  rely  upon  exceptional  circumstances  under  paragraph
    EX.1(b) of Appendix FM on the basis that the sponsor was a  UK  citizen
    born and brought up in the UK  but  now  rejected  by  her  family  and
    estranged from them because of her clandestine marriage and pregnancy.

7.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  there  were   no   exceptional
    circumstances or any insurmountable obstacles  to  her  continuing  her
    life with the appellant in Pakistan if she chose to go there.  It would
    not be unreasonable to expect her to live there with her husband and in-
    laws and where she had some family members by marriage.  It was pointed
    out that she had already spent approximately 18 months in total in that
    country, spread over several visits lasting a few months at a time.  It
    was indeed at one of these family gatherings that  she  first  met  her
    husband.  It was found that the couple were both clearly well  used  to
    living in Pakistan and it was open to the sponsor either to go with her
    husband or to stay in the UK, which she was perfectly entitled to do.

8.   The First-tier Tribunal went on to consider the claim under Article  8.
     The respondent did not accept that  removal  of  the  appellant  would
    necessarily interfere with the family life he had established with  his
    wife since the time she left her parents' home as they  could  relocate
    together if they chose to do so.  Alternatively there  was  nothing  to
    stop the sponsor from travelling from time to time to visit her husband
    in Pakistan.  It is said in paragraph 72 of the determination that  the
    removal decision as such  causes  no  interference  with  the  couple's
    family life.  It is not entirely clear whether that is a  finding  made
    by the Tribunal or whether it merely records  the  submissions  by  the
    respondent but our view is that  the  comment  falls  into  the  former
    category.  As such it is difficult to justify the comment.  It may well
    be that all the First-tier Tribunal was saying was  that  the  decision
    itself has not interfered with  the  family  life.   It  would  be  the
    consequences of the decision which would do so should for  example  the
    parties require to be separated or should the sponsor decide to go with
    the appellant to Pakistan.  Even if that was the  thinking  behind  the
    comment it is, with respect, somewhat disingenuous.

9.   However, the First-tier Tribunal went on to consider  any  interference
    with  the  appellant's  private  life.   It  was  found  that  he   had
    established  private  life  in  the  UK  and  that  his  removal  would
    constitute an interference with the respect due to that.  However,  the
    Tribunal found that the friends who attended on his behalf  shared  his
    ethnicity or were married to members of his family and  it  was  likely
    they would either return to Pakistan  themselves,  depending  on  their
    immigration status, or at least go there  for  a  prolonged  period  of
    visit.  It would be possible for the appellant to keep  in  touch  with
    them.  His removal was found to be proportionate.

10.  It was found, as was the case, that there  were  no  children  but  the
    First-tier Tribunal purported to go on to consider the  best  interests
    of any future children.  It was said that any such  children  would  be
    able to visit the United Kingdom, funds permitting.  It was well  known
    that children move countries and continents with their parents all  the
    time and no-one had suggested that such wider experience  of  life  was
    harmful.  If they were in Pakistan both their parents would be able  to
    work lawfully so that family life would be placed on a  secure  footing
    rather than their having to suffer the economic uncertainties which had
    beset them in the UK, where the appellant had  limited  entitlement  to
    work while pursuing his studies and the sponsor was currently on unpaid
    maternity leave from her job as a cashier in the butcher's.  The family
    would accordingly be better off, whether or not  in  absolute  material
    terms.  They would also be likely to have support from the  appellant's
    parents, particularly if their son's child was born there.

11.  It was found however that there could be no consideration of where  the
    best interests of the children lay given that  the  appellant  was  not
    able to satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  child  was  unborn.
    Reference was made to Miah and Ors v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  261  on  the
    basis that being a near miss could not assist.

12.  At paragraph 80 the First-tier Tribunal said the following:

        "80. It seems to me, particularly bearing in mind the minimal level
             of interference evidenced as being caused in this case  by  the
             family unit choosing  to  relocate  -  as  a  whole,  that  the
             respondent  can  justify  any  such   interference   with   the
             maintenance of an effective immigration  policy,  a  legitimate
             objective"

13.  The appellant now  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The first ground is that the First-tier Tribunal were  wrong
    in finding that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the appellant
    and his wife going to live in Pakistan, nor was it unreasonable for the
    sponsor so to do.  It is said that the fact that she spent a  total  of
    18 months in Pakistan spread over a number of visits was translated  by
    the judge into a conclusion that the sponsor was clearly well  used  to
    living in Pakistan.  There was no consideration of the  fact  that  the
    sponsor was born in the United Kingdom in 1990 and had lived her entire
    life here, the total of her visits to Pakistan amounting to only a tiny
    fraction of her life.  Visiting a country for a limited period was  not
    comparable to living there  permanently.   The  position  of  women  in
    Pakistan was notoriously very much worse than in the United Kingdom.

14.  Before us Miss Bexson re-iterated this ground but Mr Saunders  for  the
    respondent pointed out that the permission to appeal did not allow that
    matter to be argued.

15.  We can  deal  with  this  point  fairly  briefly.   Leaving  aside  any
    question of the construction of the permission to appeal, it appears to
    us that the question of "insurmountable obstacles" is one of  fact  and
    degree to be determined according to the  particular  circumstances  of
    each case.  In our opinion  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was not entitled to reach the view  it  did  and  we  find  no
    substance in this ground.

16.  The grounds go on to argue that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  simply
    failed to engage with the  interference  with  family  life  which  was
    sufficient to undermine her conclusions on Article 8.  It  was  pointed
    out, as we have indicated, that at paragraph 72 the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge held that the decision caused no interference with  family  life.
    Since the appellant and his spouse were presently  living  together  in
    the United Kingdom and the decision would lead to  his  departure  from
    the country that conclusion was incomprehensible.

17.  We did not hear any argument on this point but  it  seems  to  us  that
    there is obvious merit in it.  In the first place it  is  difficult  to
    avoid the conclusion, as we have indicated previously, that there would
    be clear interference with the family life of  the  appellant  and  his
    sponsor.  The First-tier Tribunal at one  stage  in  the  determination
    indicated that there was no such interference but at paragraph 80  went
    on to describe it as minimal.   The  consequences  of  the  appellant's
    removal will be either that the sponsor, a  British  citizen  born  and
    raised in the United Kingdom, will either relocate to Pakistan with the
    appellant or else the genuine and subsisting  relationship  which  they
    have will be broken up to all intents and purposes for an indeterminate
    period.  We consider that it is an error of law  to  describe  that  as
    "minimal interference".

18.  Another matter causes us concern.  It is pointed  out  in  the  grounds
    that the First-tier Tribunal purported to consider the  best  interests
    of future children while at the same time finding that  there  were  no
    children and thus no best interests to consider.  It is said  that  she
    failed adequately to  consider  that  the  sponsor  was  expecting  the
    couple's first child and was very shortly to give birth to a child  who
    would be entitled to British citizenship.  A failure  to  consider  the
    best interests of an imminent child was wholly unrealistic.  Dismissing
    the drawbacks for a British child of being raised in Pakistan  was  the
    alternative to separation from birth from its father on the basis  that
    the child could visit his country of nationality, funds permitting, was
    an inadequate approach to its best interests.

19.  Mr Saunders on the other hand pointed out that,  while  everyone  hoped
    that there would be no difficulties with the birth of  a  child,  there
    was good reason not to consider a child who was not yet born.   It  was
    open now to the sponsor to go to the Secretary of State  on  the  basis
    that things  had  changed.   The  judge  had  properly  looked  at  the
    circumstances as they were and had not fallen into error.

20.  We find ourselves having a great deal of  sympathy  with  the  argument
    for the respondent.  The judge had to make a decision as at the date of
    decision and there is authority that the child in utero is to  be  left
    out of consideration.  The judge however purported to go on to consider
    the interests of a future child.  In doing so she failed to address the
    point that such a child, whose birth was plainly imminent, would  be  a
    British citizen and there was no engagement at all with the  principles
    set out in Zambrano.  It might  be  said  that  everything  said  about
    future children was completely irrelevant to her decision on the merits
    of the case but in our opinion she should have adopted a more pragmatic
    approach to what was about to happen and in any event, having  embarked
    upon the discussion, she should have  done  so  having  regard  to  the
    applicable principles.  With  some  hesitation  we  find  that  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case this amounted to an error of  law
    also. We do not consider that the case of Miah is of any assistance  in
    these circumstances as the case dealt with  a  "near  miss"  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

  21. We considered whether it would be appropriate for the  Upper  Tribunal
      to re-make the decision in the circumstances which  have  now  arisen.
      Whilst it is not in the ordinary practice of  the  Tribunal  to  remit
      cases to the First-tier Tribunal, there are reasons why in  this  case
      such a course should be adopted, having given particular regard to the
      overriding objective of the efficient disposal  of  appeals  and  that
      there are issues of fact that are central to this appeal that  require
      determination which have not been taken into account or assessed  when
      the case was before the First-tier Tribunal.  In that sense  the  case
      falls within the Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2(b) (as amended).

  22. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside,  none
      of the findings shall stand and the case is  to  be  remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for a hearing in accordance with Section  12(2)(b)
      of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act at paragraph 7.2  of  the
      Practice Statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).

Decision

  23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
      set aside and the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as set
      out in the preceding paragraph.






                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                     Date:  25 November 2013


