
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/09719/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Taylor House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 October 2015                        |On 10 May 2016                    |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                               MR MOHSIN KHAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Bristoe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Judge J S Law (the Judge) dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the
    respondent's refusal dated 20 February  2015.   That  was  because  the
    Judge found the notice of appeal failed to set out  the  grounds,  such
    grounds had been  requested  from  the  appellant  but  none  had  been
    received.  The Judge went on to determine the appeal under Rule  19  of
    the 2014 Rules, taking into account RS and FD (appeals without grounds)
    Jamaica [2006] UKAIT 00064.

 2. Grounds lodged on behalf of the appellant said that his representatives
    submitted his appeal via fax on 9  March  2015.   They  were  seventeen
    pages in total which consisted of the appeal form, refusal  letter  and
    grounds of appeal.  Subsequently, the Tribunal notified the appellant's
    representatives that grounds of appeal were to be lodged  by  23  April
    2015 such that they were to be lodged again.

 3. Judge Hodgkinson granted leave to appeal  on  22  September  2015.   He
    found, inter alia:

         "Documents submitted with the current  application  would  indicate
         that the original grounds of appeal may have been received  by  the
         Tribunal but that, due to a  possible  administrative  error,  they
         might not have found their way onto the Tribunal's file.   If  such
         is established, then it would amount to an arguable error of law."

 4. The respondent lodged a Rule 24  response.   The  respondent  said  the
    grounds did nothing more  than  assert  that  grounds  of  appeal  were
    submitted on behalf of the appellant.  There was no evidence to support
    that assertion.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  a  procedural
    impropriety amounting to an error of law had arisen and an oral hearing
    was requested.

 5. Neither the appellant nor his representatives attended the hearing.   I
    was satisfied that both the appellant and his representatives had  been
    notified of the date and time of the hearing.  In the circumstances,  I
    considered that it was in the interests of justice to proceed with  the
    hearing in accordance with Rule 38 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

Submissions on Error of Law

 6. Ms Willocks-Bristoe submitted that the  appellant  had  never  supplied
    evidence that substantiated the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    such that I should find that the judge made no error of law.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 7. The grounds of appeal for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    read as follows:

         "1.   The  decision  made  by  Immigration  J  S  Law  through  his
             determination promulgated dated 2nd July 2015 is unlawful  and
             therefore, I did not have a fair trial.

         2.   On 9th March  2005,  my  legal  representatives  submitted  my
             appeal via fax.  Please find enclosed the fax report.  A cover
             letter from Immigration Chambers confirms that  the  documents
             were seventeen pages in total which consisted  of  the  appeal
             form, refusal letter along with the grounds of appeal.

         3.   Therefore, after 16/4/2015, my legal representative received a
             notice from the Tribunal requesting for the grounds of  appeal
             and the deadline to send these grounds were 23/4/2015.

         4.   On  23/4/2015,  a  fax  was  submitted  along  with  my  legal
             representatives' cover letter which included  the  grounds  of
             appeal via fax number: 08707395881.  Fax  confirmation  report
             is enclosed.

         5.   In light of the above, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
             Judge  dated  2nd July  2015  is  inappropriate  given   the
             procedural unfairness."

 8. Whilst at [2] of the grounds, there is reference to a fax report and  a
    cover letter confirming that the  documents  were  seventeen  pages  in
    total, none of the documentation was ever made available either to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal or the respondent.

 9. Whilst [4] of the grounds refers to a fax confirmation report enclosed,
    none was enclosed.

10. Whereas Judge Hodgkinson said the grounds of  appeal  "may"  have  been
    received by the Tribunal but due to a  possible  administrative  error,
    they might not have found their way onto the file to be  considered  by
    the judge, I find no evidence of the same.  On the contrary, I find  on
    the evidence before me that no original grounds  of  appeal  were  ever
    sent to the First-tier Tribunal nor do I accept that any  supplementary
    documentation was sent to the Upper Tribunal as an  attachment  to  the
    grounds of appeal.

11. I conclude that the decision does not contain a material error of  law,
    such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law  and  shall
stand.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date         22 October 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart



