

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                     Appeal Number:
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
      IA/09760/2013





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Promulgated on:          |
|On 25 November 2013                       |On 4 December 2013       |
|                                          |                         |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                       Appellant
                                     and

                               Tapasya Duggal

                                                        Respondent
                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Applicant:                 Mr R Reynolds, Counsel
For the Secretary  of  State:     Mr  G  Saunders,  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer

Background

   1.         On 13 September 2013 permission to appeal was  granted  to the
      Secretary of State in respect of her challenge to the determination of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian.

   2.       In this  determination  I  shall  refer  to  Ms  Duggal  as  the
      applicant.
   3.       The applicant is an Indian national born on 12 March  1987.  She
      appealed against the decision of the Secretary of  State  of  3  March
      2013 refusing to vary her  leave  to  remain  to  that  of  a  Tier  1
      entrepreneur and making directions for her removal. The  Secretary  of
      State had taken the view that the applicant had failed to provide  the
      required documents under paragraph 41 - SD(C) of  Appendix  A  and  so
      refused the application.

   4.       The judge noted that the applicant had produced  a  blank  CT41G
      form from HMRC which had not been completed as required and  that  she
      had not submitted a tax return  or  evidence  to  show  that  she  had
      registered as director of a company. Nevertheless he  found  that  the
      Secretary of State had failed to  follow  her  evidential  flexibility
      policy and that the decision was therefore not in accordance with  the
      law.  He found that the missing documents "were now made good" and  he
      allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

   5.       The Secretary of State challenges that decision arguing that the
      appeal should have been allowed to the limited extent  that  a  lawful
      decision was still outstanding rather than  being  allowed  under  the
      rules. It is maintained that no findings were made to show that as  at
      the date of the decision, the applicant had shown  that  she  met  the
      requirements of the rules.

Appeal Hearing

   6.       The applicant was in attendance for the  appeal  hearing  and  I
      heard submissions from Mr Saunders and Mr Reynolds. It is  noted  that
      the Secretary of State was not represented  by  a  presenting  officer
      before the First-tier Tribunal.

   7.       Mr Saunders submitted that having found that  the  Secretary  of
      State had failed to  make  a  lawful  decision  in  not  applying  the
      evidential flexibility policy, the only option open to the  judge  was
      to refer the matter back to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  a  lawful
      decision to be made. It was not open to him to consider the  'missing'
      documents and to make a decision on  the  substantive  merits  of  the
      case. It was also submitted that, in any event, it was unclear whether
      the requirements of the rules had been met.

   8.       In response, Mr Reynolds accepted that the judge  had  erred  in
      that respect but submitted that the error  was  not  material  as  the
      documents had been considered.  They  were  a  tax  return  (submitted
      instead of form CT 41G) and a current appointments form and  had  been
      included in the applicant's court bundle. He argued that  whilst  both
      documents post dated the application and the decision, had  they  been
      requested  by  the  Secretary  of  State  when  the  application   was
      considered, the applicant would have been able  to  produce  them.  He
      submitted that if the matter went back to the Secretary of  State  and
      she considered the two documents, there would  be  only  one  outcome.
      Meanwhile, the delay would impact upon the applicant and  her  ability
      to pursue her business.  He submitted that  although  paragraph  245AA
      had been raised by Judge Baker in the grant of permission, it had  not
      been relied on by the Secretary of State.

   9.       Mr Saunders replied.  He  indicated  that  he  would  have  been
      content with a transfer of the matter to the Secretary  of  State  but
      added that in considering the additional evidence,  the  judge  should
      have had regard to  paragraph  245AA  and  the  admissibility  of  the
      documents.

  10.       At the conclusion of the hearing  I  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give.

Findings and Conclusions

  11.        I have carefully considered the evidence  before  the  Tribunal
      and the submissions that have been made.

  12.       Despite my own  reservations  about  the  applicability  of  the
      evidential flexibility policy to the facts of this case, the Secretary
      of State appears to have accepted  that  she  should  have  asked  the
      applicant for the missing documents. The two 'missing' documents were,
      however, only created several months after the  application  and  even
      after the date of the decision. That  is  to  say  they  were  not  in
      existence at the time of the application.

  13.       Notwithstanding my concerns, the  issue  is  whether  the  judge
      acted improperly in failing to refer the matter back to the  Secretary
      of State. Mr Saunders argues that  he  did  and,  whilst  Mr  Reynolds
      accepts that, he argues that it is not material.

  14.       The difficulty, as I see it, is that once the judge  found  that
      the Secretary of State had not made a lawful decision, he had no power
      to ignore that finding and proceed  to  consider  the  merits  of  the
      application. Indeed, without a lawful decision, it is difficult to see
      how a judge  can  undertake  any  further  consideration.  This  is  a
      scenario where the application, as a result  of  the  judge's  initial
      findings, is outstanding and requires a decision to be made.  In  that
      context, I am unable to agree with Mr Reynold's submissions.
  15.       The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  allowing  the
      appeal under the rules is set aside. The decision to allow the  appeal
      on the basis that the decision was not in accordance with the  law  is
      upheld.

Decision

  16.       The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and  the  Secretary
      of State's appeal is allowed. The  determination  is  set  aside  (see
      paragraph 16) and the matter is referred  back  to  the  Secretary  of
      State for a lawful decision to be made.

            Signed:





      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


           25 November 2013








