

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number IA/09203/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Centre City Tower
              Determination Promulgated
On 7th April 2015
                      On 23rd April 2015


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                           CASSANDRA ELSADA KELLY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr M Azmi (Counsel, instructed by J M Wilson,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK as the primary carer
   of a British national child. The application was refused and the
   Appellant appealed. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg
   at Birmingham on the 28th of August 2014 and dismissed in a determination
   promulgated on the 16th of September 2014.

2. The Judge found that the Appellant's removal from the UK would be
   proportionate without addressing the point that the child was a British
   national and whether the Appellant's removal would lead to the child
   having to leave the UK.

3. The Grounds of Appeal assert that the Judge erred in relation to the
   nationality of the child and the derivative right of residence. The Judge
   should have made a decision on the Zambrano point, the grounds of refusal
   -  that ability of the father to care for the child and the Appellant's
   convictions disqualifying her, had not been addressed. Article 8 was
   similarly flawed.

4. Permission having been granted the error was conceded at the Upper
   Tribunal hearing. It was accepted that the Appellant's child is a British
   national and that the Judge had failed to address the issues raised in
   the appeal. Given the circumstances it was agreed that the decision could
   not stand and that it would have to be set aside. It was also agreed that
   given that the matter would have to be revisited from the start it would
   be better to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing
   with no findings preserved.

5. Given the obvious and fundamental errors in the decision and with the
   agreement of the parties the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
   for re-hearing, this case is not to be heard by Judge Beg.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The decision is set-aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-
hearing on all issues.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In remitting the matter to the First-tier Tribunal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 22nd April 2015


