
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/09352/2014
                                                               IA/09354/2014
                                                               IA/09356/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 29th July, 2015                   |On 18th August, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
                          Upper Tribunal Judge Ward


                                   Between

                             Farzana Aftab Awan
                               Aftab Khan Awan
                               Daud Aftab Awan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr G Davison, Counsel instructed by Morgan Mark
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is the determination of us both.  The first-named appellant  is  a
    citizen of Pakistan who was born on 15th March, 1977  and  who  entered
    the United Kingdom last on  5th  September,  2006  accompanied  by  her
    husband and her son, the second and third-named appellants.

2.   She entered with a valid student visa  which  was  renewed  until  23rd
    February, 2011 when she was granted a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant
    visa until 23rd February, 2013.  On 15th January,  2013  the  applicant
    made application for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant
    under the points-based system, which application was  refused  on  10th
    February, 2014.

3.   The first-named appellant appeared to the First-tier Tribunal  and  her
    appeal was heard on 22nd September, 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge N
    M Paul, who dismissed her appeal.

4.   The first-named  appellant  obtained  leave  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed  to
    give any or adequate reasons for his findings in paragraphs 18  and  19
    of  his  determination  and  failed  properly  to  apply  Ahmed   (PBS:
    admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 365 (IAC).

5.   At the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 1st  April,
    2014, having heard  submissions  from  Mr  Davison  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant and Ms Kenny, a Senior Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  on
    behalf of the respondent, he concluded  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, insofar as he gives any reasons at  al,l  had  given  inadequate
    reasons for his findings at paragraphs 18 and 19 of the  determination.
    He adjourned the hearing to a later date in  order  that  all  evidence
    could be heard.  A copy of his reasons for finding an error of law  are
    set out in the Appendix to this determination.

6.   When the matter came for hearing before us  on  29th  July  Mr  Davison
    quite properly suggested  that  he  would  like  to  establish  whether
    everybody had all the documentation before them.  He  referred  to  the
    interview recorded conducted with the  applicant  by  the  Home  Office
    before the respondent's decision to refuse was  issued.   He  explained
    that he had not seen a copy and that there was no copy  in  the  bundle
    relied on by the appellant.

7.   Mr Walker confirmed that he did not have a  copy  either.   Fortunately
    there were sufficient copies  within  the  file  for  the  Tribunal  to
    provide each representative with a copy.

8.   The appellant was called and confirmed her full names,  date  of  birth
    and address.  Mr Davison referred her  to  a  witness  statement  which
    appeared at pages 9 to 15 of her bundle of  documents.   She  told  the
    Tribunal that  everything  in  that  witness  statement  was  true  and
    accurate save one small amendment on page 14 and she confirmed that she
    wished to adopt it.

9.   For reasons which will become apparent below, we have not set  out  the
    contents of that statement.   Mr  Davison  had  no  questions  for  the
    appellant and Mr Walker said that he would not cross-examine.

10.   In  making  his  submissions  to  us  Mr  Walker  confirmed  that  the
    appellant's statement as adopted by her addresses those concerns of the
    Secretary  of  State  which  led  to  the  respondent  to  refuse   the
    application.

11.  The Tribunal asked Mr Walker if he was conceding the appeal  on  behalf
    of the respondent and he told us that he was not.  He merely wished  to
    confirm that from what has been provided now by the applicant  all  the
    concerns of the Secretary of State had been answered.  The  mixture  of
    the appellant's business being 80%  consultancy  and  20%  shop  retail
    would, he told us, meet the requirements of the Rules and the fact that
    the appellant had purchased a shop  did  not  mean  that  she  did  not
    qualify under the Rules because she was opening a consultancy  business
    within the shop premises.

12.  Mr Walker having declined to cross-examine the appellant  or  challenge
    her oral evidence and in the light of his submission, the Tribunal have
    been left with no choice, but to allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did contain  a  material  error
of law.  We set that decision aside and for the reasons we have  given  this
appeal is allowed.

No anonymity order made.

[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
                       The appendix above referred to

REASONS FOR FINDING THAT TRIBUNAL MADE AN ERROR OF LAW, SUCH THAT ITS
DECISION FALLS TO BE SET ASIDE

1.   The first named appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  who  was  born  on
    15th March, 1977 and  who  entered  the  United  Kingdom  last  on  5th
    September, 2006, accompanied by her husband and  son,  the  second  and
    third named appellants.  She entered with a valid  student  visa  which
    was renewed until 23 February, 2011 when she was granted a Tier 1 (Post
    study work) migrant visa until 23 February 2013.  On 15th January, 2013
    she made application for a Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  migrant  under  the
    Points Based system which application  was  refused  on  10th  February
    2014.

2.   The first named appellant appealed to the First Tier Tribunal  and  the
    appeal was heard on 22 September, 2014 by First Tier Tribunal Judge  NM
    Paul who dismissed her appeal.

3.   The appellant obtained leave to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that the First Tier Tribunal Judge failed to give any or adequate
    reasons for his findings  in paragraph 18 and 19 of  his  determination
    and failed to properly apply Ahmed  (PBS  Admissible  evidence)  [2014]
    UKUT 365 (IAC).

4.   Mr Davidson relied on the grounds.  Ms Kenny suggested that  the  First
    Tier Tribunal Judge had given reasons which were adequate at paragraphs
    18 and 19.  Ahmed was properly decided, he told me.

5.   I am satisfied that the reasons for the judge's  findings,  insofar  as
    he gives any, are inadequate.  I  need  to  hear  oral  evidence.   The
    matter is adjourned until 4th February 2015  at 10.00 when I shall hear
    the appeal afresh.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As we have allowed the appeal  and  because  a  fee  has  been  paid  or  is
payable, we have considered making a fee award and have decided to  make  no
fee award, given the extent to which it was necessary for the  appellant  to
clarify her application in a statement comprising seven pages.

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
