
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/09197/2012
     IA/06543/2012
     IA/00845/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke on Trent                         |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15 October 2013                              |On 30 October 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                GLADYS TETTEH
                               RICHARD TETTEH


                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs K Heath, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mrs Bassiri-Dezfouli, instructed by Michael and Co,
Legal Services


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1.  The  respondents,  Gladys  Tetteh  and  Richard  Tetteh,   were   born
    respectively on 22 July 1968 and 22 March  1988  and  are  citizens  of
    Ghana.  I shall hereafter refer to the respondents as "the  appellants"
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal and  to  the  Secretary  of
    State as "the respondent."

 2. The appellants had  applied  for  permanent  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Their applications were refused on 20 February 2012  and  the
    appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Landes) which, in
    a determination promulgated on 22 February 2013, allowed the appeals of
    both appellants to the extent  that  the  Tribunal  found  them  to  be
    entitled to the derivitative right of residence in the United  Kingdom.
    The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal by Judge Kamara on 20 March 2013.

 3.  There  are  two  grounds  of  appeal.   The   first   challenges   the
    determination on the basis that Richard Tetteh had not been, as at  the
    date of the First-tier Tribunal, "in education in the  United  Kingdom"
    as  required  by  paragraph  15A(1)(c)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and, as a consequence, was not entitled
    to a derivative right of residence under that paragraph.

 4. Mrs Heath, for the respondent, did not seek to pursue  this  ground  of
    appeal.  She did not do so in the light of what the First-tier Tribunal
    recorded at [9]:

    Before evidence was heard, it was conceded on behalf of the  respondent
    that Mr Tetteh was entitled to a residence card as  a  person  who  was
    entitled to a derived right of residence and thereupon entitled  to  be
    issued with a  derivative  residence  card  (Regulations  15A  and  18A
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as amended).   On
    that basis and having considered the recent opinion  of  the  Advocate-
    General in the case of Alarape (Case  C-529/11),  Mrs  Bassiri-Desfouli
    the Counsel for the appellants on behalf of Mr  Tetteh  indicated  that
    she  would  not  pursue  his  appeal  insofar  as  it  related  to  the
    respondent's decision to refuse him with  a  permanent  residence  card
    (sic).

 5. Mrs Heath acknowledged that the Presenting Officer  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had unequivocally conceded that Mr Tetteh was entitled to
    a residence card as a person who was entitled to  a  derived  right  of
    residence.  The first ground of appeal, therefore, sought to go  behind
    that concession and she did not seek to pursue it.  I was  grateful  to
    Mrs Heath for making the position of the respondent clear.

 6. The second ground of appeal challenges the judge's  findings  regarding
    the care which Mrs Tetteh  provides  to  Richard  Tetteh.   The  ground
    asserts that the appellant had failed to demonstrate that he  would  be
    unable to continue to be educated in the United Kingdom if  his  mother
    were required to leave.

 7. I find that this ground of appeal is without merit.  Richard Tetteh  is
    disabled and is in receipt of Disability Living Allowance.   The  judge
    found at [38] that Mr Tetteh

         Needs not just the presence, but also the care of his  mother.   He
         has some need for physical care on occasions ... and I am satisfied
         he also has a close relationship with his mother ... she  continues
         to provide him with a  permanent  home  in  the  UK  and  emotional
         support as well as financial support.

 8. In the same paragraph, the judge makes the very clear finding that  "in
    practice, Mr Tetteh would not be  able  to  complete  his  postgraduate
    education in the UK if his support in the UK  was  taken  away  by  the
    removal of Mrs Tetteh."   The  judge  was  satisfied  that  Mrs  Tetteh
    continued to be the "primary carer" of her son.

 9. The grounds of appeal amount to little more than  a  disagreement  with
    the clear findings which the judge has made on the evidence before her.
     It was clearly open to the judge, especially in light of the fact that
    Mr Tetteh is disabled, to conclude that Mrs Tetteh continued to act  as
    her son's primary carer.  The judge had not ignored evidence which  was
    relevant to that finding nor did she have regard to irrelevant matters.
     The finding can hardly  be  described  as  perverse.   The  judge  has
    produced a thorough and detailed determination which sought  to  engage
    with the evidence and she reviewed her findings of fact in the light of
    the relevant jurisprudence.  I do not find that she has  erred  in  law
    for the reasons stated in the grounds of appeal or at all.

DECISION

10. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 28 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

