
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/09449/2015
     IA/09451/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23 September 2016                      |On 31 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     KD
                                     KM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D Ball, Counsel instructed by Grazing Hill Law
Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes back before me following a hearing  on  16  May  2016
    whereby I set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  ("FtT")  for
    error of law, and for the decision to be re-made.   The  error  of  law
    decision is included as an annex to this decision.

 2. Reference should be made to the error of  law  decision  for  the  full
    background and circumstances of the appeal.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge ("FtJ") allowed the appeals under Article
    8 of the ECHR.  It was the respondent's appeal therefore  against  that
    decision.  The position now reverts to the Secretary of State being the
    respondent, given that this is a re-making of the decision.

 4. To summarise the background, the appellants are  mother  and  daughter,
    born on 4 October 1971 and 31 December  2006.   They  are  citizens  of
    Jamaica.  A decision was made in  respect  of  both  appellants  on  13
    January 2015, to remove them to Jamaica following a refusal of leave to
    remain under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 5. Below, I set out the findings  of  fact  made  by  the  FtJ  which  are
    preserved, having canvassed this issue with the parties at the  resumed
    hearing.  I heard further oral evidence which I now summarise.

    The oral evidence

 6. KD, the first appellant, adopted her most recent witness  statement  in
    examination-in-chief.  The nephew who was killed and to whom she refers
    in that witness statement was killed in Jamaica on 13 January 2015.  He
    was believed to be a homosexual, she said.

 7. In cross-examination she said that she had been in the UK for 14 years.
     She had been supported by her sister-in-law and friends.  She had  not
    always lived with her sister-in-law.  Sometimes her  sister-in-law  and
    her friends give her money.  She had  lived  in  London  for  those  14
    years.

 8. She had not asked her friends for money in  order  to  make  a  further
    application for leave to remain in 2003 or for  funds  to  be  able  to
    return to Jamaica because she wanted to remain in the UK.

 9. When she was in Jamaica  she  worked  as  a  hairdresser.   She  did  a
    cleaning job in the UK in 2004.

10. In Jamaica she has no relatives.  There was a brother on  her  father's
    side but he died, and his son was the one that died in 2015.  She  does
    not have any brothers and sisters.  The  family  home  in  Jamaica  was
    lived in by her nephew who died.  That was  his  mother's  house.   The
    house that she, the appellant, used to live in in Jamaica is now  lived
    in by other people.  After her mother died people just  took  it  over.
    The land is not her mother's.  It is just a rented house and she  would
    not be able to go back and reclaim it.

11. Her sister-in-law works in the UK.  She does not think that  she  would
    be able to afford to support her on her return to Jamaica.

12. In re-examination she said that she has a half-brother on her  mother's
    side in Jamaica but she does not know where he is.

13. She has had relationships with men in the UK and they  have  helped  to
    pay the rent sometimes.

14. In answer to my questions she said that she lives with her daughter and
    her friend, Sandra.  It is a house which she thinks Sandra  owns.   She
    does not know if she pays a mortgage.  When she can  she  gives  Sandra
    money.

15. The person she described as her sister-in-law is her  nephew's  mother.
    She does not know the whereabouts of that nephew.

    Submissions

16. Mr Kandola relied on the  reasons  for  refusal  letter,  arguing  that
    paragraph EX.1. was considered.   It  was  not  accepted  that  it  was
    unreasonable  to  expect  the  minor  appellant  to   leave   the   UK,
    notwithstanding that she was born in the UK  and  has  lived  here  for
    eight years.

17. I was referred to the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  R  (On  the
    application of) MA (Pakistan) & Ors v Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 in terms of the question  of
    the 'reasonableness test'.  Although paragraph EX.1. was not  in  issue
    in those cases, the same principles apply.  In other words,  the  wider
    public  interest  is  to  be  taken  into  account   when   considering
    'reasonableness'.  Further, it was said at [47] that the best interests
    assessment would not automatically resolve the reasonableness question.



18. In this case the first appellant has overstayed since 2003 and has made
    no attempt to regularise her stay.  She had never asked her friends for
    funds to make such an application or to help her to return to  Jamaica.
    Her intention was to remain in the UK.   The  application  for  further
    leave to remain was only made once her daughter had been in the UK  for
    seven years.

19. Although there are said to be no living relatives in  Jamaica,  and  an
    argument is raised about the general level of violence in Jamaica,  the
    situation in Jamaica does not reach the Article 15(c) threshold.

20. It could not be said that it was contrary  to  the  second  appellant's
    best interests, or that it would be unreasonable  for  her,  to  go  to
    Jamaica.

21. The first appellant had worked as a hairdresser in Jamaica.   There  is
    no evidence that she would  have  difficulties  in  sustaining  herself
    there.

22. For the past 14 years she had been supported by her  sister-in-law  and
    friends.  That, it was submitted, was  a  quite  remarkable  statement,
    given the generosity that would have been  involved  in  such  support,
    living in London, and without the first appellant working.  There is no
    reason as to why they could not support her on return to Jamaica  until
    she is settled.

23. In order for the appeal to succeed on Article  8  grounds  outside  the
    Rules, there would need to be some compelling feature of the case.  The
    decision in Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387 was relied on.  If the appeal cannot succeed  under
    paragraph EX.1., it is difficult to see how it  could  succeed  outside
    the Rules under Article  8,  having  regard  to  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

24. Mr Ball accepted that the same outcome would  eventuate  either  within
    the Article 8 Rules or outside the Rules.  The decisions would stand or
    fall together.  He conceded that it would be difficult to identify  any
    compelling feature of the appeal in  circumstances  where  it  did  not
    succeed under the Rules.

25. So far as MA (Pakistan) is concerned, the submissions on behalf of  the
    respondent failed to refer to [49] of that decision.  In particular, it
    was said there that a child that had been in the  UK  for  seven  years
    establishes as a starting point that leave  should  be  granted  unless
    there were "powerful reasons" to the contrary.   No  such  reasons  are
    evident in this appeal, it was submitted.

26. The only factor that would possibly qualify is the fact that the  first
    appellant had overstayed for a number of years.   Something  more  than
    that would be needed, on the authority of MA (Pakistan).

27. It was submitted that there were three critical factors that weighed on
    the appellants' side of the balance here.  The first is that the  minor
    appellant had been in the UK for  seven  years.   It  was  a  preserved
    finding of the decision by the FtJ that she had made good  friends  and
    was performing well at school.  In other words, she is thriving.  There
    was recent evidence from the school, and letters of support.

28. Secondly, there were significant prospects  that  the  first  appellant
    would be unemployed in Jamaica.  Thirdly, there was a general level  of
    violence in Jamaica  which  would  compromise  the  second  appellant's
    "optimum life chances", to use the expression in the statutory guidance
    to the UK Border Agency, "Every Child Matters",  dated  November  2009.
    There was evidence of  a  high  unemployment  rate  in  the  background
    material  provided.   There  is  a  realistic  prospect  of  the  first
    appellant being unemployed for a  significant  amount  of  time,  which
    would be detrimental to the second appellant.

29. The best interests of the minor appellant as  a  primary  consideration
    are to be taken into account.

30. The guidance previously referred to at the error of law  hearing,  was,
    it was submitted, superseded to a large extent by what is  said  in  MA
    (Pakistan).  The  only  countervailing  factors  referred  to  in  that
    guidance are in relation to criminality.







    Preserved findings

31. Having canvassed the issue of preserved findings with the parties,  the
    preserved findings are as follows, with the paragraph  numbers  of  the
    FtJ's decision indicated:

       . The second appellant has performed well at school, as evidenced  by
         a large number of documents produced  relating  to  her  education.
         She has made good friends and plays with a friend every day [25].

       . The first appellant had worked in a bar in  Jamaica  and  supported
         herself.  She had been living there with her mother who passed away
         on 22 September 2012.  She did not go back  when  her  mother  died
         [26].

       . The first appellant has not known the  whereabouts  of  the  second
         appellant's father since about five months after her birth [27].

       . The appellant's sister-in-law works at Asda.   She  has  known  the
         first appellant for a very long time, from when they were  both  in
         Jamaica.  She takes in the second appellant at weekends in order to
         assist her mother [29].

       . The witnesses gave persuasive and credible evidence [30].

       . The second appellant has never lived in Jamaica and has  no  living
         family members there [33].

       . The school situation in Jamaica is not as good as that in  the  UK.
         The  first  appellant's  sister-in-law  looks  after   the   second
         appellant at weekends, which is part of her family life.  The first
         appellant's sister-in-law has no plans to move to Jamaica [44].

32. I had initially been persuaded by Mr Ball that the  first  sentence  of
    [25] of the FtJ's decision should be a preserved finding.  This  states
    that the second appellant wants to be a police  officer  or  a  teacher
    when she leaves school.  However, on reflection I cannot see  how  that
    can be a preserved finding, not least because I concluded that the  FtJ
    had erred in law by stating that he gave  considerable  weight  to  the
    career  aspirations  of  the  second   appellant   in   that   respect.
    Furthermore, the aspirations and  wishes  of  a  child  of  the  second
    appellant's age will be prone to change from month to  month,  week  to
    week, if not day to day.  Even if I did consider it  to  be  a  finding
    that should be preserved, it is not a matter that can have any part  to
    play in my conclusions.  I now set out those conclusions.

    Conclusions

33. Paragraph 276ADE sets out the requirements to be met  by  an  applicant
    for limited leave to remain on the grounds of private life.   Paragraph
    276ADE(iv) requires that the applicant:

         "(iv)    is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
             the UK for  at  least  7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK."

34. Paragraph EX.1. provides as follows:
         "EX.1.   This paragraph applies if
                (a)(i) the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a child who-
                      (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was  under  the
                           age of 18 years  when  the  applicant  was  first
                           granted leave on the basis  that  this  paragraph
                           applied;
                      (bb) is in the UK;
                      (cc) is a British Citizen or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                           continuously for at least the 7 years immediately
                           preceding the date of application; and
                   (ii)     it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
                      to leave the UK; or
                (b)     the  applicant  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
                    relationship with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a
                    British Citizen, settled in the UK or  in  the  UK  with
                    refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and there  are
                    insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with   that
                    partner continuing outside the UK."

35. The appeal on behalf of the appellants is predicated on  the  basis  of
    the applicability of paragraph EX.1.  It seems to me however,  that  so
    far as the second appellant is concerned at least, the  argument  could
    equally well  be  advanced  under  paragraph  276ADE(iv).   I  was  not
    addressed by either party on the applicability of paragraph  276ADE(iv)
    which, if successfully applied, would  involve  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain  for  the  second  appellant,  but  not  the  first   appellant.
    Inevitably however, by extension it would result in a grant of leave to
    the  first  appellant  since  the  respondent  does  not  contend  that
    separation of mother and daughter is appropriate.  Nevertheless,  given
    that the consideration of 'reasonableness' applies both under paragraph
    276ADE(iv) and EX.1., it seems sensible to  focus  on  paragraph  EX.1.
    because a successful appeal on that basis is a much clearer outcome for
    both appellants.

36. In my conclusions I have taken into  account  the  background  material
    which has been provided  in  terms  of  unemployment  in  Jamaica,  the
    Caribbean Journal article dated 21 September  2016  stating  that  "The
    unemployment rate overall is dismal but is even more so for women (16.6
    percent) when the figure is disaggregated by gender".  It  goes  on  to
    state that the unemployment rate for males is 8.3%.  It refers to  deep
    systematic biases against women contributing to the unemployment  rate.
    The article goes on to state  that  almost  two-thirds  of  the  under-
    employed fall in the 25 to 44 years age range.

37. A further article from the World Bank again  dated  20  September  2016
    refers to the high levels of crime and violence in  Jamaica,  with  the
    poverty rate being said to have dropped almost 20% over two decades.

38. It seems to me to be an uncontentious proposition that there is a  high
    level of violence in Jamaica.  I was not  referred  to  any  background
    material in relation to education  in  Jamaica.   However,  given  that
    Jamaica is not as wealthy a country as the UK, the resources  available
    for education would be less than those available in the  UK.   However,
    there is no basis for any significant finding in terms of the extent to
    which  the  second  appellant's  education  or   prospects   would   be
    compromised were she to be removed with her mother to Jamaica.

39. The central question to be decided is whether it would be reasonable to
    expect  the  second  appellant  to  leave  the  UK.   In  making   that
    assessment, I must have regard to the  best  interests  of  the  second
    appellant, as a primary consideration.

40. Those best interests are undeniably  served  by  the  second  appellant
    remaining with her mother.  It is not suggested to the contrary.  It is
    evident  that  the  second  appellant  wishes  to  remain  in  the  UK;
    understandably.  Her letter provided in support  of  the  appeal  makes
    that clear, even if it could not readily be assumed in any event.

41. Further  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  second  appellant's  best
    interests are to remain in the UK are that she was born and brought  up
    here, and is now aged 9 years and 9 months.  She is in  education  here
    and has her friends here.  She will have started to  look  outside  the
    immediate family unit and have made connections and associations beyond
    her relationship with her mother.  In addition, she has never  been  to
    Jamaica and has no relatives there.

42. However, the second appellant's best interests are not determinative of
    the appeal,  although  they  are  plainly  highly  significant  in  the
    assessment of whether it would be reasonable to expect  her  to  go  to
    Jamaica with the first appellant.

43. Against the appellants in the reasonableness assessment,  is  the  fact
    that the first appellant arrived in the UK for  temporary  purposes  in
    2002 and has overstayed ever since.  That is not the second appellant's
    fault but it is nevertheless a relevant factor.  That it is a  relevant
    factor is clear from the decision in MA (Pakistan).  It is  clear  from
    [45] that the wider public interest considerations must be  taken  into
    account in assessing reasonableness, albeit that that decision was  not
    concerned directly with  that  provision.   Further  support  for  that
    conclusion can be derived from what was  said  in  EV  (Philippines)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at [37].



44. It is also to be remembered that the second appellant  herself  has  no
    legal right to remain in the UK, absent  a  conclusion  in  her  favour
    under Article 8, whether under the Rules or otherwise.   On  the  other
    hand, as was said in PD  and  Others  (Article  8  -  conjoined  family
    claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC) at [41], "it  has  frequently
    been stated that a child's best interests should not be compromised  on
    account of the misdemeanours of its parents".

45. Mr Kandola submitted that there was no reason to suppose that the first
    appellant would not  be  able  to  obtain  employment  in  Jamaica,  he
    referring to her previous work as a hairdresser.  He also relied on the
    fact that she  had  received  support  in  the  UK,  and  that  it  was
    reasonable to conclude that such support could continue.  These are all
    plainly relevant considerations.

46. It is of course, very difficult to make an  assessment  of  the  likely
    prospects of the first appellant obtaining employment in Jamaica.   The
    high level of unemployment, in particular for women, suggests  that  it
    is likely to be  difficult.   However,  I  do  not  consider  that  the
    evidence indicates  that  it  would  be  impossible  for  her  to  find
    employment.  On the basis of the relatively limited evidence before  me
    I would conclude that the first appellant would not be able  to  obtain
    employment in the short-term, because of a  lack  of  associations  and
    support  from  relatives  there,  aside  from  the  question   of   the
    difficulties of re-establishing herself.  In the  medium  term,  it  is
    reasonable to conclude that she would find  some  form  of  employment,
    possibly as a hairdresser, which is the only relevant  skill  that  was
    suggested she could deploy in that respect.

47. Furthermore, it is also reasonable to conclude that  her  sister-in-law
    and her friends in the  UK  who  apparently  have  been  very  generous
    towards her, would continue to support her on  return,  notwithstanding
    what the first appellant said in evidence about  her  sister-in-law  at
    least, not being able to afford to do so.  In my judgement it is likely
    that there would be at least some material support provided to  her  on
    return.  There is no reason to conclude that that support that has been
    provided here over many years would not continue.

48. I also take into account what  was  said  in  Azimi-Moayed  and  others
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) in
    terms of seven years' residence being likely to be more significant  to
    a child from the age of four than the first seven years of  life.   The
    second  appellant  was  born  in  the  UK  and  does  not   have   that
    'qualitative' seven years referred to in Azimi-Moayed.

49. On behalf of the appellants the guidance which was  relied  on  at  the
    error of law hearing, although  not  abandoned  in  argument,  was  not
    significantly relied on.  What Mr Ball most forcefully  relied  on  was
    what was said in MA (Pakistan) at [49].  I quote that paragraph in full
    as follows:

         "Although this was not in fact a seven  year  case,  on  the  wider
         construction of section 117B(6), the same principles would apply in
         such a case.  However, the fact that the child has been in  the  UK
         for seven years would need to be given significant  weight  in  the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary."

50. This is not a case in which there is said to be any criminality on  the
    part of  the  first  appellant,  beyond  the  criminality  involved  in
    overstaying in breach of immigration laws.  Mr Ball, rightly  it  seems
    to me, focuses on the phrase "powerful reasons to the  contrary".   For
    my  part,  such  powerful  reasons  to  the  contrary   could   include
    immigration offending.  Such immigration offending or subversion of the
    system of immigration control plainly can involve a  wide  spectrum  of
    behaviour.  Ultimately, it is a matter for judgement on  the  facts  of
    each particular case as to where the balance lies.   Put  another  way,
    the question of reasonableness is a matter to be judged on  a  case-by-
    case basis.

51. It is not argued, nor could it realistically be argued, that the  first
    appellant in her own right could successfully plead the right to remain
    on Article 8 grounds, whether within  or  outside  the  Rules.   It  is
    plainly and obviously the situation for the second appellant that is in
    play in this case.

52. The second appellant is settled in the UK, living with her  mother  and
    having such associations as a child of her  age  would  have  with  her
    friends at school.  She appears to have a close relationship  with  her
    aunt.  She has no relatives in Jamaica and plainly no friends.  She  is
    young enough to adapt to life in Jamaica.

53. Considering all the circumstances, I cannot see on the  facts  of  this
    case that there are the powerful reasons to the contrary which indicate
    that leave should not be granted so far  as  the  second  appellant  is
    concerned.  The first appellant's flouting of the system of immigration
    control is not a sufficiently powerful reason in my judgement.  It is a
    factor, but not one that carries  the  day  for  the  respondent.   The
    second appellant's life in the UK is  the  only  life  she  has  known.
    Sending her to Jamaica with the first  appellant  is  likely  to  be  a
    significantly unsettling experience for her.  Expert evidence  on  that
    point is not required.  I do not  consider  that  the  public  interest
    factors at play in this  case,  in  terms  of  the  maintenance  of  an
    effective immigration control, are such as to  make  it  reasonable  to
    expect the second appellant to leave the UK.

54. Accordingly, the appeals of both appellants are allowed with  reference
    to paragraphs EX.1. and 276ADE(iv) because I am not satisfied  that  it
    is reasonable to expect the second appellant to leave the UK.

55. Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set aside, I  re-make  the
    decision, allowing the appeals of each appellant.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 21/10/16




                                    ANNEX


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    I continue to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are mother and daughter, born on 4 October 1971  and  31
    December 2006.  They are citizens of Jamaica.  A decision was  made  in
    respect of both appellants on  13  January  2015,  to  remove  them  to
    Jamaica following a refusal of leave to remain under Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.

 3. The appellants appealed against those decisions and their  appeal  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal (FtT") on 18 September 2015.  The First-
    tier Tribunal Judge ("the FtJ") dismissed the appeals under the Article
    8 Immigration Rules but allowed the appeals under Article 8.

 4. The respondent's grounds of appeal in relation to  the  FtJ's  decision
    argue that the FtJ failed to consider Article 8 "through the  lens"  of
    the Article 8 Immigration Rules first, and thus failed to consider  the
    policy behind the Rules. The decision in Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 is relied on.

 5. It is also argued that the FtJ erred by not applying the provisions  of
    section 117B (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act") to the second appellant, simply on the basis that  she
    is a child.  It is argued that  this  provision  makes  no  distinction
    between adults and children.

 6. Part of the third ground of appeal is that the FtJ had failed  to  take
    into account that the second appellant would be  returning  to  Jamaica
    with her mother.  Whether it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  her  to
    return to Jamaica must take that matter into account, it is argued.

 7. Ground 3 also contends that there was an over-reliance on the  part  of
    the FtJ on the educational progress of the second  appellant,  contrary
    to what was said in EV (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

 8. Lastly, it is argued that at [45] of the decision  the  FtJ  took  into
    account an irrelevant  consideration,  namely  the  second  appellant's
    career aspirations. That  suggests  that  the  FtJ  was  searching  for
    reasons to allow the appeal, rather than undertaking an  assessment  of
    the facts.

    Submissions

 9. Mr Kotas relied on the grounds of appeal.  In  relation  to  the  point
    about the FtJ not taking into  account  s.117B(5),  he  relied  on  the
    decision in Miah (section 117B NIAA 2002 - children)  [2016]  UKUT  131
    (IAC).

10. In addition, in taking into account  the  length  of  time  the  second
    appellant has been in the UK, the FtJ, when relying on the decision  in
    Azimi-Moayed and Ors (decisions  affecting  children;  onward  appeals)
    [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) had failed to take into account what was said  in
    that decision about seven years' residence from the age of  four  being
    likely to be more significant to a child than the first seven years  of
    life.

11. The FtJ had failed to take into account the decision  in  AM  (S  117B)
    Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) in terms of  further  employment  of  the
    first appellant  and  the  fact  that  the  appellants  speak  English.
    Furthermore, the conclusion  at  [45]  with  reference  to  the  second
    appellant's career  aspirations,  was  said  to  be  a  "disconcerting"
    conclusion.

12. Mr Ball relied on his  skeleton  argument,  albeit  that  the  skeleton
    argument was predicated on the basis of a first instance appeal to  the
    FtJ rather than an appeal to the UT (through no fault of Mr Ball's,  he
    having been misinformed as to the nature of the hearing before  me  and
    indeed its location).

13. Essentially, Mr Ball's argument was that the FtJ  should  have  allowed
    the appeal under the Article 8  Immigration  Rules  rather  than  under
    Article 8.  Although therefore, the FtJ fell into error  in  not  doing
    so, that error is not material to the outcome it was submitted.

14. I was referred to paragraph EX.1. of the Rules, to the effect that  the
    second appellant had lived in the UK continuously for  at  least  seven
    years and it would not be reasonable to expect her  to  leave  the  UK.
    Whilst it was  accepted  that  there  was  merit  in  the  respondent's
    contention that the FtJ should have considered  the  appeal  under  the
    Rules first, this was a case in which in fact the  appellants  met  the
    requirements of the Rules.

15. It was contended that there would need to be  "countervailing  factors"
    to make it unreasonable to expect the second appellant to leave the UK.
     The only issue was the application of paragraph EX.1.

16. Mr Ball relied on the decision in PD and Others (Article 8 -  conjoined
    family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC). It was submitted that
    PD is on all fours with this appeal.  I was referred in  particular  to
    [9] - [10].

17. Reliance was also placed on what was described as Home Office  guidance
    in relation to cases where a child has spent seven years or more in the
    UK.  According to that guidance the question is whether there were  any
    countervailing factors indicating that leave should not be granted.  It
    was submitted that the fact that the child's parent had  overstayed  is
    neither here nor there.  It was  submitted  that  seven  years  is  the
    starting point and it would generally be unreasonable to expect a child
    to leave the UK. There were no "strong reasons" indicating a  different
    outcome in this case.

18. The FtJ did not look at this issue  in  isolation  but  considered  the
    facts in their entirety, as per the decision PD.

19. Although the point is made on behalf of the respondent that the  second
    appellant was not entitled to  education  in  the  UK,  that  was  more
    properly a factor to be taken into account under Article 8 proper.

20. Generally, it was submitted that where there may be said to  be  errors
    in  the  FtJ's  decision  (for  example  in  relation  to  s.117B(5)  -
    'precariousness') those errors are not material.

21. In reply, Mr Kotas submitted that the facts of  PD  were  different  in
    that the third appellant in that case was 14  years  of  age.   To  the
    extent that the Home Office policy DP5/96 was relied on behalf  of  the
    appellants, that concession was withdrawn (from 9 December 2008).

    My conclusions

22. From different perspectives, the parties contend that the FtJ erred  in
    law.  On behalf of the respondent it is submitted that he erred in  his
    Article 8 analysis outside the Rules, in  various  different  respects.
    On behalf of the appellant it is contended that the FtJ  erred  in  law
    because he dealt with the case under Article 8, whereas it should  have
    been dealt with (and allowed) under the Article  8  Immigration  Rules.
    Between those two perspectives, the parties come close to agreement  on
    this or that aspect of the arguments.   Ultimately  though,  Mr  Ball's
    position is that whatever may be said about any error  of  law  on  the
    part of the FtJ, there is no  materiality  in  any  error.   The  FtJ's
    conclusions would, or should, have led him to allow  the  appeal  under
    the Article 8 Immigration Rules.

23. It is unclear  as  to  why  the  FtJ  decided  that  he  would  proceed
    immediately to consider the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR, outside
    the Rules, rather than within the Article 8 Rules.   At  [31]  he  said
    that the appeal was considered only under human  rights  and  that  the
    "strict terms of the Rules are not fully met".

24. Both under paragraph 276ADE(iv) and paragraph EX.1.(a) the question  of
    whether it would be "reasonable" to  expect  the  second  appellant  to
    leave the UK is a fact to be decided.  If at [31] the  FtJ  meant  that
    the  question  of  'reasonableness'  was  to  be  decided  against  the
    appellants, some explanation of why he considered that to be  the  case
    should have been  provided.

25. If indeed it was the FtJ's view that the appellants could not meet  the
    'reasonableness' test, it was an error of law for him not to have taken
    that into account in the Article 8 assessment, i.e. that the appellants
    are not able to meet the requirements  of  the  Article  8  Immigration
    Rules in a material respect.

26. Putting aside for the moment the question of the applicability  of  the
    Immigration Rules, I am  satisfied  that  the  FtJ's  assessment  under
    Article 8 is legally flawed, for several reasons.  I consider it was an
    error of law for him to have taken  out  of  account  consideration  of
    s.117B(vi) in relation to the second appellant in terms of her  private
    life having been established in the UK when her immigration status  was
    precarious.  It is true that the legislative provisions in this respect
    on their face make no distinction between adults and children,  but  as
    was explained in Miah the factors set out  at  s.117B(1)-(5)  apply  to
    all, regardless of age.

27.  In addition, I do consider that it was irrational for the FtJ at  [45]
    to attach "considerable weight" to the career aspirations of the second
    appellant in terms of her wish, expressed at the age of 8� years, to be
    a police officer.  The fact that the FtJ considered this to be  in  any
    way at all a significant matter, still less one of considerable weight,
    plainly indicates an irrational approach, in this respect at least,  to
    the proportionality assessment.

28. Furthermore, the FtJ did not, as he should have done, factor  into  the
    proportionality assessment the conclusion, at least as he saw it,  that
    the appellants are not able to meet the requirements of the  Article  8
    Rules.

29. These are sufficient reasons to find an error of law on the part of the
    FtJ in terms of his Article 8 assessment.

30. Although not raised in the respondent's grounds, it  does  seem  to  me
    that there are some other troubling  features  of  the  proportionality
    assessment.  For example, at [46] the FtJ said that the assumption that
    the first appellant's sister-in-law and the appellants would be able to
    keep in touch through modern means of communication, is to  be  doubted
    "due to demonstrable lack of funds".  It is  not  immediately  apparent
    why they would not be able to communicate,  at  least  for  example  by
    phone.  If the FtJ meant to say that they could not  undertake  visits,
    that is a different matter.  However, that is not what he said.

31. At [48] it is said in essence that  because  the  second  appellant  is
    doing well at school, it is more important for her to remain in the UK,
    because if a child is doing poorly, one  might  think  it  was  not  so
    important where the child is schooled.  Put another way, in the case of
    a child who is performing poorly at school it does not matter that they
    are to be returned to a country where the standard of education, or the
    facilities available, are not as high as in the UK.  In fact  it  could
    be said that the converse is true.

32. Mr Ball's contention that the errors of law are not  material,  because
    the appellants are otherwise able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Article 8 Rules, is, with respect, an unsustainable argument.   In  the
    first place, that contention in my judgement must  rely  on  the  FtJ's
    legally unsustainable analysis of the evidence.

33. Secondly, I do not accept what appears to be Mr Ball's central argument
    which is to the effect that, to all intents and purposes,  establishing
    seven years' residence on the part of  a  child  is,  without  more,  a
    sufficient  basis  from  which  to  conclude  that  the  child,  or  an
    associated parent, are able to meet the requirements of the  Article  8
    Rules, either under  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  or  under  paragraph  EX.1.
    Although I was referred to the Secretary of State's  guidance  produced
    at the time of the changes to the Article 8 Rules, that  guidance  does
    not achieve the result contended  for  on  behalf  of  the  appellants.
    Aside  from  whether  that  document  of  June  2012   represents   the
    respondent's current policy and practice, the paragraphs to which I was
    referred, occur under the subheading "The best interests of the child".



34. On one view, those paragraphs  [25  -  28]  deal  only  with  the  best
    interests of the child, which is not,  as  is  well-known,  a  complete
    answer to the question of whether leave to remain  should  be  granted.
    Furthermore, there is reference to  "countervailing  factors".   Whilst
    those countervailing factors are not set out, aside from a reference to
    criminality, I do  not  accept  that  unlawful  status,  or  precarious
    status, either of the child or of  the  parent,  can  be  left  out  of
    account, which is effectively the argument advanced on  behalf  of  the
    appellants.

35. In this context it is instructive to note what was said in PD at  [41].
    There it was concluded that the  main  countervailing  factor  in  that
    case, relative to the minor appellant's situation, was  their  unlawful
    overstaying.   The  Tribunal  concluded  that  that  was  a  factor  of
    "undeniable weight". Although it was also  recognised  that  a  child's
    best  interests  should  not  be  compromised   on   account   of   the
    misdemeanours of its parents, that was said in the context of what is a
    child's best interests.  In any event, the decision in PD does not rule
    out the taking into account of unlawful immigration status.

36. Mr Ball's contention as set out in the skeleton  argument  at  [12]  is
    that by definition a child will only  qualify  under  the  'seven  year
    Rule' (by which I infer it is meant the Immigration Rules)  where  they
    have been living in the UK unlawfully for seven  years.  If  they  have
    been living in the UK lawfully, then there would be no need for them to
    qualify under that Rule.  It is argued that  the  mere  fact  that  the
    parent has been an overstayer is not something that weighs against  the
    child's  appeal.   However,  that  cannot  be  right.   Both  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) and paragraph EX1 refer to the seven year  period  with  the
    addition "and" it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave
    the UK.  Plainly, there must be more to the analysis than a mere  seven
    years' residence. Some periods of residence may  be  all  unlawful,  or
    there may be some period  of  lawful  residence  with  the  rest  being
    unlawful.  This answers the proposition that only a child who has  been
    in the UK unlawfully for seven years would qualify under those  aspects
    of the Immigration Rules.

37. In addition, the 'new' Article 8 Rules are expressed  at  [19]  of  the
    guidance to which I was referred as intending to fill the policy vacuum
    by setting out the Secretary of State's  position  on  proportionality,
    and at [20] that the intention is that the Rules  will  state  how  the
    balance should be struck between the public interest and the individual
    rights.

38.  Apart  from  precarious  or  unlawful  status,  other   factors   must
    necessarily   be   potentially   relevant   in   the   assessment    of
    'reasonableness'.  They may include, for example, whether a  child  has
    close relatives in the country of return, and correspondingly few close
    relatives in the UK.  The age of the child, within the 'under 18 years'
    parameter will also be a relevant factor.

39. The virtual straightjacket in the application of  this  aspect  of  the
    Rules contended for on behalf of the appellants,  is  in  my  judgement
    unsustainable.

40. I do not accept therefore, that there is no materiality in the error of
    law on the part of the FtJ.  The error of law, both in terms of a  lack
    of assessment under the Rules and in terms  of  the  'pure'  Article  8
    assessment, requires the decision to be set aside.  I indicated to  the
    parties that if that was my view I was  unlikely  to  decide  that  the
    matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  I  am  still  of
    that view.  Some findings of fact made by the FtJ can be preserved, and
    it would in my view be inappropriate to remit the matter to the FtT for
    partial or further findings of fact to be made. This is not a  case  to
    which the Senior President's Practice Statement  at  paragraph  7.2  in
    terms of remittal, applies.  Accordingly the decision will  be  re-made
    in the Upper Tribunal.

41. It was explained to me on behalf of the appellants that there would  be
    the need for further evidence, in particular in relation to the  second
    appellant.  I consider that  any  such  further  evidence,  subject  to
    ordinary principles of admissibility, should be allowed  to  be  given.
    The parties are to pay careful attention  to  the  directions  set  out
    below.

                                 DIRECTIONS

    1.   In relation to any further evidence upon which it is  intended  to
        rely, there must be a witness statement drawn in sufficient  detail
        to stand as evidence-in-chief such that there is no  need  for  any
        further examination-in-chief.

    2.   The appellants are to serve a comprehensive paginated and  indexed
        bundle of documents no later than 7 days before the  next  date  of
        hearing.

    3.   The parties must be in a position to make submissions at the  next
        hearing as to what findings of fact are to be preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            6/08/16

