
                                                                   [pic]
Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: IA/09906/2012
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House                     |Notice sent                  |
|On:  7 August 2013                            |On: 8 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                              Mr Kwok Lam Tsui
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. The appellant is a citizen of China born 7 August 1989. He  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State  of
    5 April 2012, refusing to issue him with an EEA Residence  Card  as  the
    extended family member of an EEA national exercising  treaty  rights  in
    the United Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed this appeal in  a
    determination promulgated on 6 August  2012.  Judge  Baird  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. By way of a letter to  the  Upper  Tribunal  dated  6  August  2013  the
    appellant's  representatives  request   permission   to   withdraw   the
    appellant's appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  his
    relationship with the EEA national has now broken down.

 3. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party  to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as  a  whole,
    and observing that the Secretary of  State  was  successful  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, I give consent to the  appellant  to  withdraw  his
    case.


 4. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal".  This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the  appellant's  case
    is withdrawn.

 5. The effect of the  appellant's  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper  Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 7 August 2013











































