
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09641/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 February 2015                            |On 4 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Tayeb Outmoune
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D O'Callaghan, instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Tootell promulgated on 31 October 2014 allowing  Mr  Outmoune's  appeal
    against the refusal of his application for indefinite leave  to  remain
    by the Secretary of State dated 10 February 2014 which also contained a
    decision to remove him as an illegal entrant.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent and to Mr Outmoune as the  appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. It was common ground before me that the appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom illegally at some point in 1997 and has remained here illegally
    since then, some seventeen years; see  [50]  of  the  determination  of
    Judge Tootell.

 4. On 6 July 2012 he made an application for indefinite  leave  to  remain
    under the provisions of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules then in
    force, that paragraph allowing for indefinite  leave  to  remain  where
    somebody had been in the United Kingdom illegally for  fourteen  years.
    The application was refused as it was invalid for want of a fee. It was
    also common ground before  me  that  the  failure  to  submit  a  valid
    application was the fault of the appellant's  previous  representatives
    against whom he has since obtained a positive finding of negligence and
    costs and damages through the Solicitors Regulation Authority.

 5.  Notwithstanding  the  action  taken   against   the   previous   legal
    representatives, however, by the time that the  appellant  submitted  a
    further application for indefinite leave to remain paragraph  276B  was
    no longer in force and it was not disputed before me that he could  not
    meet the new long residence provisions contained in paragraph 276ADE of
    the Immigration Rules.

 6. The appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal was that he  should
    still be  granted  further  leave  under  Article  8  ECHR.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Tootell  found  at  [59]  that  there  were  "compelling
    circumstances"  which  required  a  full  Article   8   proportionality
    assessment.  The "compelling circumstances" were that the appellant had
    lived in the UK for seventeen years and that he  had  made  what  would
    have been a successful application on long residence  grounds  in  2012
    were it not for the negligence of his previous solicitors in July 2012.

 7. Concerning the invalid application arising from the negligence  of  the
    previous legal representatives, at [59] Judge Tootell states that had a
    valid application been made in July 2012 prior to the  introduction  of
    paragraph 276ADE "then [the appellant] may well have been eligible  for
    settlement under paragraph 276B".

 8. At [60] she proceeds to a second-stage Razgar Article 8 assessment.

 9. At [66] to [69] Judge Tootell set out her  proportionality  assessment,
    the first four Razgar questions having been answered in the appellant's
    favour. Those reasons read as follows:

         "66. In this assessment, I  have  had  regard  as  I  must  to  the
             requirements of Section 117B  of  the  2014  Immigration  Act,
             which sets out the weight which must be attributed to  various
             factors in the public interest balancing exercise.   Whilst  I
             acknowledge that little weight is to be placed on private life
             which was established whilst a person was without status, this
             is not the same as stating that no weight is to be accorded to
             it.

         67.  Furthermore, I must also  recognise  that  the  Appellant  has
             resided in the UK for the past seventeen years which is by any
             reckoning a considerable period of time.  Eighteen months  ago
             subject to meeting all of the requirements of Paragraph 276 it
             was not considered to be in the public interest  to  return  a
             person who had been in the UK for fourteen years.  It is  hard
             to see what has changed since July 2012.  In a  further  three
             years when the appellant would  have  acquired  twenty  years'
             residence in the UK, it will again no longer be in the  public
             interest to remove the appellant.

         68.  I also note and take into account, that this appellant  speaks
             English, has worked for almost the entirety of his sojourn  in
             the UK and paid taxes and  national  insurance  contributions.
             He is according to him, fully integrated into UK society.

         69.   I  do  not  condone  the  appellant's  actions   in   evading
             immigration control, nor  take  it  lightly.   Clearly  it  is
             reprehensible conduct,  capable  of  constituting  a  criminal
             offence.  Indeed I have considered it as a significant  factor
             to be weighed/balanced against the grant of leave despite  the
             fact  that  no  prosecution  has  been  brought  against   the
             appellant on this basis.

         70.  Having considered all of the factors however and  carried  out
             the required balancing  exercise,  I  am  satisfied  that  his
             situation would  appear  to  fall  squarely  within  what  was
             envisaged under the former paragraph 276  and  therefore  when
             taken with the other  factors  referred  to  above,  that  the
             public interest does not require the appellant's removal  from
             the UK.  I therefore find on  balance  that  the  respondent's
             decision represents a disproportionate  interference  in  this
             appellant's right to respect for his private life."

10. The  respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  challenge  those  findings  as,
    although the judge referred to the correct provisions of paragraph 117B
    [at 66]  and  the  little  weight  to  be  placed  on  a  private  life
    established while somebody is in the UK unlawfully, she did  not  apply
    that principle in practice at [67].

11. The grounds of  appeal  also  maintain  that  the  requirement  of  the
    Immigration Rules for twenty years' residence where somebody is in  the
    UK unlawfully is a legitimate provision  passed  by  Parliament  to  be
    taken  into  account  as  a  starting  and  central   factor   in   the
    proportionality assessment. The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  erred  in
    failing to do so and erred at [67] in suggesting that  the  expectation
    of 20 years' unlawful residence was in some way arbitrary.

12. It is my view that the respondent's grounds both have merit.

13. Having stated at [66] that little  weight  was  to  be  placed  on  the
    appellant's private life the judge immediately goes on at [67] to place
    weight on the appellant's seventeen years' illegal residence "which  is
    by any reckoning a considerable period of time" and only  three  years'
    short of the twenty year  requirement  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  To
    paraphrase, the approach taken by the judge here is that "little weight
    is to be placed on a private life formed whilst the appellant  is  here
    illegally unless the period is a considerable  period  of  time,  three
    years' short of the period set down by the Immigration Rules".

14. There appeared to me merit in Mr Jarvis characterisation of this as, in
    effect, an impermissible "near-miss" argument; see Patel and  others  v
    SSHD [2013] UKSC  72 at paragraphs [55] and [56]. It is also  an  error
    of law regarding the weight  afforded  to  the  appellant's  period  of
    residence formed whilst he was here illegally.

15. It is also my view that First-tier Tribunal Judge Tootell erred in  the
    comments at [67] where  she  appears  to  look  behind  or  reduce  the
    importance of the provisions of  paragraph  276ADE,  stating  that  the
    fourteen year provisions  of  paragraph  276B  had  applied  relatively
    recently and that "it is hard to see what has changed since July  2012"
    when paragraph 276ADE was introduced.

16. It was not for the judge to question the  changes  to  the  Immigration
    Rules brought in on 12 July 2012  but  to  apply  them.   The  case  of
    Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558 is  authority  for  the  correct
    approach to the part played by the Immigration Rules in a second  stage
    Article 8 assessment. In particular, at [40] and [41]:
          "40. I, however, consider that the FTT Judge did err in his
          approach to Article 8. This is because he did not consider Mr.
          Haleemudeen's case for remaining in the United Kingdom on the
          basis of his private and family life against the Secretary of
          State's policy as contained in Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE of the
          Immigration Rules. These new provisions in the Immigration Rules
          are a central part of the legislative and policy context in which
          the interests of immigration control are balanced against the
          interests and rights of people who have come to this country and
          wish to settle in it. Overall the Secretary of State's policy as
          to when an interference with an Article 8 right will be regarded
          as disproportionate is more particularised in the new Rules than
          it had previously been. The new Rules require stronger bonds with
          the United Kingdom before leave will be given under them. The
          features of the policy contained in the Rules include the
          requirements of twenty year residence, that the applicant's
          partner be a British citizen in the United Kingdom, settled here,
          or here with leave as a refugee or humanitarian protection, and
          that where the basis of the application rests on the applicant's
          children that they have been residents for seven years.
          41. The FTT's decision on Mr Haleemudeen's Article 8 appeal is
          contained in [34]-[41], which I summarised and set out in part at
          [21] - [23] above. Those paragraphs do not refer, either expressly
          or implicitly, to paragraph 276ADE of the rules or to Appendix FM.
          None of the new more particularised features of the policy are
          identified or even referred to in general terms. The only
          reference to the provisions is in the FTT's summary (at [30]) of
          Mr. Richardson's submission that the reference to the new Rules in
          the refusal letter was of little relevance because at the time of
          Mr. Haleemudeen's application those Rules had not been promulgated
          and thus did not apply to his case. That submission could not
          succeed in view of the decision of the House of Lords in Odelola's
          case, to which I refer at [25] above."
    and at [47]:
          47.  ...  The passages from the judgments in the cases of Nagre
          and MF (Nigeria) appear to give the Rules greater weight than as
          merely a starting point for the consideration of the
          proportionality of an interference with Article 8 rights. But,
          even if Mr Richardson is correct to characterise the relevance of
          the Rules as only a starting point, the single reference in [39]
          of the FTT's decision to "apparent harshness" does not in my
          judgment suffice. I do not consider that it is necessary to use
          the terms "exceptional" or "compelling" to describe the
          circumstances, and it will suffice if that can be said to be the
          substance of the tribunal's decision. In this case, as I have
          stated, the FTT gave no explanation of why this is so, or
          identified particular features of Mr Haleemudeen's case which
          justified considering proportionality outside the Rules.
17. It is also my view that the comment set out above  from  [59]  and  the
    further comment at [70] that "I am satisfied that his  situation  would
    appear to fall squarely within what  was  envisaged  under  the  former
    paragraph 276" are materially incorrect.  It was not  sufficient  under
    paragraph 276B simply to have incurred  seventeen  years'  or  fourteen
    years' illegal residence in the UK.  Paragraph 276B(ii)  set  out  that
    there was also a requirement to have regard "to  the  public  interest"
    and there being "no reasons why it would be undesirable for him  to  be
    given indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long residence" those
    factors including  "personal  history,  including  character,  conduct,
    associations and employment record;" as at paragraph 276B(ii)(c).

18. This appellant does not dispute that he  deliberately  entered  the  UK
    illegally, remained here illegally for over  fourteen  years  employing
    different aliases to evade immigration control and only when he thought
    he could succeed under the fourteen  year  Rule  did  he  approach  the
    respondent; see [11] and [49] of the determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Where that is so it is not at all clear to me that he  would
    "fall squarely" within paragraph 276B. He cannot pray in aid  the  case
    of  Aissaoui v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 37  where  that  case  allowed  for
    failure under paragraph 276B where there was  "deliberate  and  blatant
    attempts to evade or circumvent  the  control,  for  example  by  using
    forged documents, absconding, contracting  a  marriage  of  convenience
    etc.".

19. For those reasons I find a material error  of  law  in  the  Article  8
    assessment of the First-tier Tribunal such that the  decision  must  be
    set aside and remade.

20. To a great extent, my own assessment of this matter is contained in  my
    reasons for finding an error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I accept that the appellant was subject to negligent  advice
    and action by his previous solicitors  which  led  to  his  application
    under paragraph 276B being rejected as invalid.  It is not my view that
    that entitles him to some kind  of  expectation  that  his  application
    under paragraph 276B would have been granted.  Whether it would or  not
    it is sufficiently unclear so as not to afford the appellant the  right
    to have much weight placed  in  his  favour  as  regards  that  invalid
    application.

21. Where that is so I am left with an illegal entrant who has used aliases
    to avoid immigration control and whose seventeen year residence I must,
    following primary statute, weigh very little.  Even taking into account
    the fact that he  has  worked  and  paid  tax  and  national  insurance
    contributions cannot, in my assessment, assist him.  It cannot possibly
    be said that where he came to the UK as an adult and  has  on  his  own
    evidence retained contact with his family in Algeria (see [49] of Judge
    Tootell's decision), that he would be unable to re-establish a  private
    life in Algeria or that any difficulties in doing so after being in the
    UK for seventeen years  could  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  his
    removal.

22.  It  is  my  view  that  the  decision  to  remove  the  appellant   is
    proportionate and that the  appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR  should  be
    refused.

Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law in the Article 8 assessment and the decision is set aside to  be
    remade.

24. I remake the Article 8 appeal as refused.



Signed   [pic]         Date: 4 February 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


