
IAC-AH-KRL/PC-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09669/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2015                            |On 6 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 DA (ghana)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Ms K Currie, Counsel, instructed by Chris &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal against  the  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to grant him leave  to  remain  on  family
    life grounds, and to make directions for his removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.   His
    partner and their son S, born on  26  September  2005,  joined  in  his
    appeal as his dependants.  As the central focus of the  appeal  is  the
    best  interests  of  S,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity
    direction; and I consider that it is appropriate that the claimant  and
    his family should be accorded  anonymity  for  the  purposes  of  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. All the members of the family are nationals of Ghana.  The claimant was
    born in Ghana on 17 May 1967.  He entered the United Kingdom on a multi
    visit visa which had been issued four days earlier.  The  claimant  did
    not leave the United Kingdom within the required period of six  months,
    and on 4 September 2003 he was encountered and  detained  by  the  Home
    Office and served with an IS15A notice as an overstayer.  The following
    day he claimed asylum and was released from detention.   On  5  January
    2004 his asylum claim was refused.  On 5 April 2004 his  appeal  rights
    became exhausted.

 3. The claimant's partner J entered the United Kingdom on a  student  visa
    on 8 August 2002.  Her entry clearance was valid until 8  August  2003.
    On 24 September 2003 she applied for leave  to  remain  as  a  student.
    Leave  to  remain  was  granted  until  30 September  2004,  and  she
    successfully extended her leave to remain as a student on three further
    occasions.  The last of which was on 3 February 2006 when  she  applied
    for leave to remain as a student with S as  her  dependant.   Leave  to
    remain was granted to her and S until 30 April  2010.   On  30  October
    2009 J was encountered working illegally, and was served with an  IS15A
    notice due to a breach in her employment restrictions.  On 5 March 2010
    she applied outside the Rules for leave to remain with  her  son  as  a
    dependant.  This application was refused with no right of appeal on  19
    May 2010.

 4. On 16 May 2012 the claimant included J and  S  in  an  application  for
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.  This application was  refused
    on 29 July 2013 with no right of appeal.   On  14  September  2013  the
    claimant made a  further  application  outside  the  Rules,  which  was
    refused on 8 October 2013 with no right of appeal.

 5. The claimant's solicitors wrote to  the  Home  Office  asking  them  to
    reconsider the claimant's case under Article 8 ECHR, and on 5  February
    2014  the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing  the
    claimant's application on reconsideration, and  for  serving  an  IS15B
    notice on the claimant, and IS15A part 2 notices on J and S.  The IS15A
    part 2 notice addressed to S said that he had been served with  a  form
    IS15A part 1 notice on 7 January 2011.

 6. The claimant did not qualify for leave to remain as a partner under the
    Immigration Rules.  He satisfied the suitability requirements in  S-LTR
    and he met the criteria under GEN.1.2 as he had provided evidence  that
    he had been living with  his  partner  J  in  a  relationship  akin  to
    marriage for at least two years.  But he did not meet  the  eligibility
    requirements, as his partner was not a British  citizen,  or  a  person
    settled in the UK, or a person with refugee or humanitarian protection.
     Consideration would not be given to EX.1 as  the  claimant  failed  to
    meet the eligibility requirements.

 7. The claimant did not qualify for leave to  remain  as  a  parent  under
    Appendix FM.  This was because his child S was not a British citizen or
    settled in the UK and EX.1 did  not  apply  as  the  claimant  did  not
    satisfy the eligibility requirements.  Although S was under the age  of
    18, was in the UK and had lived in the UK  continuously  for  at  least
    seven years it was reasonable to expect him to leave the  UK.   It  was
    reasonable for family life to be continued outside  the  UK  as  J  was
    originally from Ghana, and  the  family  would  be  returned  to  their
    country of origin as a family unit.

 8. On the question of private life, it was noted that the claimant and his
    partner had spent the majority of their lives in Ghana, including their
    formative years.  There were no age-related issues that  would  prevent
    them from returning to Ghana.  They would be able to utilise any skills
    and qualifications they had gained whilst  in  the  United  Kingdom  to
    their own advantage.  As the claimant had a son in Ghana  born  to  his
    previous wife, he had failed to establish he had no social, cultural or
    family ties in Ghana.

 9. Consideration had been given to the needs and welfare of the  child  as
    required under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009 (duty regarding the welfare of children).  The  duty  to  have
    regard to the need to safeguard and promote  the  welfare  of  children
    required the Home Office to consider the effect on any  children  of  a
    decision to refuse, or to remove, against  the  need  to  maintain  the
    integrity of immigration control.  It was not accepted the  removal  of
    the family would have consequences  that  were  contrary  to  the  best
    interests of S.  The family would be returned to Ghana  together  so  S
    would be protected and supported in the family unit that he  had  grown
    up in.  With respect to S's private life, it was acknowledged  that  he
    had been the recipient of education  here  in  the  UK.   It  was  also
    acknowledged the level of education available to S in Ghana  might  not
    be of an equal standard to that available to him in the UK.  But it was
    clear that education was accessible, and  that  he  would  be  able  to
    continue his education in Ghana.  With  the  support  of  his  parents,
    there was no indication he would not thrive and achieve at school,  and
    subsequently be able to make a contribution as he grew older.

10. The Secretary of State made a decision  on  exceptional  circumstances.
    Having considered all the relevant factors, the Secretary of State  was
    of  the  view  that  the  claimant's  removal  from  the  UK   remained
    appropriate.  The claimant and his partner were not known to  have  any
    criminal convictions or to have  engaged  in  activities  or  developed
    associations that were not conducive to  the  public  good.   But  this
    finding in itself did not justify allowing them to remain  here.   They
    had not been compliant with the conditions attached to previous  grants
    of leave.  The claimant should have returned to his country  of  origin
    after spending six months in the UK.  He failed to return to Ghana  and
    only came to the attention of the Home Office when he was arrested on 4
    September 2003.  J was arrested and served with an IS15A notice  on  30
    October 2009 for working in breach of employment  restrictions.   While
    the claimant had spent eleven years in the UK, only six months  of  his
    time had been spent here lawfully.  J had also spent  eleven  years  in
    the UK, however only seven years of this had been lawful.   There  were
    not any circumstances beyond their control that had prevented them from
    returning to Ghana.



The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

11. The claimant's appeal came before Judge  Tootell  sitting  at  Richmond
    Magistrates' Court in the First-tier Tribunal on 29 September 2014.  Ms
    Currie of Counsel appeared  on  behalf  of  the  claimant.   The  judge
    received oral evidence from the claimant and his partner, and took into
    account the documentary evidence in the claimant's bundle.

12. In her subsequent determination, Judge Tootell held at  paragraph  [44]
    that she was persuaded by Counsel's submissions that it  would  not  be
    reasonable now to expect the claimant's 9 year old son to relocate  way
    from the UK.  She found that Counsel's submissions  were  supported  by
    the Tribunal's decisions in EA (Article  8  -  best  interests  of  the
    child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315  (IAC)  and  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others
    (Decisions affecting  children;  onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT  00197:
    "paragraph (iv) of the head note [to Azimi-Moayed] refers to the  years
    after seven years of age as being of particular significance  since  at
    that point relationships and  ties  beyond  the  immediate  family  are
    formed."

13. At paragraph [46] she  found  there  was  clear  evidence  that  S  had
    established himself outside his immediate family  unit.   He  had  made
    friends and enjoyed a social life and activities both inside school and
    outside of home and school.  He was evidently flourishing at school and
    she accepted Counsel's submission that it was not only  the  short-term
    impact of educational disruption which  must  be  considered  but  also
    longer term detriment.

14. At paragraph [47], she also accepted that S  was  not  unaware  of  his
    family's immigration status.  There was evidence of his discomfort over
    the immigration reporting restrictions.  He was aware of  the  lack  of
    security of his situation in this  country  and  this  caused  distress
    which impacted negatively upon him.  The judge continued:

         48.  I find that it is no argument to point to the  fact  that  the
             claimant's leave to remain in the UK was only ever intended to
             be temporary.  This does not alter the position  for  his  son
             who has spent more than seven years in the country.  His  stay
             in the UK was decided for him and he would have had no part in
             that decision making process.  As a child, he  should  not  be
             held accountable for it nor I find suffer the consequences  of
             it.

         49.  In light of all the above  and  the  particular  circumstances
             identified  there,  I  therefore  find  that   requiring   the
             claimant's  9  year  old  son  to  leave  the  UK   would   be
             unreasonable.

         50.  In the light of these  findings  I  therefore  find  that  the
             claimant's   son   meets   the   requirements   of   paragraph
             276ADE(iii).

15. At paragraph [52] the judge said that even if she  was  wrong  to  find
    that as a result of her favourable ruling under Rule  276ADE  that  the
    claimant met all the requirements for the parent route  under  Appendix
    FM, nonetheless the claimant's  appeal  would  fall  be  allowed  under
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules, as a result of the combination of his
    and his family's rights to respect for their private and family  lives.
    On the topic of proportionality, she  referred  at  paragraph  [61]  to
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

16. At paragraph [62] she said she had already set out her findings  as  to
    why she did not consider it reasonable for the claimant's son to  leave
    the UK, and she did not need to repeat them other than to refer to  the
    decisions of ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4  and  MK  (Best  interests  of
    child) India  [2011]  UKUT  00475.   The  immigration  history  of  the
    claimant and his wife in the UK could not be  described  as  appalling.
    It was common ground between the parties that  they  had  made  several
    attempts at  regularising  their  status.   There  was  furthermore  no
    question of criminal conduct.  On the contrary they were both  actively
    engaged either in employment or  in  health  awareness  activities  for
    their local community.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

17. On 15 December 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes granted permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         2.   It is arguable that, as set out in ground 2 the judge did  not
             have regard to the principles set out in EV and Zoumbas.  When
             determining whether it was reasonable for  the  appellant's  9
             year old son to leave the UK she did not  explicitly  consider
             whether it would be reasonable for the child  to  return  with
             his parents to Ghana, but rather considered his  situation  in
             isolation ... indeed she appears to  have  considered  it  was
             unreasonable for the claimant and his family members  to  have
             to relocate without each other  rather  than  considering  the
             reasonableness of return on the basis that the family would be
             relocating together.

         3.   It is also arguable as set out in  ground  1  that  the  judge
             misunderstood Azimi-Moayed in that she has used  the  case  to
             place reliance on the significance of a child being older than
             7, rather than seven years being a  significant  period  which
             can lead to a child developing ties it would be  inappropriate
             to disrupt, but that seven years from the age of  4  are  more
             significant than the seven years since birth."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

18. At the hearing before me, Ms Currie mounted a  robust  defence  of  the
    judge's determination.  She acknowledged that the judge  had  misquoted
    Azimi-Moayed (ground 1) but she argued the error was not material.   It
    was clear from the rest of her decision that the judge  understood  the
    case of Azimi-Moayed and was not simply viewing seven years as  a  cut-
    off point.

19. Regarding ground 2, while the judge did not explicitly refer to  either
    EV (Philippines) or Zoumbas, it was nonetheless clear from the decision
    that she considered the question of reasonableness of return looking at
    the entire family unit returning, as could be seen from paragraph  [64]
    of her decision.  It was also not the case that the judge had not taken
    into account the immigration status of the claimant when assessing  the
    question whether it was reasonable to expect S to leave  the  UK.   The
    conclusion that she reached on the question of reasonableness  was  one
    that she was entitled to reach, weighing up all  the  factors  for  and
    against.

20. Having heard from both parties, I was persuaded that an  error  of  law
    was made out such that the decision should be set aside and remade, for
    the reasons given in the application for permission to  appeal  and  in
    paragraph 2 of the grant of permission.  I gave my reasons for  finding
    an error of law in short form, and said that I would  provide  extended
    written reasons in writing in due course.  These are set out below.

21. It was agreed by the parties that I did not  need  to  receive  further
    oral evidence for the purposes of remaking the  decision.   I  reviewed
    with the parties the judge's manuscript record of  the  proceedings  in
    order to establish what evidence had been given, and submissions  made,
    on the question of the ability of the family as a whole, or  particular
    individuals within the family, to adjust (in the  case  of  S)  and  to
    readjust (in the case of the parents) to  life  in  Ghana.   Ms  Currie
    supplemented the information which I gleaned from the judge's Record of
    Proceedings with information from her own notes of the hearing.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

22. Prior to the introduction of the new Rules, the significance  of  seven
    years' residence was that under the child policy  concession  known  as
    DP5/96 the Secretary of State used  to  grant  discretionary  leave  to
    families with an otherwise irregular status where at least one child of
    the family had accrued seven years' residence.   Although  this  policy
    was withdrawn in 2008, the President in LD Zimbabwe observed that seven
    years' residence on the part of a child was still significant, as prima
    facie after seven years' residence a child's best interest lay  in  him
    remaining in the host country.

23. However, these observations were made alongside  the  observation  that
    the circumstances prevailing in  the  prospective  country  of  return,
    Zimbabwe, were dire.  When the  Upper  Tribunal  considered  again  the
    seven year benchmark in EA (Article 8 - best interests of child) [2011]
    UKUT 00315 (IAC) (a  panel  consisting  of  the  President  and  Senior
    Immigration Judge Jarvis) it was noted that the  former  policy  DP5/96
    made reference to other factors which had to be taken into account when
    considering whether to grant leave to remain under the policy:

    (a)  the length of the parents' residence without leave;

    (b)  whether removal has been delayed  through  protracted  (and  often
         repetitive) representations or by the parents going to ground;

    (c)  the age of the children;

    (d)  whether the children were conceived at a time when either  of  the
         parents had leave to remain;

    (e)  whether return to the  parents'  country  of  origin  would  cause
         extreme hardship for the children or put their health seriously  at
         risk;

    (f)  whether either of the parents has a history of criminal  behaviour
         or deception.

24. A useful summary of the learning on the best interests of  children  in
    the context of immigration is to be found the determination  of  Azimi-
    Moayed & Others (decisions affecting children; onward  appeals)  [2013]
    UKUT 197 (IAC):

         30.  It is not the case that the best interests principle means  it
             is automatically in the interests of any child to be permitted
             to remain in the United Kingdom, irrespective of  age,  length
             of stay, family background or other circumstances.   The  case
             law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the  following
             principles to assist in the  determination  of  appeals  where
             children are affected by the decisions:

             (i)  As a starting point in the best interests of children  to
                  be with both their parents and if both parents  are  being
                  removed from the United Kingdom then  the  starting  point
                  suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part
                  of  their  household  unless  there  are  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.

             (ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have both
                  stability  and  continuity  of  social   and   educational
                  provision and the benefit of growing up  in  the  cultural
                  norms of the society to which they belong.

             (iii)    Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state
                  of origin can lead to development of social, cultural  and
                  educational  ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate   to
                  disrupt, in the  absence  of  compelling  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear
                  cut but past and present policies  have  identified  seven
                  years as a relevant period.

             (iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and Rules, the
                  Tribunal notes that seven years from age 4 is likely to be
                  more significant to a child than the first seven years  of
                  life.  Very young children are focused  on  their  parents
                  rather than peers and are adaptable.

             (v)  Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
                  leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or
                  remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely
                  to give rise to private life deserving of respect  in  the
                  absence of exceptional factors.  In any event,  protection
                  of the  economic  wellbeing  of  society  amply  justifies
                  removal in such cases.

25. The following observations of the Court  of  Appeal  in  JW  (China)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1526  are
    also pertinent:

         22.  In my view the correct approach is very well summarised in the
             Upper Tribunal decision of MK (Best interests of child) [2011]
             UKUT 00475 (IAC), where this was said at paragraphs 23 and  24
             of the determination:

                  "...If, for example, all the factors weighing in the  best
                  interests of the child consideration point  overwhelmingly
                  in favour of the child and or relevant  parents  remaining
                  in the UK, that is very likely to mean  that  very  strong
                  countervailing factors can outweigh it.  If, at the  other
                  extreme,  all  the  factors  of  relevance  to  the   best
                  interests of the child consideration (save for the child's
                  and/or parents own claim that they want to  remain)  point
                  overwhelmingly to the child's interest being  best  served
                  by him returning with his parents to his country of origin
                  ...  then   very   little   by   way   of   countervailing
                  considerations to do with immigration control etc. may  be
                  necessary in order for the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  the
                  decision appealed against was and is proportionate."

26. EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 provides  the  most  recent
    guidance from the senior courts on the approach to best  interests  and
    the question of reasonableness.  Clarke LJ said:
   1. More important for present purposes is to know how the tribunal should
      approach the proportionality exercise if it has  determined  that  the
      best interests of the child or children are that they should  continue
      with their education in England. Whether or not it is in the interests
      of a child to continue his or her education in England may  depend  on
      what assumptions one makes as to what happens to  the  parents.  There
      can be cases where it is in the child's best interests  to  remain  in
      education in the UK, even though one or both parents  did  not  remain
      here. In the present case, however, I take the  FTT's  finding  to  be
      that it was in the best interests of the children  to  continue  their
      education in England with both parents living here. That assumes  that
      both parents are here. But the best interests of the child are  to  be
      determined by reference to the child alone without  reference  to  the
      immigration history or status of either parent.
   1. In determining whether or not, in a case such as the present, the need
      for immigration control outweighs the best interests of the  children,
      it is necessary to determine the  relative  strength  of  the  factors
      which make it in their best interests to remain here; and also to take
      account of any factors that point the other way.
   1. A decision as to what is in the best interests of children will depend
      on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length  of  time
      that they have been here; (c) how long they have  been  in  education;
      (c) what stage their education has reached; (d) to  what  extent  they
      have become distanced from the country to which it  is  proposed  that
      they return; (e) how renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to
      what extent they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties
      in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which  the
      course proposed will interfere with their family life or their  rights
      (if they have any) as British citizens.
   1. In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic an answer falls
      to be given to the question: is it in the best interests of the  child
      to remain? The longer the child has been here, the more  advanced  (or
      critical) the stage of his education, the looser  his  ties  with  the
      country in question, and the more deleterious the consequences of  his
      return, the greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.
      If it is overwhelmingly in the child's best interests that  he  should
      not return, the need to maintain immigration control may well not  tip
      the balance. By contrast if it is in the  child's  best  interests  to
      remain, but only on balance (with  some  factors  pointing  the  other
      way), the result may be the opposite.
   1. In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken into  account
      the strong weight to be given to  the  need  to  maintain  immigration
      control in pursuit of the economic well-being of the country  and  the
      fact that, ex hypothesi, the applicants have no entitlement to remain.
      The immigration history of the parents may also be  relevant  e.g.  if
      they are overstayers, or have acted deceitfully.

27. Lewison LJ said:

         49.  Second, as Christopher Clarke LJ points out, the evaluation of
             the  best  interests  of  children  in  immigration  cases  is
             problematic.  In the  real  world,  the  appellant  is  almost
             always the parent who has no right to remain in the  UK.   The
             parent thus relies  on  the  best  interests  of  his  or  her
             children in order  to  piggyback  on  their  rights.   In  the
             present case, as  there  is  no  doubt  in  many  others,  the
             Immigration Judge made two findings about the children's  best
             interests:

             (a)  the best interests  of  the  children  are  obviously  to
                  remain with their parents; [29] and

             (b)  it is in the best interests of the  children  that  their
                  education in the UK [is] not to be disrupted [53].

         50.  What, if any, assumptions are to be made about the immigration
             status of the parent?  If one takes the facts as they  are  in
             reality, then the first of the  Immigration  Judge's  findings
             about  the  best  interests  of  the  children  point  towards
             removal.  If, on the other hand, one assumes that  the  parent
             has the right to remain, then one is assuming  the  answer  to
             the very question the Tribunal has to decide.  Or is there  is
             a middle ground, in which one has to assess the best interests
             of the children without regard to the  immigration  status  of
             the parent?

28. The judge went on to analyse ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 in order to  elicit  an  answer  to  this
    question.  He reached the following conclusion:

         58.   In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis the  facts
             are as they are in the real world.  One parent has no right to
             remain, but the other parent  does,  that  is  the  background
             against which the assessment is conducted.  If neither  parent
             has the right to remain, then that is the  background  against
             which the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question
             will be is it reasonable to expect the  child  to  follow  the
             parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?"

29. He went on to observe that on the facts of ZH it was not reasonable  to
    expect the children to follow  their  mother  to  Tanzania,  not  least
    because the family  would  be  separated  and  the  children  would  be
    deprived of the right to grow up in the  country  of  which  they  were
    citizens.  That was a long way from the facts of the case before  them.
    No one in the family was a British citizen.   None  had  the  right  to
    remain in the country.  If the mother was removed, the  father  had  no
    independent right to remain.  With the parents  removed,  then  it  was
    entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them:

         Although it is, of course a question of fact for  the  Tribunal,  I
         cannot see that  the  desirability  of  being  educated  at  public
         expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to  the  children  of
         remaining with their parents.  Just as we  cannot  provide  medical
         treatment for the world, so we cannot educate the world.

30. Jackson LJ agreed with both judgments.

31. The "hypothetical" approach sanctioned by Christopher Clarke LJ  is  in
    line with the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in MK (India)  which
    he cites with approval.  In MK, the Upper Tribunal emphasised the  need
    to conduct the initial best interest assessment without any immigration
    control overtones.  These only came into play when the  decision  maker
    moved on to a wider proportionality assessment.

32. However, the "real world" approach is reflected in the  leading  speech
    of Lord Hodge in Zoumbas v Secretary of State [2013] UKSC 74, where the
    Supreme  Court  dismissed  an  appeal  against  removal  brought  by  a
    Congolese family comprising Mr and Mrs Zoumbas and two  daughters,  who
    had been born in the United Kingdom on 3 February  2007  and  14  April
    2011 respectively.  At paragraph 24 Lord Hodge said:

         There is no irrationality in the conclusion  that  it  was  in  the
         children's best interests to go with their parents to the  Republic
         of Congo.  No doubt it would have  been  possible  to  have  stated
         that, other things being equal, it was in the best interests of the
         children that they and their parents stayed in the  United  Kingdom
         so that they could obtain such benefits as healthcare and education
         which the decision maker recognised might be of a  higher  standard
         than would be available in the Congo. But  other  things  were  not
         equal.  They were not British  citizens.   They  had  no  right  to
         future education and healthcare in this country.  They were part of
         a close-knit family with highly educated parents and were of an age
         when their emotional needs could  only  be  fully  met  within  the
         immediate family unit.   Such  integration  as  had  occurred  into
         United Kingdom society would have been predominantly in the context
         of that  family  unit.   Most  significantly,  the  decision  maker
         concluded that they could be removed to the Republic  of  Congo  in
         the care of  their  parents  without  serious  detriment  to  their
         wellbeing.

33. The significance of this brief survey of the relevant law  is  that  it
    illuminates the question of how the decision maker should go about  the
    task of  deciding  whether  an  applicant  meets  the  requirements  of
    EX.1(a)(ii) or the identical provision in Rule 276ADE.  The  assessment
    of reasonableness is a holistic one, and  the  immigration  status  and
    history of the  parents  is  a  relevant  consideration,  following  EV
    (Philippines).  The fact that  there  is  a  qualifying  child,  either
    because the child has accrued  seven  years  residence  in  the  UK  or
    because the child is a British  national,  is  not  a  trump  card,  as
    otherwise there would not  be  a  requirement  to  go  on  to  consider
    whether, nonetheless, it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the
    United Kingdom.

34. At paragraph [60] of her decision, Judge Tootell referred to DP5/96 and
    to NF (Ghana) [2008] EWCA Civ 906 where the Court made observations  on
    how the policy had been generously applied. Considerations (c)  to  (e)
    in the policy, which I have set out in paragraph 23 above, did  not  in
    practice exclude families from taking the benefit of  the  policy.   In
    short, the policy amounted to a de  facto  amnesty  for  most  families
    where at least one child had been here for  seven  years.  While  Judge
    Tootell's historical perspective  was  entirely  correct,  she  wrongly
    inferred that the codification of the seven year rule in the rules  was
    intended to restore the position to how it stood in 2008; and  that  if
    it was  unreasonable  by  2008  standards  and/or  from  a  NF  (Ghana)
    perspective to require a child who has acquired seven years'  residence
    to relocate, it must be unreasonable now:

         Even with or without the continued existence of such  policies,  it
         is difficult to see what might have changed in  the  terms  of  the
         ability of such minors to relocate outside of the UK after a 7 year
         sojourn here and the reasonableness in asking them to do so.

35. On the contrary, a great deal has changed  since  2008  and  NF(Ghana),
    both in terms of governmental policy and  the  domestic  jurisprudence:
    the considerations  weighing  against  a  family/minor  with  irregular
    status securing leave to remain on long residence grounds  have  to  be
    taken into account, whereas under the old policy the SSHD could  choose
    to ignore them.

36. The judge's assessment of reasonableness under Rule 276ADE  was  highly
    flawed as she failed to  ask  herself  the  right  questions,  and  her
    consideration of the child's best interests was wholly inadequate.  She
    did not balance  the  best  interest  considerations  in  favour  of  S
    remaining in the UK against the best interest considerations militating
    in favour of S returning with his parents to the country of which  they
    were all nationals.  The judge failed to pose and address the  ultimate
    question which was whether it was reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    follow the parents with no right to remain to the country of origin?

37. The judge's acknowledged error in paragraph  [45]  is  material  as  it
    colours her approach to the assessment  of  S's  best  interests.   She
    attaches undue weight to the years which S has spent in  the  UK  after
    reaching the age of 7, and insufficient weight to the guidance  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed to the significance of a child  accruing
    seven years' residence in the UK from the age of 4.  While it was  open
    to the judge to find that as a 9  year  old  child  S  had  established
    himself outside his immediate family unit, it was  not  suggested  that
    the extent of his social life and his activities outside the home  were
    unusual for a child of his age.

38. I accept Ms Currie's submission that his  parents'  immigration  status
    features in the judge's reasoning in paragraphs [47] and [48].  But the
    reasoning is defective as  the  judge  treats  S's  position  as  being
    analogous to that of the children in ZH (Tanzania), when  there  is  in
    fact a crucial difference.  In ZH (Tanzania) the two affected  children
    were British citizens, and so the argument that they should not  suffer
    for  the  sins  committed  by  their  mother  was  a  highly   relevant
    consideration in the wider proportionality assessment.  Conversely,  in
    S's case, not only is he not a British citizen, he is also not lawfully
    present in the UK (absent a successful claim under Rule 276ADE)  having
    been served with an IS15A notice  in  January  2011.   Another  crucial
    point of distinction between the children  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  and  S's
    situation is that the children's father in ZH  (Tanzania)  had  status,
    and there was no question of him going  with  the  children  and  their
    mother to Tanzania.  But in  S's  case,  neither  of  the  parents  has
    status; and what is in contemplation  is  the  removal  of  the  entire
    family unit, not a break-up of the family unit.

39. The judge's engagement with the question of the immigration  status  of
    the parents was also deficient in  two  other  respects.   Firstly,  in
    paragraph [48] she failed to acknowledge that it was not a question  of
    the father being granted leave to remain in the UK which was only  ever
    intended to be temporary; the true position was  that  the  father  had
    been an overstayer since breaching the conditions  of  his  visit  visa
    issued to him in 2002.   Secondly,  the  judge  placed  weight  on  S's
    awareness of the lack of security of his situation  as  fortifying  the
    unreasonableness of expecting him to relocate away from  the  UK.   But
    logically this consideration militated in favour of the appellant going
    with his parents to Ghana, the country of which they are all  nationals
    and where there will not be any lack of security  about  their  status.
    Return of the family  to  Ghana  would  have  the  salutary  effect  of
    removing a cause of distress which S was currently experiencing in  the
    UK.

40. As the judge failed to give adequate reasons for finding  that  it  was
    not reasonable for S to leave the UK, her decision  under  Rule  276ADE
    and Appendix FM cannot stand.  Her  decision  outside  the  Rules  also
    cannot stand, as the finding on reasonableness is a  crucial  plank  in
    the  judge's  proportionality  assessment  outside  the   Rules.    The
    proportionality assessment outside the Rules is fatally infected by the
    fact that the judge's starting point on proportionality is that  it  is
    not reasonable for S to leave the UK, and thus Section 117B(6) applies.

Evidence Relevant to the Remaking of the Decision

41. As I have indicated in the course of my error of law ruling,  what  was
    missing from the assessment of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  a
    consideration of any difficulties that the family might face on  return
    to their country of nationality.

42. In their joint witness statement which they adopted before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the claimant and his partner asserted  at  paragraph  16
    that S had no ties whatsoever with Ghana and did not speak the Ghanaian
    language or dialects.  He spoke the English language, and knew no other
    culture.  He would struggle to make sense of life in Ghana,  especially
    as he did not speak the language.  As for them, they had no home or job
    waiting for them in Ghana.  They had no idea how long it would take for
    them to find a place to stay and  a  job  with  which  to  support  and
    maintain  themselves  there.   They  would  be  forced  to  go  through
    unnecessary hardship, something which was likely to have a  bad  effect
    on their son who was used to a stable life in the UK.

43. In cross-examination, the claimant confirmed that  he  was  in  contact
    with his 15 year old son  in  Ghana.   They  had  last  spoken  at  the
    beginning of the year.  In cross-examination J was asked why she  could
    not go back to Ghana.  She said she had been away a long time  and  had
    lost all  contact.   In  her  closing  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant, Ms Currie submitted that removal of the family to  Ghana  was
    bound to have a significant impact on S.  He did not  speak  the  Ghana
    language; it would be difficult for him to make friends; he  had  never
    lived there, and was totally immersed in UK culture.




Discussion and Findings

44. The question of whether it is reasonable for  S  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom under Rule 276ADE requires the same holistic approach  that  is
    required in  a  conventional  proportionality  assessment  outside  the
    Rules, and it should  produce  the  same  answer.   The  best  interest
    considerations in favour of S  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
    adequately summarised in  paragraph  [46]  of  the  decision  of  Judge
    Tootell, and it is not necessary to repeat  them.   The  considerations
    going the other way include the fact that S will be returning to  Ghana
    with both his parents, and he is still of an age when remaining  within
    the family unit is the single most important consideration in the  best
    interests assessment.  Both parents have displayed  resourcefulness  in
    obtaining employment in the UK, and there is no reason to believe  that
    there will be significant obstacles to them re-establishing  themselves
    in Ghana, and providing  adequate  maintenance  and  accommodation  for
    themselves  and  their  son.   As  stated  in   the   refusal   letter,
    reintegration assistance is available to support the sustainability  of
    the return of the family, and so it is open to the parents  to  enquire
    about a family return plan.  The other advantages to S in returning  to
    Ghana are that he would be able to enjoy to the full  the  benefits  of
    his Ghanaian nationality, and to immerse  himself  in  the  social  and
    cultural milieu from which both his parents spring.  He would  also  be
    able to enjoy family reunion with  his  half-brother.   His  mother  is
    heavily involved in the activities of the Seventh Day Adventist  Church
    in Lewisham, and S has some involvement with the church as well.  It is
    likely that this church, or another church of a  similar  denomination,
    has an established presence in Ghana, and therefore the family will  be
    able to access a support network in Ghana through  involvement  in  the
    local church in the place of relocation.

45. The best interest considerations for and against S returning  with  his
    parents  to  Ghana  are  finely  balanced.   But,  notwithstanding  the
    strength of S's private life  claim,  I  find  that  overall  S's  best
    interests lie in him returning with his parents to Ghana.

46. If I am wrong about that, the best interests militating in favour of  S
    remaining  in  the  UK  only  prevail  by  a  small  margin,  with  the
    consequence that the public interest considerations in  favour  of  the
    family's removal do not have to be very strong to  render  the  removal
    decision a proportionate one.  In the wider proportionality  assessment
    I take into account that S is not to blame for his parents' immigration
    offending.  But the fact remains that no member of  the  family  has  a
    right to be here, and the desirability  of  S  being  continued  to  be
    educated at the  public  expense  does  not  outweigh  the  benefit  of
    remaining with his parents, whom the Secretary of State is  seeking  to
    remove as immigration offenders.  So I  answer  the  ultimate  question
    posed in EV (Philippines) in favour of the Secretary of State:  I  find
    it is reasonable to require S to follow his parents with  no  right  of
    remain to Ghana, notwithstanding the fact that S has now  accrued  some
    ten years of residence in the United Kingdom since birth, and is  well-
    advanced in his primary school education.

47.  Part  5A  entitled  "Article  8   of   the   ECHR:   public   interest
    considerations" came into  force  from  28  July  2014.   Section  117A
    provides:

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
                  117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), 'the public interest  question'  means  the
             question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2).

48.  Section  117B  lists  the  following  "Article  8:   public   interest
    considerations applicable in all cases (my emphasis)":

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.

49. Sub-sub-sections (a) and (b) of sub-section (6) of Section 117B  mirror
    EX.1(a) of Appendix FM.  Under the structure  of  Appendix  FM,  if  an
    applicant satisfies the requirements of EX.1(a) it is not necessary  to
    go on to consider the public interest question. For in Appendix FM  the
    Secretary of State has set out in considerable detail how she  believes
    the balance between Article 8(1) and Article 8(2) should be  struck  in
    family life cases; and  if  a  person  can  bring  himself  within  the
    relevant qualifying criteria, then ipso facto it is not in  the  public
    interest from the SSHD's perspective for them to be removed.

50. While S is a qualifying child for the purposes of  sub-section  (6)  of
    Section 117B, I find that it is reasonable for S to go with his parents
    to Ghana. This is for the reasons previously stated,  but  also  having
    regard to the other considerations set out in Section  117B.   For  the
    avoidance  of  doubt,  I  consider  that  the  proper  construction  of
    subsection (6) is that in determining whether it is reasonable for  the
    child to leave the UK it is necessary to take into  account  the  other
    public interest considerations listed in Section  117B.   I  reject  Ms
    Currie's submission that Section 117B(6) has a peculiar status  whereby
    it has to be considered in isolation from the other subsections.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claimant's appeal on Article 8 grounds is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 6th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
