
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09854/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10th December 2014                    |On 2nd January 2015               |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR JEROME DEKUM
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Biggs, Counsel instructed by K C Law Chambers
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent Mr Jerome Dekum is stateless.  His date of birth  is  15
    August 1973.  I will refer to him as the appellant as he was before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

2.   On 1 September 2006 the appellant made an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom  under  Article  8  of  the  1950
    Convention on  Human  Rights.   The  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State in a decision of 3 February 2014.  Accompanying that
    decision was a decision to remove the appellant of the same date.

3.   The appellant's background is that he entered the UK in  January  2001.
    On 26 January 2006 the Secretary of State served him  with  an  IS151A.
    On 28 October 2013 his representatives were sent an immigration  status
    questionnaire  which  the  appellant  completed  and  returned  to  the
    Secretary of State  on  14  November  2013.   The  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that the evidence did not  show  sufficiently  compelling  or
    compassionate circumstances that would justify granting  leave  to  the
    appellant his application was refused under Appendix FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  It was not considered that there were
    exceptional circumstances to grant the appellant leave outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

4.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Tipping  on
    10 September  2014.   The  appellant  attended  the  hearing  and  gave
    evidence and his appeal  was  allowed  under  Article  8  of  the  1950
    Convention on Human Rights in a determination that was  promulgated  on
    25 September 2014.

5.   The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal in  a  decision
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge TRP  Hollingworth  in  a  decision  of  11
    November 2014. Thus the matter came before me.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

6.    The  Judge's  findings  are  between  paragraph  17  and  23  of   the
    determination which read as follows:-

    17.  In my view, the flaws in the appellant's evidence do not undermine
         the credibility of the central events on which his claim relies.  I
         find, on a balance of probabilities, that the  appellant  was  born
         and brought up as he claims, and was rendered stateless in 2001  by
         the French authorities.  As  Mr  Ojuade  submits  in  his  skeleton
         argument, it is clear from the reasons for refusal letter that  the
         respondent was (as were the French authorities) unable to  identify
         a country to which the appellant might be removed.   The  reference
         to India on page 4 of the letter  is  evidently  a  "cut-and-paste"
         error.  This reinforces my conclusion that he is to be regarded  as
         stateless, as defined in Article 1(1) of the 1954 Convention,  that
         is, a person who is not considered as a national by any state under
         the operation of its law.


    18.  That being the case, the appellant is entitled under Article 28 of
         the Convention to the issue to  him  of  a  United  Kingdom  travel
         document, and I allow his appeal on this ground to that extent.


    19.  I nevertheless  turn  to  considering  his  appeal  on  Article  8
         grounds.  It is not claimed that the appellant  meets  any  of  the
         Article 8 requirements now contained in Appendix FM  and  paragraph
         276ADE of HC395.  I therefore  assess  the  appellant's  Article  8
         claim under the relevant jurisprudence, including the decisions  in
         EB (Kosovo),  Beoku-Betts,  and  Razgar,  considering  whether  the
         appellant's claim discloses any relevant  exceptional  circumstance
         warranting the grant  to  him  of  leave  outside  the  rules.   An
         assessment of this claim requires me to strike the balance  between
         the public interest including the enforcement of a  fair  and  firm
         system of immigration control and the appellant's Article 8 rights.
          I have kept  in  mind  the  provisions  of  section  117B  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as inserted by section
         19 of the Immigration Act 2014.


    20.  The appellant does not claim to enjoy a family life in the  United
         Kingdom.  As to his private life here, I have described  above  the
         central events on which his claim relies and accepted  the  overall
         credibility of his account.  With these  in  mind,  I  address  the
         questions posed in Razgar.  It is  clear  that  the  appellant  has
         established a significant private life here since his last  arrival
         in the United Kingdom in the autumn of 2001 some 13 years ago.   He
         has throughout that period worked and earned his living,  first  as
         an employee, but more recently on a self-employed  basis,  latterly
         through the medium of his company.  He is the owner of  a  property
         in Manchester.  He speaks  English,  giving  his  evidence  at  the
         hearing in that language.  I accept that to  refuse  him  leave  to
         remain  would  interfere  with  the  private  life  that   he   has
         established here, and, given the low threshold set by  the  courts,
         that this interference would be of a  gravity  such  as  to  engage
         Article  8.   If  my  conclusion  above  as  to   the   appellant's
         statelessness claim  were  wrong,  the  interference  would  be  in
         accordance with the law.  The appellant otherwise has no  right  of
         appeal under the immigration rules.


    21.  With these considerations in mind, I  turn  to  the  final  Razgar
         question, that relating to proportionality.  The starting point  is
         the significant length of time that the appellant has  spent  here,
         some 13 years as at the date of the hearing.  It seems to  me  that
         it is in part the unconscionable delay  of  over  7  years  in  the
         respondent's coming to a decision about his claim that has left the
         appellant with little choice but  to  establish  his  private  life
         here, and that this is a  significant  factor  to  be  put  in  the
         appellant's side of the balance.  The appellant owns property and a
         business here.  He has always been financially independent  and  it
         is not claimed that he represents a burden on state funds.  That he
         is ostensibly without another country of refuge also seems to me to
         be a significant additional factor.  By contrast, it  is  difficult
         to identify any public interest that might be  served  by  refusing
         the appellant leave to remain, apart from a formal adherence to the
         immigration rules.


    22.  The balance to be struck turns on the circumstances of each claim,
         taken in the round.  For the reasons given above, I find  that  the
         appellant's circumstances are exceptional and outweigh  any  public
         interest in refusing him  leave  to  remain.   Such  refusal  would
         accordingly be a disproportionate breach of his Article 8 rights.

    23.  The appeal on Article 8 ground is allowed.

The Grounds seeking Permission to Appeal and Oral Submissions

7.   The grounds of appeal argue  that  the  Judge  misdirected  himself  in
    allowing the appeal under Article 8.   He  applied  Article  8  without
    identifying  compelling  circumstances.   The  Judge  failed  to  apply
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   The
    Judge at [21] found that "by contrast, it is difficult to identify  any
    public interest that might be served by refusing the appellant leave to
    remain, apart from a formal adherence to  the  Immigration  Rules"  and
    this finding is not consistent with section 117B.

8.   The parties made oral submissions.  Mr Duffy stated that there  was  no
    challenge to the finding that the appellant is stateless.  In his  view
    the appellant is either stateless or a  French  national  (which  would
    entitle him to rights under Directive 2004/38/EC).  The thrust  of  the
    grounds is that there is no proper  assessment  under  Article  8.  The
    Judge should have considered the appeal under the Rules before going on
    to consider Article 8. Mr  Duffy  then  conceded  that  had  the  Judge
    considered the matter under paragraph 276ADE she may have  reached  the
    same conclusion.

9.   Mr Biggs referred me to R (on the application of  Esther  Ebun  Oludoyi
    and Ors) v SSHD (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre)  IJR  [2014]  UKUT
    00539 (IAC).

10.  Mr Biggs submitted that section 117B largely assists the  appellant  in
    any event and there was nothing wrong with the  Judge's  assessment  of
    Article 8 outside the Rules.  The appellant has been here  for  a  very
    long time and he has no connection with any other country.

Conclusions

11.  The Judge accepted the appellant's evidence.  The  appellant  was  born
    on Sainte-Denis on the Island of Lareunion, a French  Departement.   He
    is a French citizen by birth.  He travelled to mainland France with his
    father when he was aged 5 and they both went to  live  in  Paris.   The
    appellant subsequently lost contact with his father  for  a  period  of
    time.  He was given a birth certificate by his father which he used  to
    apply for a French passport.  In 1999 he used the passport to travel to
    the UK for a visit and then he went on to Germany where he  worked  for
    about  two  years.   In  July  2001  he  was  detained  by  the  German
    authorities and then handed to the French police.  He was  subsequently
    declared stateless and given two days to leave France which he did.  He
    came to the UK where he had a girlfriend and on  1  September  2006  he
    submitted  an  application  for  leave  to  remain  here.  The   French
    authorities  confiscated  his  French  passport   because   his   birth
    certificate was false.

12.  It appears  that  the  appellant  through  his  representative  at  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal conceded that he  did  not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules including  paragraph  276ADE.
    This in  my  view  was  a  surprising  concession  to  have  been  made
    considering the length of time that the appellant had been  in  the  UK
    and his previous history.  However, in these circumstances it  was  not
    open on the Judge to go  behind  that  concession  and  the  Judge  was
    entitled to go onto to consider Article 8 outside of the Rules. This is
    consistent with recent jurisprudence on the issue

13.  The Judge properly directed herself in relation to  section  117B  (see
    paragraph 19) and properly considered the  public  interest.  There  is
    nothing in the finding at paragraph 21 of the determination which is at
    odds with section 117B. The appellant is stateless and  has  been  here
    for a significant period of time. I agree with Mr Duffy  that  had  the
    Judge considered the appeal under paragraph 276ADE it  is  likely  that
    the appeal would have  been  successful  in  any  event.  Although  the
    appellant's stay here has been precarious there was a significant delay
    in processing his application. In my view the grounds do  not  disclose
    an error of law in the determination. In any event if  the  Judge  fell
    into error it not material. Mr Duffy  conceded  that  paragraph  276ADE
    would probably avail the appellant and I agree with him.

14.  There is no material error of law and the  decision  of  the  Judge  to
    allow the appeal under Article 8 is maintained.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 2 January 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

