
[pic]

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Numbers: IA/09056/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    IA/09062/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 3 February 2015                           |On 24 February 2015           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

|MR GANASEKARAM KATHIRAMAPPODY         |First Respondent |
|MRS NANDINE GANASEKARAM               |Second Respondent|


                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L. Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondents:   Ms K. Rahman, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. No application for anonymity has been made  in  these  proceedings  and
    there is nothing before me today to  suggest  that  such  an  order  is
    appropriate.

 2. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the  Secretary  of  State  referred  to  as  "the  respondent"  and  Mr
    Kathiramappody and Mrs Ganasekaram as "the appellants".

 3. The appellants are husband and wife and citizens of  Sri  Lanka.   They
    were born respectively on 21 September 1951 and 17 April 1960.

 4. The appellants made an application on 17 December 2013  to  vary  their
    limited leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
    European Convention on Human  Rights.   The  respondent's  decision  to
    refuse the application  was  dated  29 January  2014  coupled  with  a
    direction for removal under Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  The appellants appealed and, following a hearing
    at  Taylor  House,  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Moore,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 23 October 2014, dismissed the appellants'
    appeal under the Immigration Rules  but  allowed  it  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 5. The respondent  sought  permission  to  appeal.   Her  application  was
    considered by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lever  who  granted  it.
    His reasons for so doing are:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Moore)  who,  in  a
             determination  promulgated  on  25  Oct   2014   allowed   the
             Appellant's appeal to remain as the parents of  an  adult  son
             settled in the UK.

          2.  The grounds assert that the judge did not properly engage with
             the credibility issues nor deal properly with  proportionality
             under A8 ECHR.

          3.  The Appellants aged 62 and 54 entered the UK in July  2013  as
             visitors.  They claimed that shortly after arrival in  the  UK
             that their home, land and business in their home  country  was
             taken over by unknown people and they applied to stay  in  the
             UK as a result.

          4.  The judge  did  not  appear  to  deal  fully  with  issues  of
             credibility.  He refers at [28] and [33] to these people being
             Sinhalese, possibly LTTE breakaway  group  and  the  Appellant
             fearing the government.  There is a reference by the judge  to
             A2/3 ECHR and a somewhat unusual reference to the standard  of
             proof at [35].

          5.  In considering A8 ECHR outside of the rules  the  judge  notes
             quite properly at [37] the short time they have been in the UK
             and accordingly the lack of development of family  or  private
             life.  However the judge allows the appeal under A8  ECHR  and
             also appears to place much reliance upon medical conditions of
             the Appellants without reference to the high standards in such
             cases nor any real consideration of the public interest.

          6.  There are arguable errors of law in this case."

 6. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 7. Ms Kenny relied upon the respondent's grounds, asserting that the judge
    had made a material misdirection of law in two respects.   Firstly,  so
    far as credibility is concerned the judge accepted the evidence of  the
    appellants to the effect that their home in Sri Lanka  had  been  taken
    from them and that this  happened  when  they  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge does not refer  to  any  independent  corroborative
    evidence  but  accepted  the  accounts  of  the  appellants  and  their
    neighbours regarding these problems.  Ms Kenny argued that the evidence
    in this regard was self-serving and that there was an  absence  of  any
    enquiries being made  by  the  appellants  through  official  channels.
    Further,  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  engage  with  the  overall
    credibility issues in the appeal.  In her  oral  submissions  Ms  Kenny
    argued that the absence of corroborative  evidence  impacted  upon  the
    weight that could be attached to the appellants' evidence overall.

 8. Secondly, it is  argued  that  the  judge  erred  in  relation  to  the
    proportionality exercise and in particular failed to  take  account  of
    the public interest in coming to his conclusions.  Beyond that there is
    an  absence  of  a  proper  proportionality  assessment  rendering  the
    decision on Article 8 grounds unsound.  It is not inherently clear that
    the appellants would be unable to readapt to life in Sri Lanka owing to
    their claimed circumstances.  In the alternative the respondent  argues
    that the appellants have lived in  their  country  of  origin  for  the
    majority of their  lives  and  could  seek  assistance  from  UK  based
    relatives in acquiring further property, if they have lost  their  own.
    A temporary period of upheaval is, on the facts,  not  disproportionate
    to the legitimate aim pursued.  The judge  noted  that  the  appellants
    have not formed sufficient private/family life in  the  United  Kingdom
    based on the length of  their  residence  and  therefore  as  such  the
    respondent asserts that it cannot be disproportionate to  result  in  a
    breach of the appellants' Article 8 rights.  Ms Kenny  emphasised  that
    it was the proportionality issue  that  was  the  main  thrust  of  her
    argument and that essentially this was an  appeal  allowed  on  medical
    grounds without taking into account the high threshold that is demanded
    in such cases.   She  referred  me  to  paragraph  37  of  the  judge's
    determination where the judge states:-

         "It is the physical and mental  condition  of  the  lead  appellant
         which drive me to a particular conclusion in this appeal."

 9. Ms Kenny emphasised the  absence  of  any  consideration  of  the  high
    threshold required in medical cases within this particular paragraph of
    the judge's determination and also a lack of discussion in relation  to
    the public interest.

10. In reply Ms Rahman submitted that there was no  error  in  the  judge's
    approach to assessing credibility of the appellants' claim.  There  was
    nothing wrong in him accepting the evidence of the  appellants  that  a
    couple of months after their arrival into the United Kingdom  and  when
    ready to return to Sri Lanka they were informed  by  a  neighbour  that
    their house and land had been taken over  by  Singhalese  people.   Not
    only did  the  judge  take  account  of  the  oral  evidence  but  also
    documentary material, including a letter from the daughter of a  female
    who was looking after the appellants' property in their absence.  As to
    Article 8, Ms Rahman argued that the Article 8  assessment  outside  of
    the Immigration Rules remains a discretionary matter  of  judgment  for
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  She brought  to  my  attention  various
    cases in relation to  Article  8  but  placed  particular  emphasis  on
    Mukarkar v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1045  and  Katshunga,  R  (on  the
    application of) v SSHD [2006] EWHC 1208 (Admin).  She argued that there
    are a small amount of cases in which a question  of  judgment  for  the
    Tribunal of fact arises which normally raises no issue of law  for  the
    Secretary of State.  Further, that following Gulshan (Article 8  -  new
    Rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) after applying
    the requirements of the Rules  only  if  there  may  be  arguably  good
    grounds for granting leave to remain outside them is it  necessary  for
    Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether  there  are  compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under  them.   She  submitted
    that this "compelling circumstances" test gives a degree of latitude on
    the issue of proportionality.

11. I will say now that Article 8 has moved on from Gulshan.  In R (on  the
    application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre)  IJR  [2014]  UKUT
    539 (IAC) it was held that there  was  nothing  in  Nagre,  R  (on  the
    application of) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), Gulshan  (Article  8  -
    new Rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) or Shahzad
    (Article 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 85 (IAC) that suggested that  a
    threshold test was being suggested as opposed to making it  clear  that
    there was a need to look at the evidence to see if there  was  anything
    which had not already been adequately considered in the context of  the
    Immigration Rules and which could lead to a successful Article 8 claim.
     These authorities must not be read as seeking to qualify or fetter the
    assessment of Article 8.  This was consistent with paragraph 128 of  MM
    & Others, R (On the Application of) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985  that
    there was no utility in imposing  a  further  intermediate  test  as  a
    preliminary to a  consideration  of  an  Article  8  claim  beyond  the
    relevant criterion-based Rule.  As is held in Ganesabalan,  R  (On  the
    Application of) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin),  there  was  no  prior
    threshold which dictates whether the exercise of discretion  should  be
    considered; rather the nature of the assessment and the reasoning which
    were called for were informed by threshold considerations.

12. In Aliyu & Anor, R (On the Application of)  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWHC  3919
    (Admin) the claimants, Nigerian nationals, sought  judicial  review  of
    the Secretary of State's decisions refusing them leave to remain.   The
    Administrative Court,  in  allowing  the  application,  held  that  the
    Secretary of State had been required to give separate consideration  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR in her decisions  and  that  there  had  been  no
    adequate assessments made outside the Immigration Rules,  resulting  in
    unlawful decisions.  The errors were not immaterial, as it could not be
    concluded with any degree of  confidence  that  the  claimants'  claims
    would necessarily fail.

13. Ms Rahman went on to opine that Article  8  protects  the  family  life
    between an applicant and their adult family  members  residing  in  the
    United Kingdom where there is dependency beyond normal emotional  ties.
    In Katshunga it was held that an adult claimant  could  establish  that
    her removal would breach Article 8 by reference to a relationship  with
    her adult brother upon whom she was particularly dependent owing to her
    own and her  family's  traumatic  history  and  her  consequent  mental
    illness.  In Mukarkar, she submitted, the Court  of  Appeal  held  that
    there was "strong family ties of dependency in  this  country"  between
    the appellant, a father and a son in circumstances where the  appellant
    (who suffered from diabetes, was frail, and prone to falling and  could
    be doubly incontinent) was dependent on  his  son  for  his  day-to-day
    care, even though the appellant, having arrived in the UK as a visitor,
    was in the country for a short period.  Beyond that the judge  has  not
    erred in his Article 8 balancing exercise and overall he  was  entitled
    to come to the conclusions that he did thereby resulting in there being
    no error of law within his determination.

14. In dealing with the respondent's first ground, there was no requirement
    on the judge to refer to  "independent  corroborative  evidence".   The
    judge has analysed the evidence that  was  before  him  and  has  given
    cogent and sustainable  reasons  which  were  fully  open  to  him  for
    concluding that these were appellants giving credible evidence.   There
    is no requirement for corroboration within this jurisdiction and  there
    is no failure by this particular judge to engage with the  issues  that
    fell to be analysed.  There was ample justification for coming  to  his
    findings on credibility and there has clearly been no error of law.

15. As to Article 8, the judge has again considered  the  totality  of  the
    evidence.  In so doing he was equally entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    respondent's decisions were disproportionate in all the  circumstances.
    There  is,  contrary  to  the  grounds,   "a   proper   proportionality
    assessment" and the judge has taken all factors into account, not least
    the public interest.  It is referred to at paragraph 24 of the  judge's
    determination.  In coming to his conclusions the judge has weighed  all
    factors including the relatively short period of  time  the  appellants
    have been in the United Kingdom.  Indeed he concludes at  paragraph  37
    that in the short period they have been present he  is  "not  satisfied
    that they have put down any roots in the United Kingdom or that  within
    the same period of time they have developed close ties with family  and
    friends as claimed".  On the other side of the balance  though  he  has
    been satisfied that due to the medical  and  mental  condition  of  the
    first appellant his son and daughter-in-law  have  to  take  particular
    care to see that his needs are met due to the first appellant's failing
    memory.  Indeed it is the physical and mental condition  of  the  first
    appellant which causes the judge to come to  the  conclusions  that  he
    did.  In so doing he has taken account of medical evidence including  a
    comprehensive report from Antonia Kreeger, psychotherapist,  which  the
    judge found  particularly  significant.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that there are strong family ties between the  appellants  and
    their  son  and  that  there  is  both  a  physical  and  psychological
    dependency upon him.

16. Beyond the abovementioned reference to the public  interest  the  judge
    has further analysed it at paragraph 36 of his determination and it  is
    clear that it has been built into the balancing exercise carried out.

17. The judge has looked at the evidence cumulatively before coming to  the
    conclusions regarding the inability of the appellants to readapt  to  a
    life in Sri Lanka outside their current family environment.

18. This is not simply a medical case which might demand a  high  threshold
    but one where there are many strands of evidence which come together to
    enable the judge to come to the conclusion that he did.  The judge  was
    entitled to find  that  the  appellants'  removal  would  breach  their
    Article 8 rights.

19. The grounds of appeal are a disagreement with  findings  and  reasoning
    which are legally adequate and which take proper  account  of  relevant
    case law.  There is here no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity order is made.





Signed                              Dated:  23 February 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


