
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA096422015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8th April 2016                         |On 14th June 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                             mr daniyal daniyal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Narayan promulgated on 13th August 2015, following a hearing at  Stoke-
    on-Trent on 6th August 2015.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, and was born  on  12th  January
    1993, and  is  a  male.   He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 25th February 2015, refusing him an application for  a
    variation of leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his marriage  to
    a British citizen wife, namely, Zaynab Chloe Ann Dorris Khalifa.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that his partner is a  British  citizen,  born
    and brought up of European heritage, in the UK, and her date  of  birth
    is 11th June 1998.  Their relationship began when he was a  student  in
    February 2014 and started living together on 26th  September  2014  and
    entered into an Islamic marriage on 26th September  2014  and  a  civil
    registry marriage on 6th November 2014.  The  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State is wrong to refuse the Appellant's application on  the  basis  of
    Appendix FM paragraph 276ADE, requiring either the Appellant's wife, or
    the Appellant himself to return  to  Pakistan,  and  if  the  Appellant
    himself so wishes, to then make a spouse's application for a visa to re-
    enter.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge found that the Appellant's wife, in spite of her youth  being
    only 16 years of age, had entered into a relationship  and  a  marriage
    and then parenthood of a child "in the full  knowledge  that  his  stay
    [i.e. that of the Appellant] was not permanent and that the marriage by
    itself might not be sufficient to allow  him  to  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom".

 5. Second, the judge held that "they have considered  the  possibility  of
    him having to leave the United Kingdom and then to  reapply  to  rejoin
    his wife and child in the United Kingdom".

 6. Third, the judge held that although there was a possible  consideration
    of a child, nevertheless, it was not the case that "a young born  child
    falls for consideration in the balancing exercise as a child is  not  a
    human being, until it is born".

 7. Finally, the judge stated that, "I therefore do not consider Section 55
    of the relevant Statute" (see paragraph 36).  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to carry out the
    balancing exercise adequately at the proportionality  stage.   This  is
    because as the judge  made  it  clear  in  his  determination  that  he
    considered  it  proportionate  that  the  Appellant  should  return  to
    Pakistan and apply from there, the matter might have been different.

 9. On 23rd December 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

10. On 8th January 2016, a Rule 24 response was entered by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me Ms Rutherford, appearing as Counsel on  behalf
    of the Appellant, submitted that the crux of the matter was  that,  the
    judge had recognised that the Appellant's wife did not wish  to  go  to
    Pakistan because all her relatives and friends were  in  this  country.
    First, she was a British citizen.  Second, she  was  not  of  Pakistani
    origin.  She was English.  Third, the child was  now  born  and  was  7
    months of age.  Third, the Appellant himself  was  legally  in  the  UK
    being a student with lawful leave.   Subsequently  he  had  Section  3C
    Immigration Act 1971 leave.  Fourth,  the  Appellant's  partner  was  a
    "qualifying" partner.   Fifth,  however,  and  most  importantly,  when
    regard is had to the fact that Section 117B of the 2014 Act  refers  to
    how "little weight is to be given" to a private life that is  developed
    at a time when a person's  immigration  status  is  precarious"  it  is
    salutary to bear in mind that first, the Appellant himself was  not  in
    the UK unlawfully, and second, that  that  provision  is  focused  upon
    "private life" so that as far as family  life  was  concerned,  it  was
    arguable that as such a strict interpretation did not apply  to  family
    life relationships.  What was more important was whether a partner  was
    in the UK  unlawfully.   The  Appellant  in  this  case  was  not  here
    unlawfully.  Therefore, the "public interest" immigration  control  was
    less than the right to family life.

12. For his part, Mr Diwnycz submitted that  this  was  a  case  where  the
    Appellant obviously could not succeed under the Immigration Rules under
    paragraph  276ADE,  and  the  judge  considered  the  situation   under
    freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence, and he is entitled  to  conclude,
    that in circumstances where the parties had entered  this  relationship
    with an open mind knowing fully well that marriage did  not  mean  that
    they could both stay in this country, the judge was entitled to come to
    the conclusions that he did.  There was no material arguable  error  of
    law here.  The judge  did  properly  direct  himself  to  the  law  and
    contrary  to  the  Appellant's  Grounds  of  Appeal  give  a   detailed
    consideration to the facts of the case.  The  public  interest  was  in
    maintaining effective immigration  control.   As  far  as  freestanding
    Article 8 jurisprudence was concerned, only  a  very  small  number  of
    exceptional cases would be allowed under Article 8 where they could not
    succeed under  the  Rules.   The  Appellant  could  not  point  to  any
    unjustifiably harsh consequences either for removal  or  for  his  wife
    were he to return to Pakistan.

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    an error on a point of law (See Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that I
    should set aside the decision.  My reasons are as follows.  This  is  a
    case where  the  judge  does  not  consider  the  "proportionality"  of
    requiring the Appellant to return to Pakistan, in  circumstances  where
    he had no legal right to remain here, given the right  to  family  life
    that he had, but in  the  circumstances  where  the  "public  interest"
    considerations   are   in   favour   of   immigration   control.    The
    proportionality  exercise  should  have   been   more   comprehensively
    undertaken.  It is not enough to say that what had been  done  was  "in
    the full knowledge that  his  stay  was  not  permanent  and  that  the
    marriage by itself might not be sufficient to allow him to  stay"  (see
    paragraph 36).

Re-Making the Decision

14. I have remade the decision on the basis of the finding of the  original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the  following  reasons.   First,
    this is a case where the judge found as a  fact  that  the  Appellant's
    wife

         "has very strong and cogent reasons why she does not wish to  leave
         the United Kingdom and in any event would not do so.  I accept  the
         concerns about the future of her unborn child  as  the  health  and
         education in Pakistan would not be as good as in the United Kingdom
         ..." (paragraph 37).

15. This means that in circumstances where she is not going  to  leave  the
    UK, being a British lady who has been  born  and  brought  up  in  this
    country, her family life with the Appellant will be  split  up  if  the
    Appellant is required to go to Pakistan.

16. Second, in that event, the question that needs to be asked  is  whether
    it is "proportionate" for this course of action to be  countenanced  by
    the immigration authorities, given  that  it  is  always  open  to  the
    Appellant's husband to apply for a spouse's visa to enter to rejoin his
    British wife in this country.

17. However, the Appellant's child has now been born.  He is 7 months  old.
    The Appellant's wife is very young and she is reliant upon him.  I have
    had regard to the IDI which referred to "Appendix FM  1.0  family  life
    (as a partner or parent) and private  life:  ten  year  route"  (August
    2015) and this makes it clear at Section 11.2.3, and under the  heading
    "would it be unreasonable to expect the British citizen child to  leave
    the UK" that,

         "save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child when the effect of that decision would be  to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child.  This reflects the European Court of  Justice  judgment
         in Zambrano".

    It was not, however, end there.  The IDI goes on to say that,

         "where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to the country outside the EU, the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer".

18. The possibility exists here of the Appellant and  his  wife  and  child
    being all required to go to Pakistan because the Appellant's wife  will
    need his support in order to look after the child.

19. Third, this leads to the  question  of  there  being  for  that  reason
    "exceptional circumstances" such that Article 8 ECHR jurisprudence must
    be considered.

20. Finally, in considering the matter then in its entirety, it  cannot  be
    overlooked that the child, now born, is a "qualifying child" as defined
    in Section 117B(1), because a child is a British citizen.   Indeed  the
    child's mother is a British citizen.  Therefore, the "public  interest"
    does not require the  removal  of  a  person  who  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a  child  though  it  is  not
    reasonable to expect the child to leave.

21. The original judge had already found that there  are  very  strong  and
    cogent reasons why the Appellant's wife does not wish to leave the  UK.
    She was born here and spent her entire life here.  She will be going to
    a place culturally very different from the UK.  She has never  been  to
    Pakistan.  She does not speak the language of Pakistan.  She  does  not
    know anyone there.  Her entire family is  in  this  country.   She  has
    close links with her family members.  She is a first time mother.   She
    is young.  She needs the support  of  everyone  in  this  country.   To
    expect her to relocate with a young child is not reasonable.  To  force
    her to do so will affect the care  that  the  mother  will  give  to  a
    British citizen child.

22. For all these reasons, the appeal must be allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th June 2016
