
                                    [pic]
IAC-CH-SA-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/09302/2015
                                                               IA/09303/2015
                                                               IA/05516/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th November 2016                        |On 21st December 2016         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   l s (1)
                                  m m s (2)
                                   m s (3)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N O'Brien


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. Anonymity having previously been ordered in the First-tier Tribunal and
    there being no application to remove the order, I see no reason  to  do
    so and the order remains in place.  Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  a
    court directs otherwise, the Respondents  are  granted  anonymity.   No
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them
    or any member of their family.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
    Appellant  and  to  the  Respondents.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision  of
    Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Samimi, promulgated on 15th
    April 2016.  The judge allowed the Appellants' appeal against a refusal
    of leave to remain on the basis of continuous residence with  reference
    to the Immigration Rules at paragraph 276B of HC 395 as amended.

 3. At the time when First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parkes  granted  permission
    the grounds of the Secretary of State's application were missing.   The
    judge read the decision and identified  concerns  in  the  judgment  as
    follows:

         "The  decision  needlessly  and  unhelpfully   recites   the   law,
         paragraphs 10 to 16 could have been condensed  to  a  single  short
         paragraph and paragraphs 18 and 20 do not add anything either.  The
         decision does not concentrate on the principal issues.  The overall
         immigration history of the family  had  to  be  addressed  and  the
         adults' history are highly relevant factors, MA (Pakistan)  and  EV
         (Philippines).  Also the question of whether it was  reasonable  to
         expect the child, a national of Sri Lanka, to live  there  was  not
         addressed and had to be assessed before the question in relation to
         the adults could be addressed."

 4. The grounds of the application which fortunately had been reattached to
    the file by the time it came for hearing before me, were that there was
    a material misdirection in law in the context of Article 8 because:

         "(i)     The FtTJ failed to determine whether the  minor  Appellant
             (child) met the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE  first  and
             then determining whether the parents met the Immigration Rules
             or otherwise.  (PD and Others (article 8 -  conjoined  appeals
             family claims) Sri Lanka UKUT 00108 (IAC)).

         (ii)     In particular there is a failure to  evaluate  whether  it
             was  reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  leave   the   UK.
             (paragraph 276ADE(iv)).

         (iii)    The FtTJ failed to evaluate  the  best  interests  of  the
             child (section 55 Borders Act 2009).

         (iv)     The Judge failed to evaluate the "reasonableness question"
             in accordance with EV Philippines  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  and
             assess the public interest considerations ie the cost  of  the
             education of the child in the UK, the family's connections  to
             Sri Lanka, the ability of the family to re-integrate into life
             in Sri  Lanka,  the  child  is  not  British,  and  the  adult
             appellants did not meet the immigration rules.

         (v)  The FtTJ erred in failing to consider  and  adequately  assess
             section 117 (B) (6) properly.  Paragraph (6) (b) requires  the
             Tribunal to determine whether it would be reasonable to expect
             the child to leave the UK.  There are simply  no  findings  on
             this matter."

 5. Mr Avery summarised the  grounds  succinctly  as  a  criticism  of  the
    judge's approach to the legal framework. The judge  should  have  dealt
    with the Private life position of the minor appellant under the  rules,
    with reference to paragraph 276ADE first, and in that  context  made  a
    rounded decision as to whether it would be reasonable to expect him  to
    go to Sri Lanka, taking account of his best interests  as  informed  by
    his position here and as it would be in Sri Lanka, and the position  of
    his parents who had not basis to be here under the rules. There  is  no
    express consideration of the rule as it applies to  the  child  or  any
    express finding as to what his best interests are. On its face  if  the
    position of the child did not lead to a grant of his appeal  under  the
    Rules, and at paragraph 15 the  judge  identifies  that  she  is  going
    outside of them, it was wrong for the judge  to  allow  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds without  even  identifying  what  it  was  about  the
    circumstances that were exceptional and compelling requiring her to  go
    outside of paragraph 276ADE.

Discussion

 6. Contrary to the tenor of the grounds and Mr  Avery's  submission  I  am
    satisfied that the judge here did not need to start  with  the  private
    life position of the child. The grounds fail to read the decision as  a
    whole.

 7. Unlike the case of PD relied on this is not a  case  where  the  adults
    were overstayers and with no entitlement  to  remain  under  the  rules
    where a judge found that it was appropriate to allow them to piggy back
    on the circumstances of their minor child.

 8. Reading the decision as a whole it is quite clear that the matter which
    was foremost in the judge's mind was the  historical  position  of  the
    adult Appellants and in  particular  the  adult  male  Appellant.   The
    complaint that the Article 8 Assessment was not viewed through the lens
    of the Rules completely misreads the decision.   The  judge's  starting
    point is that this was an application made  under  the  long  residence
    rule at 276 B.  There was no application under 276ADE.

 9. There was pertinent history.  The Appellant  had  initially  made  this
    application on 24th September 2013.  At the time he had leave to remain
    and so lawful residence continued by virtue of statutory  extension  of
    leave.  The leave he enjoyed at the time  was  as  a  Tier  2  Migrant.
    Judge Chamberlain heard the Appellants' appeal  against  a  refusal  of
    that application and concluded that the decision was not in  accordance
    with the law because the Respondent had failed to appreciate  that  she
    had a discretion to overlook a period of formal overstaying,  and  that
    in any event the Respondent had incorrectly calculated  the  period  of
    overstaying as being between June 2007 and September 2009, when in fact
    it was considerably less: between June 2007 and April 2008.

10.  Judge  Chamberlain,  in  his  judgment  dated  10th  September   2014,
    confirming what was said in the earlier Court  of  Appeal  judgment  of
    24th November 2008 concerning the male Appellant, (both of  which  were
    in the Respondent's bundle), found the Appellant's leave to remain as a
    work permit holder was curtailed because his  employers  deviated  from
    the letter of the work permit in  the  tasks  that  they  required  the
    Appellant to do, and that they ought to have applied  for  a  new  work
    permit.  The Court of Appeal saw much force in the submissions that the
    Appellant was a hardworking young man who had come to this country  and
    behaved  responsibly,  applying  himself  diligently  to  his  job  and
    deserving of another chance.  In the event there was to-ing and fro-ing
    between the Respondent and the employer during the course of which  the
    Respondent  changed  her  mind  concerning  the  formalities   of   the
    documentation, until finally in  September  2009  a  further  five-year
    period was approved.

11. When the Appellant subsequently made  his  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain (ILR), he still had six months leave  outstanding.  The
    Respondent delayed making, what in the event was an unlawful  decision,
    until after the expiry of his leave.  As  result  of  the  Respondent's
    unfair processing of the Appellant's ILR application, the Appellant did
    not make an in-time, lesser application, for an  extension  of  Tier  2
    leave.  Following  the  refusal  of  his  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    application which, unsurprisingly, the Appellant appealed, he  made  an
    effort to correct that position but his Tier 2 application was  treated
    as invalid, on the basis that he had an outstanding appeal.

12. Before Judge Chamberlain in 2014, and as acknowledged before the First-
    tier Tribunal and myself in  the  current  proceedings,  it  is  common
    between the parties  that  the  Tier  2  application  would  have  been
    granted. Following which the Appellants  would  in  the  meantime  have
    become entitled, all things being equal and it is not suggested by  the
    Respondent they were not, to indefinite leave to remain by dint of  the
    length of residence under the Tier 2 provisions.

13. Although these grounds complain that the judge's decision does no  more
    than reach a hasty conclusion in respect of the  child  without  proper
    reference to whether or not it was reasonable to expect  the  child  to
    leave, they entirely overlook that the main concern  is  quite  clearly
    that the Appellants' opportunities, which were plainly acknowledged  as
    being positive, to obtain indefinite leave to remain on the basis of an
    entitlement under the Immigration Rules have  been  frustrated  by  the
    Respondent's  inept  handling  of  the  family's  applications  over  a
    significant period of time.

14. Designated Judge Samimi clearly found that it was  that  history  which
    operated as compelling not just in providing reasons to go  outside  of
    the Rules in the sense of not finding  those  circumstances  adequately
    addressed by a consideration under the Rules,  but  compelling  in  the
    sense of commanding that leave to remain should be granted.

15. Whilst the factor of the couple having  a  child  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 18th October 2006 and so 8 years and 3 months old, as at the
    date the respondent revisited the earlier  unlawful  decision  on  20th
    January 2015, and 9 years 6 months  as  at  the  date  of  the  judge's
    decision  on  15th  April  2016,  was  incorporated  into  the  judge's
    considerations, this case  was  not  one  which  was  argued  as  being
    predicated or hinging on the private life rights of the child. It was a
    case which turned on the position of the adults.

16. The parties framed the arguments in the context of the  rule  at  276B,
    inviting the judge in the event that the period of overstay meant  that
    the rules was not met, to move on to decide whether or not leave should
    be granted on Article 8 grounds outside of the rule  under  Article  8.
    The Respondent's representative recognised the force of the argument in
    respect of the poor dealing, not  only  of  the  2013  application  the
    subject of the  appeal,  but  also  the  Tier  2  point,  and  did  not
    significantly challenge the Appellant's submission that the  judge  was
    bound to look beyond the rule. The arguments were all about  the  fifth
    question in Razgar, i.e. that of proportionality. It is in that context
    that the judge considers the position of the child. The conclusion that
    the judge reached was open on the evidence, and is consistent with  the
    IDIs, and a long line of jurisprudence.

17. Whilst  the  judge  could  have  better  articulated  her  findings  to
    incorporate an express best interests  finding,  and  provided  a  more
    concise articulation that the immigration status of the parents was not
    a significant countervailing factor,  the  matters  are  satisfactorily
    explained.

18. The reality is this was a child whose circumstances plainly fell within
    the parameters of a line of case law to the point that  the  length  of
    residence, in the context of cultural integration  as  demonstrated  by
    the long  schooling  here,  and  expected  childhood  experiences,  the
    understanding that the child's best interests are served  by  remaining
    here, and having his parents with him, follows inexorably.  That  is  a
    position which is foreshadowed in the IDI.  Although  a  best  interest
    conclusion is not determinative of  the  position  in  respect  of  the
    child's own private and family life rights, or  that  of  his  parents,
    because there may  be  countervailing  factors,  where  the  judge  has
    plainly found that there are none, not  least  because  there  are  the
    immigration control factors weighted significantly  in  favour  of  the
    adult Appellant, no further detailed articulation is required.

19. In short the decision makes perfectly clear to the Respondent  why  she
    lost this case which resulted in historic injustice.  To  come  to  the
    Upper Tribunal in this context is simply an  effort  to  argue  that  a
    sustainable conclusion should be set aside,  and  the  appeal  reheard,
    because a different structure from that adopted by  the  Respondent  in
    making her decision, and as advocated by her representative on the  day
    ought to have been adopted.

20. Having had the benefit of detailed consideration of the evidence before
    the First-tier Tribunal and having had the assistance of  both  of  the
    representatives before me confirming the immigration history,  for  all
    the reasons set out above, I too would reach  the  same  evaluation  of
    where  the  balance  between  the  public  interest  in  enforcing  the
    Immigration Rules including issues of validity of applications, and the
    private and family life rights of this family lay,  and  conclude  that
    the decision to remove is  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    Adult Appellants' private and family  life rights, as well as  that  of
    the child,  because had it not been  for  the  unreasonable  historical
    processing of the Appellant's  applications  by  the  Respondent   they
    would have  had  a  straightforward  route  to  settlement.  There  are
    compelling reasons as to why the Respondent should have  granted  leave
    to remain.

Decision

21. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  Appellants'
    appeals on Article 8 grounds reveals no error of law and stands.


Signed                              Date 21/10/2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
