
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09494/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30th October 2013                            |On 11th November 2013      |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                           LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     b S

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Jones, instructed by Bhogal Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
the claimant and his family members have been granted  anonymity  throughout
these proceedings and after  their  conclusion,  absent  any  order  to  the
contrary by the Upper  Tribunal  or  any  other  Court  seised  of  relevant
proceedings. No report  of  these  proceedings,  in  whatever  form,  either
during the proceedings or thereafter, shall directly or indirectly  identify
them or any of them. Failure to comply with  this  order  could  lead  to  a
contempt of court.


 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond allowing the  appeal
    of the claimant, an Afghan citizen, against her decision to  refuse  to
    vary his leave to enter or remain as the spouse of a person present and
    settled in the United Kingdom, pursuant to Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) and to  remove  him
    by way  of  directions  under  s.47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The Secretary of State considered that the claimant could not meet  the
    requirements of paragraph E-LTRP 3.1, 3.2 and 4.1 in Appendix  FM  (the
    financial requirements).

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond allowed the  appeal  both  under  the
    Rules and under Article 8 ECHR.

 4. The Secretary of State's challenge to his reasoning is set out  in  her
    grounds of appeal and summarised in the grant of  permission  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Roberts.

 5. At the hearing today the Secretary of State withdrew  her  case  before
    the Upper Tribunal and pursuant to Rule 17 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, we accept that withdrawal.

 6. There is accordingly  now  no  challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination, which stands.

Date:        6       November       2013                              Signed
                                    Judith Gleeson
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


