
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09624/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 March 2015                       |On 26 May 2015                       |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                dlAMEL ARIDJ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E Pipi, Counsel, Kamberley Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on 8 July 1973.  He  appears
    to have stated in an application he made to the Respondent in  December
    2013 that he most recently entered the UK in about the year  2000.   He
    did so illegally, but for the purposes of the application that  he  has
    made, and the decision upon it, that forms the context of  this  appeal
    that matters not; Metock Case C-127/08.

 2. On 15 April 2009 the Appellant applied for a  residence  card,  relying
    upon his relationship with Delya Yasmina Mazari, a citizen  of  France,
    and the Respondent duly issued him with a residence card  in  September
    of that year for five years.  There has been no attempt to revoke  that
    residence card and no attempt by the Respondent to  suggest  there  has
    been a material change in circumstances since it  was  issued  to  him;
    Ewulo [2012] UKUT 238.

 3. On 15 November 2013 the Appellant made an application for  a  residence
    card as confirmation of the fact that  he  had  a  permanent  right  of
    residence in the UK.  That application was refused on 5  February  2014
    on the basis the Respondent was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant's
    sponsor was a qualified person under Regulation 6, because she was  not
    satisfied that the sponsor had exercised treaty rights for a continuous
    period of five years.

 4. The Appellant duly sought to appeal that decision and  the  hearing  of
    his appeal came  before  Judge  Flynn  on  29  September  2014.   In  a
    Determination promulgated on 5 November 2014 the appeal  was  dismissed
    although a number of findings of  fact  were  made  upon  the  disputed
    factual  issues  in  the  Appellant's  favour.  The  Appellant   sought
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  that  decision  and
    permission was granted by Judge Hollingworth on 17 December  2014.  The
    Respondent filed a Rule 24 response on  22  January  2015  and  so  the
    matter comes before me.

 5. It is clear now, and it is agreed by both  parties,  that  Judge  Flynn
    approached the appeal on the basis that he needed to decide whether the
    Appellant was an extended family member of the sponsor under Regulation
    8(5), rather than a family member under Regulation 7(1).    Thus  Judge
    Flynn focused upon an Islamic marriage that  had  taken  place  at  the
    Lewisham Islamic Centre on 30 October 2007, and the issue of whether or
    not the Appellant and the sponsor had a  durable  relationship.  It  is
    clear now that Judge Flynn overlooked the Appellant's reliance  upon  a
    marriage effected in France on 11 December 2008. (If  such  a  marriage
    were valid under French law, then it would be recognised as such  under
    English law.) I am satisfied that the basis of the application for  the
    residence card in November 2013 was that French marriage. I derive that
    from page 31 of the application form which refers to the  existence  of
    two  different  marriages  certificate,  and  the  schedule   to   that
    application form where the documents enclosed with it were  identified.
    At item 7 the Islamic marriage certificate from 2007 is identified  and
    at item 8 the French marriage certificate from 2008 is  identified.  It
    is not therefore necessary to rely entirely upon  Mr  Pipi's  assertion
    that this was the way in which he put the  Appellant's  case  to  Judge
    Flynn, although given the content of the witness statements provided by
    both the Appellant and the sponsor, I am also satisfied  that  he  must
    have done so.

 6. It is quite clear now in my judgement that  the  application  that  was
    made in 2013 was therefore first to be considered on the basis that the
    Appellant was a family member of the sponsor, and only if he failed  in
    that assertion would the Respondent or the Tribunal  need  to  turn  to
    consider whether, despite that failure, he still fell to be treated  as
    an extended family member of the sponsor on the basis  of  the  durable
    relationship he alleged he was in with her. The reasons  given  by  the
    Respondent for the refusal of the application  take  no  point  on  the
    marriage, or whether the couple were in a  durable  relationship;  they
    focus exclusively upon the evidence provided to show that  the  sponsor
    was a qualified person.

 7. It is therefore clear in my judgement that  the  judge  overlooked  the
    French marriage certificate and approached  the  matter  on  the  wrong
    footing. Thus he fell into a material error of law,  and  his  decision
    must be set aside and remade.  Having said that, it is  agreed  between
    the parties that the findings of fact that the judge did make cover all
    of the issues of fact that were live before him, and that his  findings
    are sufficient to allow me to determine the appeal quite shortly by way
    of this extempore judgement. Both parties are in  agreement  with  that
    course.

 8. In paragraphs 30 and  31  of  the  determination  the  judge  made  the
    findings that he was satisfied that the sponsor was a qualified  person
    between early 2007 and January 2013.  That is a period of in excess  of
    five years. She was therefore by January 2013 entitled to  a  permanent
    right of residence in the UK whether or not she  had  actually  applied
    for a residence card to record, or confirm, that status. The Respondent
    has never challenged the validity of the French marriage undertaken  in
    2008 either in the decision letter of 5 February 2014 or in the  course
    of the hearing before Judge Flynn. There  was  for  example  no  cross-
    examination of the  Appellant  or  the  sponsor  by  Counsel  who  then
    appeared on behalf of the Respondent to cast doubt on the  validity  of
    that marriage certificate.

 9.  On  that  basis  the  Appellant  therefore  met  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 17(1) because he had established on the basis of the  French
    marriage that he was the family  member  of  an  EEA  national  with  a
    permanent right of residence. He  had  a  valid  passport  and  he  had
    produced that to the Respondent, and he was  able  to  prove  with  the
    French marriage certificate that he was her spouse. I note  in  passing
    that Judge Flynn accepted  that  the  couple  had  been  in  a  durable
    relationship from at least the date  in  October  2007  when  they  had
    started to cohabit and had undertaken the Islamic marriage  in  London.
    They also appear to have had children as a consequence  of  that  union
    together. Thus it was the judge accepted that  the  couple  were  in  a
    durable relationship in paragraph 34 of his determination.

10. Accordingly having set aside the decision for the reasons given  above,
    I remake the decision on the appeal so as to  allow  the  appeal  under
    Regulation 17(1).  All the other findings of fact  necessary  to  reach
    that conclusion were made by the judge and  were  not  the  subject  of
    challenge before me by either party.

Notice of decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 17.3.15

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes




To the Respondent
Fee award

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable by the Appellant.



Signed   Date 17.3.15

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

