


                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum   Chamber)                       Appeal   Number:
IA/09305/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On June 24, 2015                         |On June 26, 2015          |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR ASAD ZAMAN KHAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Parkinson (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Jafar, Counsel, instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall,  in
       the  interests  of  convenience  and  consistency,   replicate   the
       nomenclature of the decision at first instance.

    2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. The  appellant  entered  the
       United Kingdom as a student under  Tier  4  with  leave  valid  from
       August 4, 2011 until July 25, 2012. On July 25, 2012 he submitted an
       application to remain here as a Tier 4 student but this  was  deemed
       invalid. The application was re-submitted on August 31, 2012 but the
       respondent refused  this  application  on  January  24,  2012  under
       paragraph 245ZX(d) HC 395.

    3. The appellant appealed that decision  on  February  17,  2014  under
       section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.
       The matter came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Copper
       (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on January 29, 2015 and in a
       decision promulgated on February 10,  2015  he  allowed  the  appeal
       under the Immigration Rules.

    4. The respondent  lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  February  13,  2015
       submitting  the  FtTJ  had  erred  by  accepting  the  affidavit  as
       compliance with the Rules. Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Astles
       found there was an arguable error in law for the reasons raised.

    5. The matter came before me on the above date  and  the  parties  were
       represented as set out above.

    6. The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
       pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 and I see no reason to alter that order

SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR IN LAW

    7. Mr Parkinson adopted the grounds of appeal and argued the FtTJ erred
       by allowing the appeal under the Rules. The appellant had failed  to
       provide a mandatory document to prove relationship. He had  produced
       a birth certificate at the hearing but as this  was  a  points-based
       application it was quite properly not taken into  account.  However,
       the FtTJ erred by finding the Rules were met based  on  a  statement
       field by the appellant's mother. This was not a court  document  and
       even if it was construed to be one the Rules  only  provided  for  a
       court document to prove legal guardianship. This  was  not  a  legal
       guardianship case and there was an error in  law  and  the  decision
       should be remade and the case dismissed.

    8. Mr Jafar opposed the application. He argued the  FtTJ  had  rejected
       his own submissions but had allowed the appeal for  the  reasons  he
       gave in paragraph [42] onwards of his determination.  The  FtTJ  was
       satisfied the document was a court document  and  it  contained  the
       required information and  as  the  respondent  had  considered  this
       document with the application the FtTJ was  entitled  to  allow  the
       appeal as he did.

    9. Mr Parkinson referred me to paragraph 13B(a)(iii) of Appendix  C  of
       the Immigration Rules that makes clear that the court  document  had
       to be a document that named his legal guardian. The affidavit was  a
       statement made by the appellant's mother and  it  was  not  a  court
       document that  named  her  as  his  legal  guardian.  The  specified
       evidence required by paragraph [13] and [13B] of Appendix C was  not
       provided with the  application  and  the  appeal  should  have  been
       dismissed.

   10. I reserved my decision.

CONSIDERATION AND FINDING ON MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

   11. In considering whether there has been an error I  remind  myself  of
       the grounds of appeal and the reason permission was given.

   12. Paragraph 13 and 13B of Appendix C set out what documents are needed
       to prove funds are available and who is able to provide those funds.
       It is common ground that the appellant  did  not  submit  his  birth
       certificate with his application.

   13. The FtTJ was aware of the law as he set the  law  out  in  paragraph
       [26] of his determination and he then set out the various arguments.
       Mr Jafar's argument argued that the  passport  and  other  documents
       contained the relevant information and the FtTJ accepted part of his
       argument but rejected his submission  at  paragraph  [41]  that  the
       passport satisfied the Rules.

   14. Mr Parkinson is correct  when  he  submits  the  Rules  have  to  be
       complied with.  The  appellant  has  to  provide  either  his  birth
       certificate or a certificate of adoption or a court document  naming
       his legal guardian.

   15. Mr Jafar accepts the appellant did  not  provide  either  his  birth
       certificate or a certificate of  adoption  but  submits  the  FtTJ's
       findings in paragraphs [42] and [43]  explained  why  he  found  the
       Rules were met.

   16. Having considered the Rules and evidence I find there is a  material
       error. The affidavit is not a court document that names  his  mother
       as his legal guardian. The affidavit is simply a statement signed on
       oath by the appellant's mother. The court have  played  no  role  in
       this document and the  FtTJ  erred  in  finding  this  was  a  court
       document and further that paragraph 245AA of the Rules provided  any
       assistance. The appellant had the document  that  was  required  and
       failed to submit it as  required  by  the  Rules.  The  evidence  he
       adduced did not meet the mandatory requirements of the Rules and the
       respondent was under no obligation to seek any further document. The
       affidavit could never have been court document or a replacement  for
       the appellant's birth certificate.

   17. For these reasons I find there was a material error. I indicated  to
       Mr Jafar that if there were an error then in remaking the decision I
       would have to dismiss the appellant's appeal.


DECISION

   18. There was a material error. I set aside the FtTJ's  decision  and  I
       remake it by dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

Signed:
                                  Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appellant's appeal was dismissed.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
