



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/09346/2015


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 12th June 2017                        |On 16th June 2017                   |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                         MR SAMUEL OLANREWAJU BELLO
                        (NO AnoNYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Walsh instructed by Universe Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria.   Having  considered  all  the
    circumstances, I do not consider it  necessary  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Malley promulgated on 18th October 2016,  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent to refuse him a residence card as a spouse  of  an  European
    Union citizen, who is exercising treaty rights in the  UK.  In  essence
    the judge found that this was a marriage of convenience and accordingly
    that the appellant did not meet the requirements of the Regulations.

 3. By a decision of 13th  April  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Landes
    granted permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  granting
    permission there was no  restriction  on  the  grounds  that  could  be
    argued. Thus the matter appeared before me to determine  in  the  first
    instance whether or not there was an  error  in  law  in  the  original
    determination.

 4. The appellant is a Nigerian national, who entered the United Kingdom on
    30 April 2008 under a visit visa. The visa was valid until 17 September
    2008. After that date the appellant did not have leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom. It is suggested  that  the  appellant  sought  to  make
    attempts to regularise his status in the United Kingdom from the end of
    2013. He appears to have made applications on human rights grounds  but
    those applications appear to have been refused.

 5.  On 10 November 2014 the appellant married Magdalena  Anna  Marek,  now
    Mrs Bello, a Polish national, who was and is exercising  treaty  rights
    in the United Kingdom. It appears that  the  appellant  had  sought  to
    marry Ms Marek on a previous occasion in 2013 but he was prevented from
    doing so by Immigration Officials.

 6. On 18 November 2014 the appellant applied for a residence card  as  the
    spouse of an EU citizen, who was exercising treaty rights in the United
    Kingdom. The appellant and Mrs Bello attended marriage interviews on 11
    February 2015.

 7. By decision made  on  19  February  2015  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellant a residence card. In refusing the application the  respondent
    pointed out that  there  were  significant  discrepancies  between  the
    answers given in interview by the appellant  and  those  given  by  Mrs
    Bello. Some of the discrepancies are set out within the refusal letter.



 8. The appellant appealed against the decision. The appeal  was  heard  in
    the First-tier Tribunal and  dismissed.  The  appellant  now  seeks  to
    appeal against that decision.  The  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal assert :

      a) There was no question as to the formal validity  of  the  marriage.
         The respondent could only justify investigating whether this was  a
         marriage of convenience where she had reasonable doubts as  to  the
         right of the appellant to a residence card and there  were  grounds
         for  such  reasonable  doubts.  In  accordance  with  the  case  of
         Papajorgi  (EEA spouse - marriage of  convenience)  Greece   [2012]
         UKUT 00038 as nothing in the application raised such grounds  there
         was no justification for the respondent investigating the marriage.
          At paragraph 73 the judge has  suggested  that  the  discrepancies
         provided about personal  information  and  the  difficulties  about
         language spoken were sufficient to displace that burden. Given  the
         fact that the couple were married legally and  had  lived  together
         from 2013, there was nothing to justify the shifting of the  burden
         of  proof.  In  the  circumstances  the  respondent  was  wrong  to
         investigate this is a marriage of convenience  and  thereafter  was
         wrong to put the onus on the appellant to prove  that  this  was  a
         genuine marriage.

      b) The judge in paragraph 85 has placed  a  burden  of  proof  on  the
         appellant to prove that this is not a marriage  of  convenience  on
         the balance of probabilities. It is submitted  in  accordance  with
         the case of Papajorgi the burden  on  the  appellant  was  only  an
         evidential burden and it was then for the respondent  to  prove  on
         the  balance  of  probabilities  that  this  was  a   marriage   of
         convenience.

      c) The judge erred in paragraph 80 by failing to give  any  weight  to
         the evidence of the witnesses and failing to give adequate  reasons
         for giving no weight to such evidence.

 9. Before me the appellant's representative  was  seeking  to  argue  that
    there was no justification for the respondent investigating whether  or
    not this was a marriage of convenience in the first place and that  the
    respondent  had  no  justification  for  investigating  the   marriage.
    Thereafter given all of the circumstances the respondent had failed  to
    raise sufficient grounds to shift the burden of proof.

10. The case of  Papajorgi  (EEA  spouse-marriage  of  convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 00038  (IAC)  has  been  relied  upon  by  the  appellant's
    representatives. At the end of the case is an Appendix,  in  which  the
    Commission of the European Communities has set out guidance as  to  how
    to approach the issues relating to abuse of  rights.  At  paragraph  15
    guidance is given of which the following is relevant:-

    Member States may define a set of indicative  criteria  suggesting  the
    possible intention to abuse rights conferred by the Directive  for  the
    sole  purpose  of  contravening  national  immigration  laws.  National
    authorities may in particular take into account the following factors:

      the couple have never met before their marriage;

      the couple are inconsistent about their respective personal  details,
    about  the  circumstances  of  their  first  meeting,  or  about  other
    important personal information concerning them;

      the couple do not speak a language understood by both;

    ....

      The past history of one or both of the spouses contains  evidence  of
    previous marriages of convenience or other forms of abuse and fraud  to
    acquire a right of residence;..

    The  above  criteria  should  be  considered  possible   triggers   for
    investigation  without  any  automatic  inferences  from   results   or
    subsequent investigations. Member States  may  not  rely  on  one  sole
    attribute; due attention has to be given to all  the  circumstances  of
    the individual case. The investigation may involve a separate interview
    with each of the 2 spouses.

11. The criteria did not  appear  to  be  exhaustive.  From  the  facts  as
    presented it was evident  that  the  couple  did  not  speak  a  common
    language. Whilst it was noted that the  couple  had  met  before  their
    marriage, and indeed on the judge's findings had been  living  together
    from 2013 onwards, the appellant had entered the United Kingdom in 2008
    and have merely stayed without lawful leave or  without  being  in  any
    relationship that would have entitled him to remain until 2013.

12. Given the circumstances there was sufficient  within  the  evidence  to
    justify  the  respondent  questioning  whether  this  was   a   genuine
    relationship and to investigate by asking that the parties  attend  for
    marriage interviews.

13. I would note the cases of Papajorgi and the case of Collins Agho [2015]
    EWCA  Civ  1198  both  of  which  were  relied  on  by  the   appellant
    representatives. The cases were decided under the regulations  as  they
    appeared prior to January 2014.

14. The Regulations have altered. Within the refusal  letter  reference  is
    been  made  to  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  as  amended
    specifically Regulation 20B, which states: -

    20 B 1) this regulation applies when the Secretary of State-

    a) has reasonable doubt as to whether a person ("A")  has  a  right  to
    reside under regulation 14 (1) or (2) ; or

    b) wants to verify the eligibility of  a  person  ("A")  to  apply  for
    documentation issued under Part 3

    2) The Secretary of State may invite A to -

    a) provide evidence to support the existence of the right to reside, or
    to support an application for documentation under Part 3, or

    b) attend an interview with the Secretary of State

    3) If A purports to be entitled to a right to reside on  the  basis  of
    the relationship with another person ("B"), the Secretary of State  may
    invite B to

    a) provide information about their relationship with A; or

    b) attend an interview with the Secretary of State .

15. On the basis of the regulations as they now appear, the  respondent  is
    entitled where an individual is applying under part 3 for  a  residence
    document to conduct an investigation to verify whether  the  individual
    is entitled to a residence card. The regulations  as  they  now  appear
    seem to go further than originally appeared in the directives.

16. However as indicated above the respondent had  sufficient  grounds  for
    conducting   an   investigation   given   the   appellant's    personal
    circumstances including his immigration history and given the fact that
    the parties did not share a common language.

17. The 2nd ground of appeal suggests that the judge was wrong to place the
    burden upon the appellant to prove that this  was  not  a  marriage  of
    convenience. The judge in paragraph 46 and  47  has  set  out  material
    parts of the judgment  in  the  case  of  Papajorgi  and  has  properly
    identified how  judges  should  approach  the  burden  of  proof.   The
    appellant's representative accepted that the judge has  properly  cited
    the legal principles laid down in the case law.

18. The judge makes a specific finding in  paragraph  85  that  this  is  a
    marriage of convenience. The judge in  the  paragraphs  running  up  to
    paragraph 85 has given valid reasons for finding that the appellant and
    his spouse have acted dishonestly, given testimony which they  knew  to
    be untrue in an effort to bolster the appellant's  claim.  The  sponsor
    had even acknowledged in giving evidence that she had lied to the  Home
    Office (see paragraph 24).

19. The judge has properly applied the guidance in the  case  law  and  has
    properly approached the issues as to where the burden of proof lay  and
    in what circumstances the burden of proof shifted. It is clear that the
    judge has made a clear and unequivocal finding that this was a marriage
    of convenience. The judge has properly justified that conclusion.

20. Finally it is suggested that the judge has erred in his approach to the
    evidence of the appellants witnesses. The judge has in paragraph 80  of
    the decision indicated that the appellant's friends  gave  evidence  in
    support of the appeal. It is suggested that  the  judge  has  given  no
    valid reasons for not giving weight to the evidence.

21. First and foremost the matter of weight to be applied  to  evidence  is
    entirely a matter for the judge.

22. Secondly one has to consider the nature of the evidence  given  by  the
    individuals. The judge had noted that one of  the  witnesses  had  been
    present at the wedding but lived some distance away although  allegedly
    they saw the appellant and his spouse at weekends.  The  other  witness
    lived 15 or 16 miles away  from  the  appellant  and  his  spouse.  The
    evidence of the individuals did not give any detail or substance to the
    claim that this was  a  genuine  marriage  merely  asserted  that  they
    believed it to be a genuine marriage. In the light of  that  the  judge
    was entitled to give  their  evidence  such  weight  as  he  considered
    appropriate. He examined the  circumstances  in  which  they  knew  the
    appellant and gave a valid reason in  respect  of  each  case  for  not
    giving significant weight to the evidence.

23. In the circumstances the judge was entitled to deal with their evidence
    in the manner that he did.

24. For the reasons set out there is no error of law. I uphold the decision
    of first-tier Tribunal Judge.

Notice of Decision


25. I dismiss the appeal by the Appellant.


Signed      Date 15.6.17



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

