
IAC-AH-LEM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09186/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15 December 2014                             |On 22 December 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                         MR SAGAR GIRISHBHAI THANKI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Esen Tufan, Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Duff sitting at North Shields  on  22  April
    2014) dismissing on the papers his appeal against the decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to grant him leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant, and his  appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's concomitant decision to  make  directions  for
    his removal under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality
    Act 2006.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction,
    and I do not consider that such  a  direction  is  required  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national  of  India,  whose  date  of  birth  is  12
    December 1989.  He first arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  8  October
    2010 in possession of a student visa which conferred upon him leave  to
    enter until 30 March 2012.  He was granted leave to remain as a student
    from 17 October 2012 until 23 August 2013.

 3. The appellant applied for an extension  of  stay  as  a  student,  just
    before his current student  leave  expired.   He  wished  to  follow  a
    diploma in health care management at Vista Business College in Hounslow
    from 16 September 2013 until 12 February 2015.

 4. According to Home Office records, on 7 October 2013  UK  Border  Agency
    decided to revoke  the  licence  of  Vista  Business  College.   Again,
    according to Home Office records, on 21 November 2013 the  Home  Office
    sent a letter dated 21 November 2013 to the appellant at the address in
    London E7 given on his  application  form.   He  was  informed  of  the
    decision to revoke the licence of Vista Business College on  7  October
    2013, which meant that the CAS that he submitted with  his  outstanding
    application was no longer valid.  But before a final decision was made,
    the Home Office had suspended consideration of his  application  for  a
    period of 60 calendar days.  During the 60-day period, it was  open  to
    him to withdraw his application or submit  a  fresh  application  in  a
    different category or to leave the United Kingdom.  Enclosed  with  the
    letter was a certified copy of his passport.  If he decided to obtain a
    new CAS, then his sponsor would need to see and retain this copy.

 5. On 3 February 2014 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing
    the application.  The Tier 4 sponsor register had been  checked  on  27
    January 2014, but Vista Business College was  not  listed  as  of  that
    date.  This was also the case on 3 February 2014.  On 21 November  2013
    he had been informed of the revocation of the licence of Vista Business
    College, and he had been allowed 60 days to obtain a  new  sponsor  and
    CAS.  But he had not provided a new CAS within that 60-day period.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on the ground that he
    had not received any letter from the Home Office giving him 60 days  to
    submit a new CAS.

 7. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Duff to be determined  on  the
    papers,  as  the  appellant   had   requested.    In   his   subsequent
    determination, Judge Duff said there had  been  no  unfairness  to  the
    appellant.  For even if he did not receive an original letter dated  21
    November 2013 giving him 60 days to obtain a new sponsor  and  CAS,  it
    was clear that he had ample opportunity since he received  the  refusal
    letter to obtain a new sponsor and CAS, and he had  failed  to  do  so.
    The refusal letter was dated 3 February 2014  and  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal the appellant stated he received it on  5  February  2014.   The
    case had been listed for hearing on 22 April 2014 and the appellant had
    filed no evidence to suggest that, even now, he had found a new sponsor
    and CAS.  This was a period of  over  60  days  since  receipt  of  the
    refusal letter.  Had the appellant filed any such  evidence,  he  would
    have considered it proper to take it into  account,  on  the  basis  of
    common law fairness.  But as no such evidence had been  filed,  it  was
    clear that the appellant had failed to demonstrate  that  he  satisfied
    the requirements of  the  Rules,  and  accordingly  the  case  must  be
    dismissed.

The Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8.  Permission  to  appeal  was  initially  refused,  but  on  a   renewed
    application to the Upper Tribunal permission was granted on 3  November
    2014 by Judge Kekic for the following reasons:

         Although the grounds cover eleven pages, they essentially make just
         two points: that the respondent withdrew the sponsor's licence  but
         the appellant did not receive the  letter  from  the  Secretary  of
         State giving him 60 days to  find  another  sponsor  and  that  the
         judge's approach to the matter of the letter and the 60-day  policy
         was flawed.

         In the absence of any evidence from the respondent  of  the  letter
         sent to the appellant with regard to the 60 days granted to  enable
         him to find another sponsor, it is arguable that the judge erred in
         his approach.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 9. At the hearing before  me,  Mr  Tufan  produced  the  letter  dated  21
    November 2013 referred to  in  the  refusal  letter.   The  letter  was
    addressed to the appellant at the address which he  had  given  in  his
    application form, and it is the same address as that used by  the  Home
    Office to communicate  the  letter  of  refusal  to  the  appellant  in
    February 2014.

10. Mr Tufan also produced a print-out  from  the  Home  Office  electronic
    database showing that on 21 November 2013 an  entry  was  made  on  the
    database with respect to the appellant.  His  case  did  not  fall  for
    refusal but would fall for curtailment as his application was in  time.
    All the documents had been photocopied and originals  returned  to  the
    appellant.  The passport and BRP had been  photocopied,  and  originals
    kept on file.  ICD4499 and 4500 had  been  produced  and  sent  to  the
    applicant at the address given for him in the application.

Discussion

11. Judge Duff's treatment of the common law unfairness claim  is  arguably
    inadequate.  As argued in the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,
    the absence of a Patel permission letter would make it very  difficult,
    if not impossible, for the appellant to obtain a  new  CAS  and  a  new
    sponsor.  So the failure  by  the  appellant  to  file  evidence  of  a
    successful attempt to find a new CAS and new sponsor between  the  date
    of decision and the date of the hearing was not something  which  could
    weigh against him.

12. However I do not consider that a material error of  law  is  made  out.
    The burden at all material times rested with the appellant to prove his
    case on common law unfairness, and he did not seek  to  discharge  this
    burden.  It was not enough for him merely to assert by  way  of  appeal
    that he had not received the permission letter.  It  was  incumbent  on
    him to file evidence which sustained this assertion.  Not only did  the
    appellant not file  any  evidence  on  this  discrete  issue,  but  the
    appellant also did not file any evidence to show that  he  had  at  all
    material times been ignorant of the fact that the college had  had  its
    licence revoked, and he had thereby been deprived of the opportunity of
    requesting a permission letter before the Secretary  of  State  made  a
    decision on his application.

13. It was not part of the appellant's case by way of appeal  that  he  was
    not aware of the revocation of the college's licence on 7 October 2013.
     He thus had ample time before the ultimate refusal decision to request
    a permission letter from the Home Office to enable him to  find  a  new
    sponsor and obtain a new CAS.  If he knew about the revocation  of  the
    college's licence, he had no excuse for sitting on his hands until  the
    inevitable refusal of his pending application.  Thus, even if  it  were
    true that he had not received the permission letter  sent  in  November
    2013, it did not follow that the subsequent  refusal  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State was not in accordance with the law.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appellant's claim  on
common unfairness grounds (as well as under the Rules) did  not  contain  an
error of law, and the decision stands.  This appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.



Signed        Date 15 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

