

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/09720/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|on 20 October 2016                         |on 24th October 2016           |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                AFSAR SALEEM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Maleqe, of Leonards, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  India,  born  on  12  April  1992.   She
    appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boyd,
    dismissing her appeal against refusal of further leave to remain on the
    basis of her family and private life in the UK.

 2. The appellant was granted leave to remain in  the  UK  on  11  December
    2013, valid until 13 January 2015, as the dependent of her husband.  He
    does not appear to have been originally to have been a UK citizen,  but
    to have become one at some date after the application leading to  these
    proceedings.  At that time the couple had two children, born on 19 June
    2012 and 20 October 2013, who at that time were nationals of India  but
    not of the UK. In course of these proceedings the children (who did not
    appeal against refusal of  their  concurrent  applications)  became  UK
    citizens. There is now also a third child of the family,  who  is  also
    (or is entitled to become) a UK citizen.

 3. The respondent refused the appellant's application for reasons set  out
    in a letter dated 3 March 2015.

 4. The material produced by the appellant is not summarised or analysed in
    the letter, but the decision proceeds on the basis  that  she  did  not
    present the specified evidence to meet the financial requirements  with
    her application.  The appellant does not seem to have disputed that.

 5. The application fell also to be reused for non-production  of  a  valid
    English language certificate.

 6. The respondent  considers  paragraph  EX1.  It  is  accepted  that  the
    appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  her  "settled
    partner", but there are no insurmountable obstacles or very significant
    difficulties to their continuing family life together outside  the  UK.
    The children were born in UK but no evidence has been provided that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect them to leave the  UK,  "especially  as
    part of the family unit".

 7. In terms of her private life, there were no very significant  obstacles
    to the appellant's reintegration into India.

 8. The position of the children was found not to meet the requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the rules.

 9. The respondent took account of the best interests of the children under
    reference to section 55 of the 2009  Act,  but  no  evidence  had  been
    provided to show that they might not live in India.

10. There were no exceptional circumstances qualifying for a grant of leave
    outside the rules.

11. In her grounds of appeal  to  the  FtT  the  appellant  said  that  the
    respondent "failed to properly consider" her rights under article 8  of
    the ECHR, "failed to properly apply" the immigration rules, "failed  to
    properly consider the best  interests  of  the  child",  and  that  the
    decision was "not in accordance with the law... and against the  weight
    of the evidence".

12. The respondent's decision is on its face watertight, and those  grounds
    are vague. They  contain  nothing  whereby  the  appellant  might  have
    expected success either by reference  to  the  rules,  or  outside  the
    rules.

13. The hearing in the FtT took place on 30 July 2015.  The  appellant  and
    her husband gave oral evidence.  After  the  hearing,  the  appellant's
    representatives provided evidence of the registration of the two  older
    children as UK citizens on 30 July 2015.  The judge had been told  that
    such applications were pending.

14. It appears that for some  time  thereafter  the  judge  was  unable  to
    complete the decision. The appellant's representatives in the  meantime
    sought rehearing, but this did not take place. The judge's decision  is
    dated 18 April 2016.

15. The judge found (correctly) that as to the financial limits  he  should
    take account of the  situation  at  the  date  of  decision,  when  the
    children were UK nationals. The evidence of income presented to him was
    not entirely clear, but even taking the best available view  of  it  he
    found the appellant to fall short of showing the  required  income.  He
    observed that the appellant might now be able to provide  the  required
    evidence in a fresh application. He did not find any  reason  to  grant
    the appeal under article 8, outside the rules.

16. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the UT are headed firstly "delay".
    This is said in itself  to  render  the  determination  unsafe  and  to
    require a fresh hearing.

17. The second heading of the grounds of appeal is "the best  interests  of
    the child". The judge is said to  have  failed  to  consider  the  best
    interests of one of the children, being British,  and  his  ability  to
    "utilise  services  such  as  the  NHS  available  ...  as  a   British
    nationality". The complaint is also made that  the  judge  "improperly"
    referred to the child being "returned" or  "removed"  which  could  not
    happen  due  to  the  child's  British  nationality  at  the  date   of
    promulgation of the determination.

18. The third heading in the grounds is "maintenance calculation - appendix
    FM". The said that the judge  having  accepted  post  hearing  evidence
    failed  to  place  weight  upon  it,  and  that  this  was   of   great
    significance, as the judge's assessment "would take the appellant to  a
    position where she would qualify... with ease".

19. (This ground rests on the underlying assumptions that amounts no longer
    need be added for the children, being British, and that  the  appellant
    could succeed by  showing  that  although  her  application  could  not
    succeed at the time it was made, she was at the date of the hearing  in
    a position to meet the  different  criteria  governing  an  application
    hypothetically made at that date.)

20. In a written response under rule 24 to  the  grant  of  permission  the
    respondent says that when read in the  round  it  is  plain  the  judge
    reached reasoned conclusions that the appellant, her husband  and  very
    young British citizen children might relocate  to  India  and  maintain
    family life there; the language  was  clumsy  but  the  thrust  of  the
    reasoning was clear and disclosed no material error in law.

21. Having  heard  from  both  representatives,  I  indicated  that  I  was
    satisfied that the decision does not err in any point of law such as to
    require it to be set aside.

22. It is unfortunate that there was a long delay, and that no  explanation
    for it was provided.  However, there is nothing to  disclose  that  but
    for the delay the outcome might have been any different.

23. There is a slip by the judge in referring to return of the children  to
    India and to their removal, when by the time the decision was issued no
    such enforcement could take place, as they were  UK  citizens.   Again,
    however, that makes no difference to the outcome.

24. An appeal to the FtT is not conducted against an ever shifting  target,
    or as if it were an ongoing process of application to the respondent.

25. In general, applications under the relevant part of the rules  have  to
    be accompanied by the evidence to support them, specified by the  rules
    in detail.  There is no free ranging opportunity to improve or  perfect
    applications in course of an appeal, or to succeed by showing that  the
    rules might be met at some later date.  Nor did the appellant show that
    even on further evidence she was able to satisfy the rules.

26. The appellant could not bring herself within the rules on financial and
    on language aspects, and there was nothing to justify a finding that  a
    family all of Indian extraction and nationality might not reasonably be
    expected to return to India.

27. There was at the date of the hearing (although not then established  by
    evidence before the judge)  a  clear  possibility  that  under  shortly
    pending circumstances the appellant might be able to apply  again  with
    good prospects of success under the rules.  That, however,  is  a  good
    reason for refusing the appeal outside the rules, not for allowing  it.
    There can be no disproportionate interference with family  and  private
    life where a party may apply and succeed under  the  rules.   In  other
    words, there is no human right not to make the proper application.   If
    the appellant has a remedy, that is where it lies.

28. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

29. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            20 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




