
IAC-HX-MC/12-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09916/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 4th December 2014                     |On 18th December 2014     |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr adwoa afriyie
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Background to this Appeal

 1. The respondent applied for a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  the
    right to reside in the United Kingdom as the spouse of an EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  That  application  was
    refused and the respondent's appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Beg on 21st July 2014.  In a decision promulgated on  6th  August
    2014 the appeal was allowed.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal arguing that  the  judge  had
    made a material misdirection of law in  failing  to  follow  and  apply
    Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024.  The grounds  were
    in the following terms:

         "Ground one: Making a material misdirection of law

         3.   The decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]  UKUT
             00024 (IAC) was promulgated on 16 January 2014.  This decision
             provides important guidance as  to  how  the  Tribunal  should
             determine whether a marriage has been properly contracted.

         4.    At  [6]  the  appellant's  representative  claims  that   the
             Secretary of State has misapplied the Ghanaian Registration of
             Marriages Act; that the appellant has complied with  the  Act.
             Further, that there was no need to  consider  the  Matrimonial
             laws of France since she satisfies Ghanaian law.

         5.   This is incorrect.  The law on proxy marriages  involving  EEA
             nationals has been clarified by two upper  Tribunal  decisions
             in recent times: Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT
             24, published on 23 January 2014) and TA  and  Others  (Kareem
             explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (ICA), published on 14 July
             2014.  Kareem states that in cases concerning proxy  marriages
             and EEA rights, the crucial question is whether the country of
             the EEA nationality recognises such marriages;

         6.   At [16] Kareem finds that -

             '...we start from the fact that the rights  of  free  movement
             and residence stem directly from Union citizenship.  According
             to the Treaties, a person having the nationality of  a  Member
             State is a Union citizen.  It follows  from  these  provisions
             that a Union citizen's rights of free movement  and  residence
             are intrinsically linked to that  person's  nationality  of  a
             Member State.  Judgments of the CJEU indicate that where there
             are issues of EU law that  involve  the  nationality  laws  of
             Member States, then the law that applies will be  the  law  of
             the Member State  of  nationality  and  not  the  host  Member
             State...This  is  because  nationality  remains   within   the
             competence of the individual Member States'.

         7.    Accordingly,  in  determining  whether   the   marriage   was
             contracted, the Immigration Judge ought to have turned to  the
             law of the Member State of France as the  appellant's  claimed
             family member is a French national [6];

         8.   Kareem further notes that -

             '...A lack of evidence of relevant foreign law  will  normally
             mean that the party with the burden of proving it  will  fail'
             [14];

         9.   In this case, no finding was made that  any  evidence  of  the
             relevant foreign  law  was  provided  by  the  appellant.   In
             failing to provide evidence of the relevant foreign  law,  the
             appellant has failed to satisfy the required burden;

         10.  In accordance with Kareem, the Immigration Judge  was  obliged
             to consider French law in determining this case.   Failure  to
             do so amounts to a material misdirection of law;

         11.  Permission to appeal is respectfully sought;

         12.  An oral hearing is requested"

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on
    6th November 2014 thus the matter came before me to  determine  whether
    the decision of Judge Beg contains an error of law.

 4. The respondent did not attend  the  appeal  hearing  nor  did  he  file
    submissions in response to the application for  permission  to  appeal.
    No further evidence was heard from the respondent.

The Decision of Judge Beg

 5. The core findings of Judge Beg with regard to the customary marriage in
    Ghana is set out at paragraphs 7 to 12 which I set out below:

         "7.  The Home Office is wrong to state that this type  of  marriage
             in Ghana was governed by PNDC law 112, Customary Marriage  and
             Divorce (Registration) Law 1985.  The  1985  Act  governs  the
             Registration of the Marriage and not the marriage itself which
             take place under traditional custom and  the  parties  do  not
             have to be present.

         8.   The  Appellant  submit  that  the  Home  Office  have  imputed
             essential conditions into the Customary Marriage  and  Divorce
             (Registration) Law 1985  which  are  not  within  the  Statute
             itself.  If the Parliament of Ghana had intended that Ghanaian
             marriages should only be between two Ghanaians the  Parliament
             would have stated that in  the  Act.   The  1985  Act  do  not
             categorically state that customary marry could only be validly
             contracted between two Ghanaians and it is inconceivable  that
             any country would statutorily stop its nationals from marrying
             foreign national.

         The essentials of  a  valid  Ghanaian  Customary  marriage  are  as
             follows:-

         (a)  agreement by the parties to get together as man and wife
         (b)  consent of the families of the man and woman to the marriage
         (c)  consummation of the marriage

         As held in the Ghanaian Court of Appeal in Asumah v Khar (1959) GLR
         353, the procedure is that where a man desire to marry, he  applies
         to the woman's family for consent taking to  them  customary  gift.
         If the family gives their consent by accepting the gift and  drink,
         that concludes a valid marriage under customary law.
         The giving and acceptance of the customary drink and  gift  usually
         takes place at a marriage ceremony attended by  both  the  paternal
         and maternal members and friends of both  prospective  husband  and
         wife.  The man or woman or both may or may not be  present  at  the
         ceremony.  In fact their presence is not necessary at the ceremony.
           The  customary  drinks  are  received  and  customary  rites  are
         performed at the ceremony in the presence of or with the consent of
         the families of both the prospective husband and wife.

         In Ghana customary marriage is legally valid without  registration,
         the couple being considered  legally  married  when  the  customary
         marriage is consummated.  One characteristic of customary  marriage
         is that it allows polygamy thus it allows the  man  to  marry  more
         than one woman.

         The customary marriage may be registered for record purposes only.

         Under the PNDC Law 112  in  Ghana,  a  customary  marriage  may  be
         registered and a Customary Law Marriage  Certificate  issued  under
         PNDC 112 to the couple.

         9.   That the Customary Marriage  and  Divorce  (Registration)  Law
             1985  makes  provisions  for  the  registration  of  customary
             marriage and that the law does not govern  Ghanaian  Customary
             marriages as  stated  by  the  UK  Border  Agency.   Customary
             marriages are governed by the Tribal Custom.

         10.  The Appellant submitted that the  UK  Border  Agency  has  the
             whole status  from  which  they  cited  the  above  quotation,
             Section 4(1) of the  same  statute  as  amended  by  Customary
             Marriages and Divorce (Registration)  (Amendment)  Law,  1991,
             states  that  'The  Registrar,  shall,  upon  receipt  of   an
             application for the registration of a  marriage  register  the
             marriage and shall by notice in the form set out in the second
             schedule to this Law notify the public of the marriage.'

         11.  The Appellant submit that the marriage was conducted under the
             customary law and subsequently registered under the  Customary
             Marriage and  Divorce  (Registration)  Law,  1985.   That  the
             marriage ceremony is separate from  the  registration  of  the
             said marriage.

         12.  Section 13 of the statute states that 'in  any  proceedings  a
             true copy of the entry in the  register  certified  under  the
             hand of the Registrar  shall  be  admissible  in  evidence  as
             sufficient proof  of  the  registration  of  the  marriage  or
             dissolution of the marriage.  The statutory declaration is  in
             support of the application.  Upon submitting  the  application
             for registration  of  marriage  the  Registrar  makes  further
             enquiries to satisfy him or herself that the requirements have
             been met before issuing the marriage certificate."

 6. The Tribunal in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT  00024
    (IAC) have given guidance concerning the marriage of an EEA national to
    a non-EEA national.  In particular  the  Tribunal  has  indicated  that
    where there is doubt that a marriage certificate has been issued  by  a
    Competent Authority then the marital  relationship  may  be  proved  by
    other evidence.  This will require the Tribunal to determine whether  a
    marriage was contracted.  In such an appeal the starting point will  be
    to decide whether a marriage was contracted between the  appellant  and
    the qualified person according to the national law of the  EEA  country
    of  the  qualified  person's  nationality.   The   qualified   person's
    nationality in this appeal is French.  The Tribunal  have  gone  on  to
    note that it should be assumed that without  independent  and  reliable
    evidence about the recognition of the marriage under the  laws  of  the
    EEA country and/or the country  where  the  marriage  took  place,  the
    Tribunal is likely to be unable to find that  sufficient  evidence  has
    been provided to discharge the burden of  proof.   Mere  production  of
    legal materials from the EEA country or country where the marriage took
    place will be insufficient evidence because they will rarely  show  how
    such law is understood or applied in those countries.  Mere  assertions
    as to the effect of such laws  will,  for  similar  reasons,  carry  no
    weight.

 7. In this case as can be seen from the decision from which I have set out
    the key parts from above, Judge Beg did not take  into  account  Kareem
    (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC).  Had he done  so  I
    am satisfied that he could not have concluded that  the  appellant  and
    the qualified person had shown they had  contracted  a  valid  marriage
    recognised by the laws of  France  which  was  a  requirement  for  the
    marriage to be recognised in the United Kingdom.

 8. For all of these reasons I am satisfied that the judge erred in law for
    the reasons set out in the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal.   In
    the circumstances I set aside the decision and remake the  decision  by
    dismissing the appeal.

Conclusions

 9. The judge made an error of law and the decision is set aside.

10. I remake the decision dismissing the appeal.



Signed        15 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge E B Grant

