
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09114/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th September 2014                          |On 26th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          Miss MICHELLE NICOLE JOHN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Frankish, promulgated on 3rd June 2014, following  a  hearing  at
    Bennett House on 20th  May  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  Michelle  Nicole   John.    The   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Antigua and  Barbuda,  who  was
    born on 14th June 1994 (being 19 years  of  age  at  the  time  of  the
    determination of Judge Frankish).  She appeals against the  refusal  of
    her application for indefinite leave to remain in the UK, that decision
    having been made by the Secretary of State on 29th January 2014.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that although she arrived in the UK on  a  six
    month visa on 30th June 2013, and  then  subsequently  overstayed  this
    visa, she has family life rights in the UK, which she enjoys  with  her
    mother, Joycelyn All-John, and other family members  in  this  country.
    She is a British overseas citizen (BOC), and  although  she  holds  the
    citizenship of  Antigua  and  Barbuda  (which  are  independent  former
    colonies of the UK), she has lived her entire life with her  mother  in
    Montserrat (which is a British colonial territory)  and  of  which  she
    holds a British Overseas Citizenship passport.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge heard evidence from the  Appellant's  close  family  members.
    They consisted of the mother, Joycelyn All-John (see para 7), her aunt,
    Petra Greenway, and her maternal grandmother, Daphne Allen.  All  these
    individuals were  also  present  in  the  courtroom  before  me  today.
    Additionally,  the  judge   heard   evidence   from   the   Appellant's
    schoolteacher, Miss Katie Mason, and the report from her neurologist Dr
    Esmaell Nikfekn.  There was also evidence from others.

 5. On at least two occasions, the judge made it clear that  "there  is  no
    dispute about the facts of the case" (see para 4, para 15).  The  judge
    then made his findings.  He first considered the Immigration Rules.  He
    observed that removal directions were to the country of the Appellant's
    nationality, namely, Antigua and Barbuda.  He noted that "the Appellant
    has only been in Antigua, which has a better hospital, to be born,  the
    rest of her life being in Montserrat" (para  16).   He  then  observed,
    however, that the Appellant, "has obviously tricked her way into the UK
    with her visit visa by persuading the Respondent that she  intended  to
    return" (para 17) but never doing so.

 6. The Appellant's mother had left  Montserrat,  after  her  father  died,
    leaving the Appellant and her siblings  behind,  who  subsequently  all
    joined her.  There are various  appeals  with  respect  to  the  others
    against decisions of the Secretary of State.

 7. Nevertheless, the judge considered the Immigration Rules  and  observed
    that with respect to paragraph  276ADE,  what  was  relevant  was  para
    276ADE(vi) because this refers to a person who is

         "Aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for  less
         than twenty years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  has
         no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country  to
         which he would have to go if required to leave the UK" (see para 19
         of the determination).

 8. The judge noted that "Mr Sellwood contended that  the  Appellant  falls
    under sub-paragraph (vi) above.  I agree.  My reasons for so concluding
    are as follows ..."

 9. The judge then goes on to explain how the Appellant has "no  connection
    with Antigua and Barbuda" and that it was relevant that

         "Some three-quarters of  the  population  of  that  territory  have
         already been admitted to the UK, leaving only some 5,000 souls none
         of which are relatives of the Appellant.  Here, she has her  entire
         and substantial extended family.  These factors put an end  to  her
         family, social and cultural ties to her  homeland  of  a  bare  few
         miles of habitable circumference" (para 20).

10. Having considered the Rules, the judge then went  on  to  consider  the
    Appellant's human rights situation and considered  she  was  given  two
    ECHR Article 8 rights.  The judge set out the case law referring to  MM
    [2013] EWHC 1900 and to Nagre [2013] EWHC  720,  and  to  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2012] UKUT 00393.  The judge then held that,

         "It could be said that the Rules have not been correctly applied by
         failing to allow for compelling circumstances.  It  could  be  said
         that the Rules do not cover the situation and that it is  necessary
         to step outside to consider Article 8 jurisprudence.   Either  way,
         the Article 8 guidance is supportive of the Appellant  through  her
         wider connection to the family  including  consideration  of  their
         interests under Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39.   She  has  close  ties
         with her family and none in what is left of her island in terms  of
         Huang (2007) UKHL 11 ..." (para 22).

    Finally, the Razgar principles were  applied  (see  para  24)  and  the
    appeal was allowed on the basis that the balance of considerations fell
    in favour of the Appellant.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state that the  judge  has  failed  to  give
    proper consideration to Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 which  makes  it  clear
    that the Rules are a complete code and  that  compelling  circumstances
    have to be identified.

12. The Appellant had spent all her life in Montserrat until her arrival in
    the UK on 30th June 2013 and it was wrong for the judge to say that she
    had no ties there.

13. On 23rd June 2014 permission to appeal was granted.

14. Unusually, there was a sound and comprehensive Rule  24  response  from
    the Appellant, in the words of Mr Sellwood, on 10th July 2014, to which
    I have given due regard.




Submissions

15. At the hearing before me, Mr  Richards,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent, stated that he would rely upon the Grounds of  Appeal.   He
    also explained that the determination did not make clear how the appeal
    was allowed in terms of findings on private and family life.  The judge
    had simply said there  were  no  ties  left  with  Montserrat  but  the
    Appellant had until recently lived in Montserrat.  The judge had failed
    to apply the five-step approach in  Razgar,  choosing  simply  to  cite
    Razgar in the last paragraph of the determination.   No  findings  were
    actually made in terms of the  existence  of  family  life.   A  proper
    proportionality exercise had not been carried out.  There was therefore
    a material error of law.  I should set aside the determination.

16. For his part, Mr Sellwood submitted that  exactly  that  which  it  was
    claimed had not been done, had indeed been done, and that one only  had
    only to look at his Rule 24 response which made this clear.  First, the
    judge had made it clear that the Immigration Rules are a complete  code
    because he had cited MF (Nigeria) at paragraph 21 of the determination.
     He had determined the matter under the Immigration  Rules  first  (see
    paras 19 to 22) before stepping outside  them.   Second,  he  had  made
    findings that there were "compelling circumstances" (see paras  22  and
    23) when looking at  the  Article  8  situation.   Third,  the  removal
    directions were to Antigua  and  Barbuda,  the  country  of  which  the
    Appellant was a national, and yet  this  was  a  county  in  which  the
    Appellant had never lived, having lived all  her  life  in  Montserrat.
    The removal directions were not to Montserrat.   The  judge  took  that
    into account.  These were  exceptional  features  and  the  judge  made
    reference to them.  Finally, insofar as it is said that the judge  took
    into account immaterial matters, these are not specified, but the judge
    very comprehensively and properly took account of the  family  dynamics
    and explained in detail what the background  Article  8  considerations
    were.  Insofar as reference was made to the fact that the Appellant had
    "obviously tricked her way into the  UK,"  this  had  been  taken  into
    account, but had been treated as a less than decisive  factor,  in  the
    light of the fact that the Appellant's mother, with whom she had  lived
    all her life, was in the UK, and her siblings  were  in  the  UK.   The
    mother was a British citizen and was able to come into the  UK  on  the
    basis of her British citizenship passport.  The siblings were not.  And
    they still had their appeals to  run.   Nevertheless,  the  family  was
    together in this country.

No Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA [2007]) such that I should set aside this  decision.   My  reasons
    are as follows.

18. First, the judge appears to  have  already  allowed  the  appeal  under
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) which refers to the fact that  the  Appellant  was
    aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for less  than
    twenty years, "but has no ties" with the country of her origin.  It  is
    not enough to say that  the  Appellant  had  only  recently  come  from
    Montserrat.  This is because  the  judge  considered  the  position  of
    Montserrat, observing how,

         "The history and geography of Montserrat is not irrelevant.  It  is
         less than ten miles long, less than seven wide.  Ninety per cent of
         the buildings were damaged by Hurricane Hugo in 1989.  Seventy five
         per cent of the island now forms an exclusion zone,  too  dangerous
         to enter, since the volcano in 1995 ..." (para 16).

19. But even  more  importantly,  the  judge  held,  with  respect  to  the
    Appellant,  that  "some  three-quarters  of  the  population  of   that
    territory have already been admitted to the UK, leaving only some 5,000
    souls none of which are relatives of the Appellant" (see para 20).

20. Therefore, it is clear that the Appellant had no social or cultural  or
    family life ties in that country.  The judge found that  she  succeeded
    under paragraph 276ADE, although he neglected then to specifically  say
    at the end of his determination that the appeal  was  allowed  on  this
    basis, as well as on the basis of human rights grounds.   This  was  an
    oversight on the judge's part.  The appeal  should  have  been  allowed
    expressly under the Rules as well.

21.  Second, with respect to allowing the appeal under Article  6,  if  the
    appeal had already been allowed under the Immigration Rules, then  this
    added extra weight to the balance of  considerations  with  respect  to
    Article 8 factors and the weight to be accorded to them.

22. In any event, the judge had express regard  to  the  cases  of  MM,  of
    Nagre, and of MF (Nigeria) at para 21 and went  on  to  hold  that  the
    considerations of Huang (at para  18)  applied  in  this  case  because
    "there comes a point at which,  for  some,  prolonged  and  unavoidable
    separation from his group seriously inhibits their ability to live full
    and fulfilling lives."

23. The Appellant in her case had relied  heavily  upon  her  two  disabled
    siblings (see para 23) and the  judge  did  not  consider  this  to  be
    relevant.  He was clear that the best interests of the Appellant lay in
    the  Appellant  remaining  in  the  UK  as  did  the  Section  55  BCIA
    considerations and the judge cited authorities for this.  There  is  no
    material error.

Decision

24. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

25. No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th September 2014


