
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/09760/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On November 23, 2015                 |On November 26, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR IMRAN KHAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  No attendance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant, citizen of Pakistan applied to vary his leave  to  enter
    or remain as the partner of a person present and settled in the  United
    Kingdom on December 22, 2014.  On  February  20,  2015  the  respondent
    refused the application and issued directions for his removal  pursuant
    to Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The
    appellant appealed this decision on March 10, 2015 under section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Gurung-Thapa on
    June 3, 2015 and she allowed the appellant's appeal under Section  EX.1
    of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules on the  basis  the  appellant's
    wife had just given birth to their child who was a British citizen.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal that decision  on  June  24,
    2015 on the grounds the Tribunal had approached this issue incorrectly.
    Permission to appeal was granted on October 20, 2015 by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Simpson who concluded at  paragraph  [4]  that  all
    grounds were arguable.

 5. On November 17, 2015 the appellant's solicitors  advised  the  Tribunal
    that the appellant  no  longer  pursued  this  application  as  he  had
    submitted a fresh application based on the birth of the child.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    ERROR IN LAW

 7. Mr Harrison pointed out that  a  substantial  part  of  the  permission
    concerned itself with article 8 whereas the grounds were concerned with
    the Rules. He submitted that the Tribunal had  erred  in  allowing  the
    appeal under Section EX.1 of Appendix FM because when  the  application
    had been submitted the appellant could not satisfy the  Rules  and,  in
    particular, Section E-LTRPT 2.2 that required the child  to  have  been
    born at the date of application. As the child was only born on June  3,
    2015 (six months later) then the Tribunal had  erred  in  allowing  the
    appeal.

 8. There was no attendance by the appellant's  solicitors  save  they  had
    excused themselves from the hearing on November 17, 2015.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDING

 9. The appellant had submitted an application under the Rules to remain as
    a partner. The Tribunal did not actually consider that application when
    it dealt with the matter in its decision promulgated on June  17,  2015
    albeit heard on June 3, 2015.

10. The Tribunal instead took into account  evidence  submitted  after  the
    hearing date that the appellant's child was now born  and  allowed  the
    appeal under Section EX.1 on the basis the child was British  and  that
    he had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with it.

11. This approach was incorrect bearing in  mind  the  application  was  to
    remain as a partner and the respondent had not had any  opportunity  to
    consider the changed basis of the  application.  Under  the  Rules  the
    relevant date is the date of application and  whilst  post  application
    evidence could be adduced this  evidence  would  not  alter  the  basic
    requirement of the Rules.

12. I am satisfied there was a material error in law and I  set  aside  the
    earlier decision under the Rules. The Tribunal had not  considered  the
    appeal under paragraph 276ADE HC 395 or article 8 ECHR.

13. In normal circumstances I would have proceeded to consider  the  matter
    further but I have before me a letter from the  appellants'  solicitors
    attaching a statement from the appellant withdrawing his appeal on  the
    basis he has submitted a fresh application as a parent.

14. Rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Regulations  2008
    allows a party to give notice of the withdrawal of  its  case,  or  any
    part of it. The Tribunal has a discretion to give consent. In light  of
    the letter and statement I give my consent to  the  withdrawal  by  the
    appellant of his pending appeal.

    DECISION

15. There was a material error and I set aside the earlier decision.

16. I allow the appellant to withdraw his appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appellant withdrew his appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

