
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09991/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|Prepared 3 November 2015             |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                              Miss Sadia Malik
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Graham, Counsel instructed by Visawise
                    Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Pakistan, date of  birth  23  April  1969,
    applied on 3 November 2014 for a variation of leave to  remain  outside
    of the Immigration Rules which was refused and a further  decision  was
    made to make removal directions under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The Reasons for Refusal Letter  dated
    24 February 2015 amply demonstrates that the basis for seeking leave to
    remain  was  essentially  for  the  Appellant  to  pursue  studies   or
    employment in the United Kingdom pursuant to the education which he had
    undertaken here. The appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Blair (the Judge) on1 June 2015. Permission  to  appeal  was  given  by
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Molloy  on  3  September  2015  principally
    because he thought documents provided late by the  Appellant  were  not
    considered.

2.   It is plain beyond any doubt that no part of the  original  application
    was made on the basis of any  Humanitarian  Protection  reason,  rights
    engaged by Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR and/or particularly relating to
    the risk of persecution under the Refugee Convention and/or the risk of
    proscribed ill-treatment  such  that  internal  relocation  was  not  a
    reasonable option and that there was no sufficiency of protection  from
    the state to which the Appellant could have recourse.

3.   In the grounds of appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  the
    grounds  substantially  address  the  original  application   made  and
    seeking to appeal with reference to  Section  84  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on the basis that:- First, the decision
    was not in accordance with the Immigration  Rules.   Secondly,  it  was
    unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act.  Thirdly, it was  not
    otherwise in accordance with the law.  Fourthly, the Secretary of State
    had not exercised any discretion conferred by  the  Immigration  Rules.
    These grounds which are dated 10 March 2005 make passing reference to a
    complaint  that  the  Appellant's  ex-husband   had   initiated   court
    proceedings essentially asserting that the Appellant  and  others  were
    involved at theft of property from the  Appellant's  ex-husband's  home
    and seeking the return of those materials.  It  further  adverted  that
    the Appellant was concerned that if she returned her  ex-husband  could
    initiate some further proceedings, which are unspecified,  against  her
    as he is an influential person in Pakistan. The Appellant  was  denying
    any wrongdoing on her part

4.   Again those grounds do not particularise or raise any claim of  a  risk
    of persecution or honour killing or of ill-treatment by  her  ex-spouse
    and/or his family but was simply in the most general terms.   Documents
    originally provided in support again barely make any reference  to  the
    issue and a statement that was lodged with the application which  again
    barely touched upon such issues in any meaningful way and certainly did
    not suggest that the Appellant was at risk of persecution on return.

5.   It is perhaps therefore unsurprising that when the matter  came  before
    the judge on 1 June 2015 when in considering the matter on  the  papers
    that were before him and in the light of representations made there was
    nothing meaningful to suggest that there was a Refugee Convention claim
    nor a risk of ill-treatment contrary to Articles 2 and 3  of  the  ECHR
    nor any need for  Humanitarian  Protection.   Quite  simply  there  was
    nothing to suggest  that  those  matters  had  been  addressed  to  the
    Secretary of State by way of an application even up until the  time  of
    the consideration of the appeal.

6.   The judge it seems took the view that the evidence did not support  the
    claims of risk associated with such criminal proceedings  as  may  have
    been initiated in Pakistan by the Appellant's  ex-husband.   Rather  on
    the material that he thought he had before him there  was  no  material
    that particularly assisted such claims.

7.   It may be the documents  (two  documents  plus  a  statement  from  the
    Appellant) were received in Glasgow at the Tribunal on 18 May  2015  to
    some extent enlarged upon her concerns by return.  There was no Section
    120 notice and no particularised claim  under  the  Refugee  Convention
    provided, either to the Secretary of  State  or  at  all.   Within  the
    bundle that was sent to the Tribunal was a  divorce  petition  together
    with the grant of a decree of  divorce  and  information  concerning  a
    request  from,  it  is  said,  the  Appellant's  ex-husband  seeking  a
    direction from the court to the district police officer in Sialkot  and
    the senior officer at the police station at Sialkot  asserting  that  a
    lady, Miss Sadia Bibi, had been involved in the removal of his property
    from his home and asserting that Sadia Bibi and her brother Malik Adnan
    had "... armed with lethal weapons home forcibly broken the  locks  and
    loaded household accessories ..." which are then listed  and  asserting
    that these had been removed and were of a value  of  115,500  Pakistani
    rupees.

8.   In the circumstances I am satisfied that the judge did not have  before
    him a properly  evidenced  and  articulated  claim  under  the  Refugee
    Convention  or  the  need  for  Humanitarian   Protection   under   the
    Immigration Rules nor with reference to Articles 2 and 3 of  the  ECHR.
    Therefore any omission of the material if it was in fact on  the  court
    file at the material time or came thereafter does  not  suggest  to  me
    that there has been any procedural error of law nor a claim that should
    have been considered by the judge nor would it have made  a  difference
    to the appeal relating to her desire to continue with PGD  studies.   I
    am satisfied that the Appellant's position is fully  protected  by  her
    ability to make a Refugee Convention and  other  protection  claims  if
    that is what she wishes to do.  I do not find any error of law  by  the
    judge in the way he considered the disparate material before  him   nor
    was the nature of that material such as to raise the possibility  of  a
    further and extant Article 8 ECHR claim or  indeed  under  the  Refugee
    Convention or any other protection provisions within the ECHR.

9.   In those circumstances, the basis on which  permission  was  originally
    given by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Molloy  is  understandable  but  I
    simply disagree with the judge that such omission was material  to  the
    consideration of the appeal outside of the Rules that  was  before  the
    judge.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The original Tribunal's decision stands.  The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 4 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
