
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09061/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated      |
|On 26 February 2015                        |On 26 March 2015               |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Mr Kevin Kware Agas
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. O. Omoniruvbe, Legal Representative.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. No application for anonymity had been made  in  these  proceedings  and
    there is no reason why such an order should be made.

 2. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and Mr  Agas  as
    "the appellant".

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 20  November  1980.   He
    applied for a residence permit as the  family  member  of  his  sponsor
    pursuant to Regulation 9(2) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006.  The appellant also  claimed  to  have  a  derivative
    right of residence.   His  application  was  refused  and  following  a
    hearing at Taylor House Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Tipping  found
    that he met the requirements of Appendix FM and allowed the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal and on 16 January 2015 Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Colyer gave his reasons  for  granting  such
    permission.  They state:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Tipping) who, in  a
             determination promulgated on 25th  September  2014,  dismissed
             the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  to
             refuse his application for a residence permit as  a  dependent
             family member of an EEA citizen pursuant  to  the  immigration
             (European economic area)  regulations  2006  and  allowed  the
             Appellant's appeal under article 8 of the European  convention
             on human rights.

         2.   The Grounds for applying to the upper tribunal submit that the
             judge has misdirected  himself  with  reference  to  factually
             incorrect findings.  For example paragraph 14 the  finding  of
             appellant failing to qualify under  paragraph  E-LTRP  1.7  of
             appendix FM whereas the refusal was under E-LTRP 1.2 and S-LTR
             1.7 and such decision recorded 'there is no  right  of  appeal
             against this refusal'.  The appellant did not  appeal  against
             this decision.

         3.   Paragraph 4  of  the  decision  and  reasons  is  said  to  be
             factually incorrect as  seen  from  the  reasons  for  refusal
             letter.  The respondent  invited  the  appellant  to  make  an
             application should he wish.  This is  a  materially  different
             proposition  from  that  indicated  by  the  judge  which  was
             essentially  that  the  appellant  fails  for  want   of   one
             requirement under eligibility.

         4.   The respondent refers to the case of Lamichhane [2012].  It is
             submitted that there is no section 120 notice served  in  this
             appeal.

         5.   The respondent refers to the case  of  Weiss  [2010].   It  is
             submitted this application was  not  made  on  the  prescribed
             form.

         6.   It is submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in  considering  and
             subsequently allowing the appeal under appendix FM.

         7.   In the alternative the  judge  in  assessing  the  appellant's
             family and  private  life  misdirected  himself  in  fact  and
             proceeded on the wrong premise incorporating a  decision  that
             was not subject to a right of appeal and which did not  appear
             in the reasoning of the immigration  decision  of  29  January
             2014 which generated this right of appeal.

         8.   The grounds disclose an arguable error of law."

 5. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 6. At today's hearing Ms Petterson relied upon the grounds submitting that
    it was not open to the judge to allow the appeal under Appendix  FM  in
    all the circumstances and that he should have either allowed the appeal
    to the limited extent that it be remitted back to  the  respondent  for
    consideration of Article 8 or dismissed the appeal outright.

 7. Mr Omoniruvbe accepted that that was the position but on the basis only
    that the appeal should have been allowed to the limited extent that  it
    be remitted for a lawful decision to be made.

 8. Ms Petterson agreed that the appeal before me should  proceed  on  that
    basis.

 9. On my own analysis and taking into account all the grounds of appeal  I
    too am satisfied that the judge has materially erred and  that  in  the
    circumstances it was incumbent upon him to allow  this  appeal  to  the
    limited extent that it be remitted back to the respondent for a  lawful
    decision to be made.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it  to  the  limited  extent
that it is remitted back to the respondent  for  a  lawful  decision  to  be
made.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 25 March 2015




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

