

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oA/09523/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 September 2014                          |On 30 September 2014         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MRS PARKASH WATI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:   Mr Z Jafferji, Counsel, instructed by Jusmount & Co,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Claim History


1. The Appellant in this  appeal  was  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
   Tribunal hearing on 6 May 2014. However,  for  ease  of  reference,  the
   Appellant and Respondent are hereinafter referred to as they were before
   the First-tier Tribunal. Therefore  Mrs  Wati  is  referred  to  as  the
   Appellant and the Secretary of State is referred to as the Respondent.


2. The Appellant, a citizen of India, applied for leave to enter the United
   Kingdom as a dependent relative under Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
   Rules. Her application was refused and her appeal  against  refusal  was
   dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hubball  under  the  Immigration
   Rules and allowed under Article 8. He found that the Appellant could not
   meet the provisions of the Immigration Rules and, following the approach
   in Gulshan (Article 8 - new rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640
   (IAC), it was disproportionate to refuse leave under the Article 8 ECHR.



3. In the grounds of application, the Respondent  submits  that  the  Judge
   noted the guidance in Gulshan, that is only "...if  there  are  arguably
   good grounds for granting leave to remain outside the Immigration  Rules
   is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to  go  on  to  consider  whether
   there are compelling circumstances not recognised under  the  Rules...",
   but failed to make any findings on this and  proceeded  to  undertake  a
   free standing Article 8 assessment.  It is submitted that without making
   findings, the  Judge  could  not  undertake  a  freestanding  Article  8
   assessment.

4. Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  the  grounds  were
   arguable.

5. A Rule 24 response was not submitted by the Appellant.

 The Hearing

6. Relying on the grounds of application, Mr Mills submitted that the Judge
   concluded  that  despite  needing  care  due  to  her  age  and  medical
   conditions, this was available through relatives, neighbours and a  maid
   paid for by her family. The  Judge  found  that  the  Immigration  Rules
   relating to entry clearance for dependent relatives could not be met.

7. The crux of Mr Mills' submission was that although the Judge referred to
   Gulshan at [152] he ignored the requirement to establish  if  there  are
   arguably  good  grounds  or  compelling  circumstances  for  considering
   whether a free standing Article 8 assessment should  be  conducted.  The
   Judge only made one reference to compelling circumstances and  this  was
   at  [161].  He  stated  that  the  Judge  was  in  effect  saying,  'the
   requirements of the Immigration Rules are not met but I have  compassion
   for her and will allow her appeal'. However, the Immigration Rules are a
   complete  code  and  cover  the  majority  of  circumstances.   If   the
   Appellant's circumstances changed, she could re-apply.

8. Mr Jafferji submitted that the Judge set out  the  guidance  in  Gulshan
   expressly at [152]; he had this in mind when he assessed the Appellant's
   circumstances.  At [77] he refers to  the  Appellant's  emotional  state
   following the deaths of her sisters Santosh and Kuldeep. The Judge noted
   the very strong emotional ties between the Appellant and her sons in the
   UK at [153].  At  [161]  the  Judge  stated,  "I  find  that  there  are
   compelling and compassionate  circumstances  in  this  case;  given  the
   Appellant's age, emotional and financial dependency and medical  needs."
   Mr Jafferji submitted that  whilst  medical  and  financial  needs  were
   considered under the Immigration Rules, emotional needs  and  dependency
   was not accounted for. He submitted that whilst the Appellant's physical
   needs could be met in India, her emotional needs could  not  be  catered
   for. Furthermore, the rights of other family members were not considered
   under the Immigration Rules; there was no consideration of the impact on
   other family members and evidence was provided to the Judge of her  sons
   in the UK providing for  her  financially  and  supporting  her  through
   visits. This was a feature of the case he took into account under Beoku-
   Betts [2008] UKHL 39 [162]; he found  that  it  was  not  reasonable  to
   expect them to live in India  [163  -  164].  The  emotional  dependency
   aspect of the appeal was a significant feature and there was no error of
   law in the determination of the Judge.


 Decision and reasons


9. I note that the Judge considered carefully the position of the Appellant
   under the Immigration Rules at [128] -  [151].  It  is  clear  from  the
   determination that he did not accept all the evidence in relation to the
   Appellant's circumstances in India. He did not accept that her  daughter
   Sudesh Kumari lived in the Philippines rather than  in  Nakodar  in  the
   Punjab [139]. He therefore  considered  the  availability  of  emotional
   support in India when assessing the Appellant's  circumstances.  He  did
   not accept that unpaid help from neighbours was the only assistance  the
   Appellant had in India in relation to her care needs [146]. The findings
   he has made  have  not  been  challenged.  Particularly,  there  was  no
   challenge  to  the  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the   emotional
   dependency between the Appellant and her family in the UK.


10. Having dealt with the position under the Immigration  Rules,  the  Judge
   then  turned  to  the  guidance  in  Gulshan.  I  accept  Mr  Jafferji's
   submission that the Judge, having set out the  guidance  in  Gulshan  at
   [152], had this in mind when he  considered  the  circumstances  of  the
   Appellant and her family.

11. The  Judge  reminded  himself  of  the  jurisprudence  relating  to  the
   assessment of circumstances and concluded that  there  were  'compelling
   circumstances in this case' [161]. This refers back to  the  passage  in
   Gulshan, at [152], setting out the need to consider  whether  compelling
   circumstances have been established.  The  Judge  lists  the  compelling
   circumstances at [156], of which the only  circumstance  not  considered
   under the Immigration Rules was the  emotional  dependency  between  the
   Appellant and her sons in the UK.  The  Judge  was  well  aware  of  the
   legitimate aim under Article 8 (2) as set out at [156]. His finding,  on
   the evidence before him, was that the refusal to grant  entry  clearance
   was disproportionate. He concluded that in the particular  circumstances
   of the Appellant's case the decision to refuse was unlawful [164].

12. The challenge appears to be that the Judge did not use  the  terminology
   set out in Gulshan and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) which reflects  the
   terminology used by the Respondent in the guidance issued  to  decision-
   makers in deciding whether to grant leave outside the Immigration Rules.
   In Nagre it is stated:

       "14. The definition of "exceptional circumstances" which is given in
       this  guidance  equates  such   circumstances   with   there   being
       unjustifiable hardship involved in removal such  that  it  would  be
       disproportionate - i.e. would involve a breach of Article 8."

13.  The Judge found that the decision was 'unlawful', which is the same  as
   stating that the outcome is 'unjustifiably harsh'. The  failure  to  use
   the terminology set out in the guidance is not an error of  law  in  the
   present case where the Judge considered the circumstances,  applied  the
   approach in Gulshan and reached a decision on the evidence  before  him.
   Another judge may have reached a  different  decision  but  the  Judge's
   decision was open to him on the evidence  before  him  and  no  material
   errors of law are disclosed.



Decision


14. The determination of Judge Hubball contains no material errors  of  law
    and his decision therefore must stand.


15. The Respondent's appeal is dismissed.


16. There was no application for an anonymity order before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or before us. In the circumstances of this  case,  we  see  no
    reason to direct anonymity.









Signed                                  Date

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT


     In light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award
(Rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
2005 and section 12(4) (a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee Awards in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). As the appeal has been dismissed,
Judge Hubball's fee award is confirmed.




Signed                          Dated

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
