
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09082/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 28th October 2013                          |On 30th October 2013         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                             NANCY MWENYA CHASHI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Bircumshaw of Coventry Law Centre.
For the Respondent: Mr Smart - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Hawden-Beal  promulgated  on  5th  July  2013  in  which  she
        dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal  to  vary  her
        leave under paragraph 245ZX of the Immigration Rules, purported  to
        allow the appeal in relation to section 47 Immigration  Asylum  and
        Nationality Act 2006, and make no findings on the appellant's human
        rights claim.  Permission to appeal was refused by a Judge  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal but granted on a renewed application  by  Upper
        Tribunal Judge C Lane on the basis it was arguable that  the  Judge
        was wrong in law to refrain from determining the appeal on  Article
        8 grounds.


     2. I find the Judge erred in law in relation to  the  section  47  and
        human rights issues although no legal error is proved  in  relation
        to the dismissal of the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules.   The
        Judge allowed the section 47 appeal but notes at  paragraph  22  of
        the determination that  the  removal  direction  made  pursuant  to
        section 47 was withdrawn by the Presenting Officer at the  hearing.
        There was therefore no extant immigration decision  permitting  the
        Judge to allow the appeal.


     3. In relation to the human rights element, the appellant  claims  she
        has protected rights in the United  Kingdom  and  submissions  were
        made in relation to both her private and family life  which  is  an
        issue raised in the original grounds of appeal.  In paragraph 22 of
        the determination the Judge states  "Since  there  are  no  removal
        directions before me the appellant  is  not  at  imminent  risk  of
        removal and  therefore,  although  the  appellant's  representative
        addressed me on her Article 8 rights in so far as her  husband  and
        her immediate family are concerned, I  have  not  considered  those
        rights, considering it to be more suitable for a  Tribunal  in  the
        future to consider if and when  there  is  an  appeal  against  any
        removal directions".


     4. This is an area in which there has been a divergence of opinion, on
        the one hand it his thought by some that if there  are  no  removal
        directions there  can  be  no  interference  with  an  individual's
        protected rights and therefore Article 8 will not be engaged. There
        is, however, a line of authorities  including  JM  v  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ  1402  in  which  the
        Court of Appeal stated on a variation appeal it was appropriate  to
        consider human rights, SI  (variation/curtailment  -  human  rights
        ground) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00118 in which the Tribunal held  that
        on appeal against a refusal to vary leave or  decision  to  curtail
        leave or decision to vary leave such that an individuals  leave  is
        effectively curtailed, there is a right of appeal on  human  rights
        grounds, and the case of MDB and others v Secretary  of  State  for
        the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ  101  in  which  the  Court  of
        Appeal when deciding  whether  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  a
        document certifying  permanent  residence  status,  notwithstanding
        there being no decision to remove, noted  it  was  agreed  by  both
        parties that the outstanding issue concerning  Article  8  ECHR  be
        remitted.


     5. It was accepted before me that the Article 8  element  should  have
        been considered by  the  Judge  who  could  have  made  appropriate
        findings in relation to the same. The Judge did not and accordingly
        there has been no consideration of this element of  the  appeal  by
        the First-tier Tribunal.  In accordance with the Senior  Presidents
        guidance it was agreed that the appropriate way to proceed was  for
        the determination to be set aside in relation to the Article 8 ECHR
        ground and for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
        for a proper hearing relating to Article 8  ECHR.  The  section  47
        decision is set aside but no further order is required as there  is
        no extant removal direction at this time.

     6. The following directions shall apply to future conduct this appeal:






                                 Directions


     i.   The appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at
                  Sheldon Court Birmingham for the  purposes  of  a  hearing
   limited to              consideration of Article 8 ECHR only.
   .
     ii.  The hearing shall take place on a  date  be  advised  by  Resident
   Judge          Renton subject to the operational requirements of  Sheldon
   Court,               Birmingham  but,  in  any  event,  not  before  24th
   November  2013.   It  is             recorded  that  both  parties   have
   indicated they will accept short                   notice of hearing. The
   appeal shall be heard by a salaried judge  of  the             First-tier
   Tribunal    nominated     by     Resident     Judge     Renton.     Judge
   Hawden-Beal  is  excluded.  Time  estimate  three  hours(appellant   plus
   two witnesses).


     iii. Bundles containing all the evidence to be  relied  upon  shall  be
   filed          and served no later than 4PM 14th November  2013.  Witness
          statements contained in the bundle shall stand as the evidence  in
          chief of the maker. Supplementary questions shall not be permitted
              without permission of the trial judge for which an application
                  explaining the nature of the questions, their relevance to
   be appeal,              and why the evidence  was  not  included  in  the
   witness statements is            required.


     iv.  No interpreter is required.


Decision

     7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge relating to Article  8  ECHR.  I
        remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with  the
        directions above.


   Anonymity.


     8. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no  such  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper        Tribunal) Rules 2008) as there was no application
   for anonymity and such an        order is not warranted on the facts.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 28th October 2013
