
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09882/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14th August 2015                  |On 26th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN


                                   Between

                              MR UMIT YILDIRIM
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Francis (instructed by Rahman & Company
Solicitors)
For the Respondents:   Mr L Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant  with regard to a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Zahed) promulgated on  26th  March  2015  by  which  it  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    to  grant  him  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  under  the   "standstill
    provisions of the Ankara agreement.

 2. The  application,  and  appeal  were  thus  to  be  decided  under  the
    provisions of HC510.

 3. The application was for Indefinite Leave to Remain and thus should have
    been considered under paragraph 28 of HC510.  In fact the Secretary  of
    State considered it under paragraph 21, which is entirely different.

 4. Paragraph 21 is applicable where an applicant has entered the UK  as  a
    visitor and seeks permission to remain for the purpose of setting up  a
    business.

 5. Under paragraph 28 :-

         'A person who is admitted in  the  first  instance  for  a  limited
         period, and who has  remained  here  for  four  years  in  approved
         employment or as a businessman  or  a  self-employed  person  or  a
         person of independent means, may have the time limit  on  his  stay
         removed unless there are grounds for maintaining it.   Applications
         for removal of the time limit are to be considered in the light  of
         all  the  relevant  circumstances,  including  those  set  out   in
         paragraph 4.'

 6. Paragraph 4 provides:-

         'The succeeding paragraphs set out the main  categories  of  people
         who may be given limited leave to enter and who may seek  variation
         of their leave, and the principles to be followed in  dealing  with
         their applications, or in initiating any variation of their  leave.
         In deciding these matters  account  is  to  be  taken  of  all  the
         relevant facts; the fact that the applicant  satisfies  the  formal
         requirements of these rules for  stay,  or  further  stay,  in  the
         proposed capacity is not conclusive in his favour.   It  will,  for
         example be relevant whether the person has observed the time  limit
         and conditions subject to which he was  admitted;  whether  in  the
         light of his character, conduct or associations it  is  undesirable
         to permit him to remain; whether he represents a danger to national
         security; or whether, if allowed to remain for the period for which
         he wishes to stay, he might not be returnable to another country.'

 7. It is clear that if a person fits the primary criteria of paragraph 28,
    the Secretary of State has a discretion based on the criteria  set  out
    in paragraph 4 to grant or refuse Indefinite Leave to Remain.

 8. In this case the Appellant applied for Indefinite Leave to Remain.   So
    much is clear from his application form.

 9. The Secretary of State, in her decision, noted in the  first  paragraph
    that he had applied for Indefinite Leave to Remain but then  considered
    the application under paragraph 21 and refused it.

10. In the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  the  Judge  also  considered
    paragraph 21 of the Rules.

11. That was clearly an error.  The correct paragraph was 28 and the  Judge
    ought to have found the Secretary of State's decision not in accordance
    with the law, it having been considered under the incorrect  Rule.   So
    much was accepted by Mr Tarlow.

12. On that basis I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I
    redecide it.

13. It is clear from the copy of the Appellant's passport that he has  been
    in the UK, initially as  a  student  until  July  2008.   He  was  then
    provided with three successive residence permits allowing him  to  work
    in the UK valid from 10th September 2008 until September 2013.  On that
    basis Mr Tarlow accepted he met the primary criteria to  be  considered
    for Indefinite Leave to Remain under paragraphs 28  with  reference  to
    paragraph 4.

14. As the decision requires an exercise of discretion by the Secretary  of
    State it is appropriate that I allow the appeal to the  limited  extent
    that it is remitted to the Secretary of  State  for  a  decision  under
    paragraph 28 of HC510.


Signed   Date 20th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



Direction regarding anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed   Date 20th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
