
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09008/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10th December 2014                     |On 2nd January 2015              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                           NILES BHOJABHAI JADEJA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, Counsel, instructed by Bhattarai &
                    Co Immigration Practice
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India and his date of birth  is  6  April
    1988.  He made an application as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant  under  the
    points-based system on 28 November 2014 and his application was refused
    by the Secretary of State in a decision of 3 February 2014.

2.   The reason for the decision is  that  the  appellant  did  not  provide
    documents  as  specified  on  the  CAS  letter;  namely,  the  academic
    transcript from Sterling  Academy  and  the  City  and  Guilds  English
    Certificate.

3.   The appellant appealed and his appeal was dismissed  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Thew in a determination that was promulgated  on  5
    September 2014 following a hearing on 6 August  2014.   Permission  was
    subsequently granted to the respondent by Judge P J M Hollingworth in a
    decision of 20 October 2014.  Thus the matter came before me.

3.    The  appellant  had  provided  the  abovementioned  documents  to  the
    respondent prior to the decision although they were not submitted along
    with  the  application.   Judge  Thew  noted  this  and  she  gave  the
    Presenting Officer the opportunity to consider any discretion  but  the
    Presenting Officer indicated to her that there was  no  discretion  and
    the appeal went ahead under the Rules.  The two documents were received
    by the respondent on 3 February on 2014 which is the same date  as  the
    reasons for refusal.  The appellant had  received  a  letter  from  the
    respondent stating that the  documents  had  been  received  after  the
    decision had been made but this was not the case.

4.   The CAS letter was assigned to the appellant on 22  November  2013  and
    his application was submitted six days after this.  He  had  failed  to
    include the documents putting it down to human error that he  had  lost
    them.  However, sent them to the respondent on 3  December  2014.   The
    judge accepted the appellant's evidence about the  documents,  but  she
    found that he could not meet the requirements of the Rules and that  he
    was not assisted by Section 245AA of the  Rules  and  she  went  on  to
    dismiss his appeal under the Rules.

4.   At the hearing before me Mr Duffy confirmed  that  his  records  showed
    that the documents were received by the respondent at 6.40  a.m.  on  3
    December 2014 and the decision was made at 11.55 a.m.  Thus  they  were
    with the Secretary of State prior to the making of the  decision.  This
    information  was  not  before  Judge  Thew.  In  Mr  Duffy's  view,  in
    accordance with the current policy of the Secretary of State  (that  is
    that they will take into consideration documents which are before  them
    at the date of  the  decision  if  they  were  in  existence  when  the
    application was made) they should have been taken into account  by  the
    decision maker.  Thus in his view there was an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Error of Law

5.   In the light of the concession made  by  Mr  Duffy,  in  my  view,  the
    decision is not in accordance with the law. There is no lawful decision
    and the appeal should be allowed to this limited extent.

6.   I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appeal and allow the appellant's appeal to the limited extent that  the
    decision is not lawful.





Signed                 Joanna McWilliam               Date 18.12.14


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


