
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/09288/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 August 2014                                |On 5 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           mr kwase boakye twumasi
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N. Bramble, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Khalid, Counsel (Direct Access)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State ("SSHD") appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  ("UT")
    from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge R. Prior sitting at
    Hatton Cross on 7 May 2014) allowing the claimant's appeal against  the
    decision by the SSHD on 25 January 2014 to refuse to issue him  with  a
    residence card as confirmation of his right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights here.
    The First-tier Tribunal ("FTT") did not make an anonymity order, and  I
    do not consider that such an order is warranted for  these  proceedings
    in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a Ghanaian national,  and  his  sponsor  is  a  French
    national. As evidence that he was married to the sponsor, the appellant
    relied on a marriage certificate dated 20 October 2011 showing that  he
    had married the sponsor in Accra on  28  September  2011.  A  statutory
    declaration made on 5 August 2013 conveyed the information that it  had
    been a customary marriage by proxy.  Paragraph  8  of  the  declaration
    stated that it superseded a previous one dated 17 October 2011,  "which
    inadvertently did not indicate the proxy  marriage  and  the  place  of
    residence of the  parties  at  the  time  of  the  celebration  of  the
    marriage".

 3. The SSHD gave lengthy reasons for refusing the claimant's  application.
    The burden was on him to prove that his asserted customary marriage was
    valid, and he had not discharged this burden. He had not shown that all
    the requirements for a valid customary marriage, including the  payment
    of a dowry, which had been identified by the expert  in  NA  (Customary
    marriage and divorce - evidence) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 0009 had been  met,
    in particular the requirement that both parties to the marriage were of
    Ghanaian descent. He had also not shown  that  the  marriage  had  been
    validly registered in accordance with Ghanaian law. The application for
    the registration of the marriage had to be accompanied by  a  statutory
    declaration which stated, among other things, the places  of  residence
    of the parties at the time of the marriage. This  had  not  been  done.
    There  was  also  no  proof  that  the  signatories  to  the  statutory
    declaration were related to the parties  as  claimed.   The  Ghana  COI
    report of 11 May 2012 highlighted problems with forged and fraudulently
    obtained official documents, such as birth certificates. The signatures
    of husband and wife on the marriage certificate did not match those  on
    the application form, passport or ID card.

 4. The SSHD went on to consider in the alternative  whether  the  claimant
    could be considered as unmarried  partner  under  Regulation  8(5).  To
    assess whether their relationship was durable, she would expect to  see
    evidence of cohabitation for at least two years. No evidence  had  been
    provided that they had resided together as a couple prior to the  issue
    of their marriage certificate, or even that they knew other or had  met
    prior to the issue of the certificate.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The claimant only appealed against the decision to refuse to  recognise
    him as a family member under Regulation 7, and he asked for his  appeal
    to be determined on the papers.  His case was that registration of  the
    customary marriage was not mandatory, and it  was  not  necessary  that
    both parties to the marriage should be of Ghanaian descent:

         Further, the  marriage  certificate  was  issued  by  the  Ghanaian
         authorities and certified by  the  Ghana  High  Commission  in  the
         United Kingdom which clearly  shows  that  the  marriage  has  been
         recognised in the country where it took place.

 6. Judge Prior's reasoning in allowing the appeal  under  the  Regulations
    2006  was  that  the  SSHD  had  sought  to  go  behind  the  statutory
    declaration made  on  5  August  2013  and  the  marriage  certificate,
    "although, on the face, there  is  nothing  to  suggest  they  are  not
    valid". In English law there was a presumption of validity. Whether  or
    not the sponsor was of Ghanaian descent, the judge did not accept  that
    the customary marriage, on the reasoning of the refusal letter, was not
    valid. Its validity was established by  its  registration  and  he  was
    satisfied that it was registered.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 7. The SSHD applied for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    arguing that the judge had erred in law in failing to establish whether
    the proxy marriage was recognised in France, the sponsor's  country  of
    nationality, when determining the  issue  of  validity,  citing  Kareem
    (proxy marriages - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24. The claimant had not
    discharged  the  burden  of  proving  that  the  marriage  was  a  type
    recognised in France, and so the appeal should have been  dismissed  on
    that basis. Moreover, proxy marriages are incompatible with the  French
    Civil Code, Article 146-1, which states as follows (in translation):

         The marriage of a French person, even when contracted in a  foreign
         country, requires his being present.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 8. On 12 June 2014 Judge Nicholson granted the SSHD permission  to  appeal
    on the above grounds.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 9. At the hearing before me, Mr Bramble developed the argument  raised  in
    the grounds of appeal, citing TA and others  (Kareem  explained)  Ghana
    [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC), which was heard at  Field  House  on  10  June
    2014. Mr Khalid sought to rely  on  an  unreported  decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Macleman in the case of Abina Serwaah promulgated on  21
    May 2014, which he said he  had  obtained  from  the  UT  website.  The
    decision was to the contrary effect of TA. Mr Bramble objected  to  the
    introduction  of  this  decision,  on  the  ground  that  the  practice
    direction relating to the citation of unreported decisions had not been
    complied with.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

10. The central issue in controversy is the interpretation of the  headnote
    guidance given by the Vice-Presidential panel in Kareem, which  repeats
    verbatim the guidance given by the panel at paragraph [68].

11.  The  interpretation  favoured  by  UT  Judge  Macleman  in   a   brief
    determination is that there is no need to consider whether  a  Ghanaian
    proxy marriage is recognised in the member state of the sponsor  unless
    there is a difficulty over whether it is recognised  in  the  state  in
    which it was contracted ("the two stage approach").

12. In TA UT Judge O'Connor gave detailed reasons for reaching the contrary
    conclusion, which is that  it  is  always  necessary  to  undertake  an
    examination of the validity of the disputed marriage in the context  of
    the national legislation of the EEA sponsor's country  of  nationality.
    He accepted that paragraph [68] read in isolation appeared  to  provide
    support for the two stage approach (i.e. only to look at  the  national
    legislation of the EEA sponsor's country of nationality if there  is  a
    doubt over recognition in the country where the  marriage  took  place)
    but he referred to earlier passages in Kareem  which  refuted  such  an
    approach. For instance, at paragraph [17] the panel held:

         In light of the connection between the rights of free movement  and
         residence and  the  nationality  laws  of  the  Member  States,  we
         conclude that, in a situation where  the  marital  relationship  is
         disputed (my emphasis), the question of whether there is a  marital
         relationship is to be examined in accordance with the laws  of  the
         Member State from which the Union citizen obtains  nationality  and
         from which therefore that citizen derives free movement rights.

13. I prefer the reasoning of Judge O'Connor, and in any event his decision
    has the imprimatur of being a reported decision of the UT, and thus  it
    will have been approved by an editorial panel of the UT as representing
    good law.

14. The judge ought to have dismissed the appeal on  the  ground  that  the
    claimant had not discharged  the  burden  of  proving  that  he  had  a
    contracted a valid marriage under French law,  following  Kareem,  even
    though this issue had not been raised in the refusal  letter.  For  the
    law always speaks.

15. Although this was not a point taken by way of appeal to the UT,  as  it
    did not need to be, the reasoning  of  Judge  Prior  discloses  another
    egregious error of law. While he was aware of Kareem, as he  cites  it,
    he appears to have misunderstood its import with regard to the question
    of how the Tribunal should go about the task of establishing  that  the
    marriage certificate  relied  upon  has  been  issued  by  a  competent
    authority.

16. In Kareem the panel conducted a  rigorous  analysis  of  the  documents
    relied upon as  showing  that  the  proxy  marriage  had  been  validly
    registered in Nigeria, and found that  there  was  non-compliance  with
    statutory requirements, and no proof that the  person  who  signed  the
    certificate was a registrar: see paragraphs [41] and  [42].  The  panel
    thereby concluded that the applicant had not discharged the  burden  of
    proving that the certificate had been issued by a competent  authority.
    The panel did not presume that the marriage certificate was issued by a
    competent authority, and was thereby valid.

17. But this is Judge Prior's approach. He wrongly treats the  registration
    of the marriage as engendering a presumption of validity. Moreover,  he
    has not engaged with  the  irregularities  identified  in  the  refusal
    letter. The marriage certificate purports to have been  signed  by  the
    bride and groom, but it was not signed by them as they were not in  the
    country: so it is a false document in that it conveys the false message
    that bride and groom were present at the customary  marriage  ceremony,
    and subsequently signed the marriage register in person.  In  addition,
    the statutory declaration used to obtain the marriage  certificate  did
    not contain all the  information  required  by  law,  as  is  partially
    acknowledged in the later statutory declaration of August 2013.

18. As pleaded in the refusal letter, it is a requirement of Law  112  that
    the application for registration of marriage shall be accompanied by  a
    statutory  declaration  stating,   inter  alia,  "(b)  the  places   of
    residence of the parties  at  the  time  of  the  marriage".   As  this
    condition was not complied with, it would follow that the marriage  was
    not validly registered, as the SHHD contends in the refusal letter.

19. At Paragraph [68] of Kareem the panel said inter alia:

         (ii) The production of a marriage certificate issued by a competent
             authority (that is, issued according to the registration  laws
             of the country where the marriage took place) will usually  be
             sufficient...

20. By the refusal letter the SSHD was challenging the proposition that the
    marriage certificate had been issued  "according  to  the  registration
    laws" of Ghana. So Judge Prior was wrong to proceed on the premise that
    the marriage had been registered according to the registration laws  of
    Ghana, when that was precisely the issue which was in  controversy  and
    there was clear evidence of irregularities. This was not a  case  where
    the mere production of the marriage certificate was sufficient.

21. For the reasons given above, the decision of the FTT contains an  error
    of law such that it should be set aside and remade.

Remaking

22. The appeal falls to be dismissed on the ground that  the  claimant  had
    not discharged the burden of proving that he has a contracted  a  valid
    marriage under French law.

23. In addition, the appeal falls to be dismissed on the  ground  that  the
    claimant  has  not  discharged  the  burden  of  proving  that  he  had
    contracted a valid marriage under Ghanaian law.

24. The judge did not deal with Regulation 8(5), and  Mr  Khalid  submitted
    that the appeal should be remitted to the FTT for findings to  be  made
    on whether the claimant is an extended family member  under  Regulation
    8(5). But this was not an issue upon which he appealed to the FTT,  and
    so remittal is not appropriate. As Regulation  8(5)  has  not  been  an
    issue in this appeal, I make no finding on its potential  applicability
    to the claimant.




Conclusion

25. The decision of the FTT contained an error of law, and accordingly  the
    decision is set aside and the following decision  is  substituted:  the
    claimant's appeal is dismissed.


Anonymity


The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.










Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
