

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09752/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1st October 2014                           |On 2nd October 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

               DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL MS GA BLACK


                                   Between

                             MRS MEENAKSHI BANSHi


                                                (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller ( Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1.   This matter comes before me for consideration as to whether  or  not
      there was a material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
      McDade) determination promulgated on  15th  July  2014  in  which  the
      Tribunal dismissed the appeal on immigration and human rights grounds,
      for indefinite leave to remain outside of the Rules.


   2.   The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius and her  date  of  birth  is
      18.11.1979.  She has two children and her  partner  is  a  citizen  of
      India.


   Background


   3.   The appellant entered the UK in 2004 as a visitor  and  was  granted
      periods of leave as a student until 2008.  She left  the  UK  in  2009
      voluntarily and re entered in 2009 with leave as a post study migrant.
       On 25.7.2011 she applied for indefinite leave outside of  the  Rules.
      There  ensued  proceedings  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   (Judge
      Martins) and  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal was refused.  An application for reconsideration was made and
      refused.  The appellant made a further application for ILR outside the
      rules on 27th March 2013.


   Reasons for refusal


   4.  The respondent refused the application under paragraph 322(1) of  the
      Immigration Rules HC 395  as  amended.   The  application  was  for  a
      purpose not covered by the Rules.


   5.   Consideration was given to exceptional circumstances.  The appellant
      was 34 years of age and lived in the UK for 9 years.  Her husband  was
      an Indian national who had no status in the  UK,  although  there  was
      some suggestion that he was awaiting a decision on a legacy claim.


   6.  Reliance was placed on the first determination before  Judge  Martins
      [28] on 1st March 2012 in which she found that family  life  could  be
      enjoyed outside of the UK.


   7. There was no evidence  of  insurmountable  obstacles  and  nothing  to
      indicate that the removal would be contrary to the best  interests  of
      the children.

   Determination


   8.  The appeal was determined on the papers by First-tier Judge McDade at
      the request of the appellant. Although he stated that he did not  have
      the respondent's bundle [5]  he  proceeded  to  determine  the  appeal
      relying on the evidence in the appellant's bundle  and  dismissed  the
      appeal.


   Appeal grounds


   9.  The appellant submitted grounds of appeal  in  which  she  maintained
      that the Tribunal failed to consider Article 8  family  life  and  the
      risks/ insurmountable obstacles  on return faced by the family in  the
      event of  removal  to  either  Mauritius  or  India  and/or  the  best
      interests of the children.




   Permission


  10. Judge Hollingworth granted an extension  of  time  and  permission  to
      appeal.  There were arguable grounds that the appellant  was  entitled
      to assume that the Judge  determined  her  appeal  having  taken  into
      account all of the material in the bundles including the Respondent's.
       It was now clear that the Judge did not have the respondent's  bundle
      before him. The error arose in terms of the scope of the  findings  of
      fact by the Judge in relation to the extent of the material  available
      to him.


   Hearing


  11. Mr Deller helpfully indicated that there  was  correspondence  in  the
      respondent's file to show that the respondent  had  made  attempts  to
      serve a bundle but that it was  clear  from  the  directions  that  no
      bundle had reached the Tribunal. The determination  makes  clear  that
      the Tribunal did not have it before him.  Mr Deller conceded that this
      amounted to a procedural error leading to possible unfairness.


  12. Mrs Banshi submitted that the Judge failed to take  into  account  all
      the material.




   Discussion


  13. I find an error of law in the determination by  way  of  a  procedural
      irregularity.  The Tribunal did not have a bundle from the  Respondent
      before it when determining the appeal on the papers.   The  respondent
      had provided a bundle but for some unknown reason it did not reach the
      Tribunal. That the appellant is not represented is  a  factor  that  I
      take into account. As I did not have the respondent's bundle before me
      it was not possible to identify the impact of the lack of  information
      included in the bundle on the Tribunal's findings of fact.


  14. Accordingly the practical and fair approach in  my  view  is  for  the
      matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.



   Decision
  15. There was a procedural error which amounts to a material error of law.
  16. The determination is set aside.
  17.  The appeal is to be heard at the First tier Tribunal at Taylor  house
      on 20th February 2015 (excluding Judges McDade and Martins).



                               Signed                 Date 1/10/2014


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
