

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09880/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  23 September 2014                         |On 26 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                                 ADEEL AHMED
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:  Ms Khan, Counsel, instructed by Maz Shah Legal.
For the Respondent: Mrs Petteresen, HOPO

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal came before Judge Baker on 8  May  2014.  He  allowed  the
      claimant's appeal on Article 8 grounds.
   2. The claimant arrived in the  UK  as  a  student,  and,  following  the
      curtailment of his leave, married  his  first  cousin  in  an  Islamic
      ceremony, and made an application for leave to remain on that basis.
   3. It was accepted that he could not meet the requirements of the  Rules.
      The judge accepted that there was a subsisting relationship  and  that
      the claimant's wife was unwell and needed his care.
   4. However there is nothing in this determination which  shows  that  the
      Secretary of State's interests were properly weighed and considered.
   5. The judge did not inform his  conclusions  by  any  reference  to  the
      immigration rules, but embarked  on  his  own  freewheeling  exercise,
      unencumbered by them, which is the wrong approach.
   6. Furthermore it is difficult to see what the  basis  for  some  of  his
      conclusions were in the evidence before  him,  for  example  that  the
      claimant's wife needs 24 care.
   7. The decision is set aside.
   8. The appeal should be reheard afresh by a differently constituted first-
      tier tribunal, not to include  Judge  Baker,  at  Bradford,  with  all
      issues at large.



Signed                                  Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
