
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 09642 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 May 2014                                 |On 17 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Noela Francess Claye
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The respondent was not represented
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing on human rights grounds an appeal  by  the
    respondent (hereinafter "the  claimant")  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to remove her from the United Kingdom.  The claimant
    was not represented before me  today.   She  came  armed  with  a  very
    detailed letter from Public Law  Project  asking  for  an  adjournment.
    With the help of Mr Walker for the Secretary of State I tested out  the
    strength of the Secretary of State's case before making any decision on
    that application. I concluded that this is not a case where I found  it
    appropriate or necessary or in the  interests  of  justice  to  adjourn
    because it concerns an appeal that  I  am  going  to  dismiss  for  the
    reasons given.

 2. In outline, the claimant is a citizen of Sierra Leone born in 1947  and
    so she is now 66 years old.  Although apparently perfectly  capable  of
    addressing me, which she did appropriately and with dignity, I think it
    right to say that her general  appearance  is  of  someone  possibly  a
    little older than the age given and this is no  doubt  something  which
    acted on the mind of the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The claimant came to the United Kingdom in September 2004 as a  visitor
    and remained without leave from 2005.  On  3  July  2012  she  made  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain.

 4. Looked at superficially this case seems to be a rather annoying example
    of a single relative joining her family in the United  Kingdom  without
    regard for the Rules and staying around for long enough to assert in  a
    right (in her mind) to remain but that would be a very  wrong  analysis
    of the case.  There are different elements to this case that have  been
    brought out very clearly in a careful and  full  determination  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 5. The claimant was in Sierra Leone at a time of great social  disruption.
    She suffered significantly including being raped which must be regarded
    as being amongst the very worst kind  of  violence  that  a  woman  can
    survive. Had she organised things differently she might have been  able
    to establish a claim to be a refugee.  No such claim was made and there
    is no reason to think that she is  a  refugee  now.  Sierra  Leone  has
    changed. Nevertheless it is very important to emphasise that this is  a
    case of a person who has had a very hard time in Sierra Leone  and  her
    reluctance to live there is clearly rooted  in  something  much  deeper
    than her personal convenience and her understandable  not  particularly
    weighty desire to be with her family.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that in  her  time  in  the  United
    Kingdom the claimant had established a significant private  and  family
    life.  She lived with her niece who looked after her  financially.  She
    contributed to running the home and looked after her niece's  children.
    She had also made herself an active member of society, particularly  in
    her involvement in St Peter's Church and its extended community,  where
    she was clearly highly regarded.  She is a person  who  has  not  lived
    selfishly in her time in the United Kingdom.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge took account of her age, her time in  the
    United Kingdom and all the circumstances of the  case  before  deciding
    that it would be disproportionate to remove her.

 8. In paragraph 38 of his  determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    particularly considered proportionality.  I have set it out below.   He
    said:

         "Firstly in favour of the  Secretary  of  State  I  find  that  the
         [claimant] came in as a visitor and has overstayed for  over  eight
         years in the United Kingdom.  When the [claimant] came  to  the  UK
         there was no legitimate expectation that she would  be  allowed  to
         stay in the UK indefinitely.  However in favour of  the  [claimant]
         is the fact that she has never claimed benefits and she  has  never
         committed any  criminal  offence.   The  [claimant]  is  clearly  a
         vulnerable adult bearing in mind the  background  she  has  had  of
         being raped.  This has brought back old memories and returning  her
         to Sierra Leone would be placing her at her  age  in  a  vulnerable
         position.  The evidence before me is that the [claimant]  does  not
         have any family members in Sierra Leone.  She has not  lived  there
         for over eighteen years.  I therefore find that there are no family
         ties for her back in Sierra  Leone.   She  has  a  very  supportive
         network in the United Kingdom which can only  help  to  extend  her
         wellbeing bearing in mind her age."

 9. In paragraph 3  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  the  Secretary  of  State
    criticised the judge for allowing the appeal without proper  regard  to
    the medical care that would be available to her in Sierra  Leone.   The
    grounds referred  to  the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MM
    (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279 and described medical care as "an
    additional factor to be weighed in the  balance,  with  other  factors,
    which by themselves engage Article 8".  It then went on to say that the
    approach was expressed as: "Supposing ... the appellant has established
    firm family ties in this country, then the availability  of  continuing
    medical treatment here coupled with his dependence on the  family  here
    for support, together establish "private life" under Article 8."

10. The grounds then complain that the test made it clear that medical care
    was only relevant where an individual's personal ties to the UK have  a
    direct bearing on the prognosis.

11. There is a report from Women Against Rape and its officer Sian Evans in
    the bundle at page 67. The report includes the following:

         "[The claimant] is clearly suffering from symptoms typical of  Rape
         Trauma Syndrome. In addition to the violence she herself  suffered,
         she also witnesses adults and children being killed  in  the  civil
         war. Also compounding her symptoms is the long period in which  she
         has  been  unable  to  seek  help,  suffering  profound   isolation
         particularly as an older woman. As a result, she has not been  able
         to start to recover from her experiences. Now we  are  helping  her
         establish a support  network  to  start  this  process,  which  now
         includes a referral for psychiatric treatment.  Expert  psychiatric
         evidence about [the claimant's] state of mind and ongoing needs may
         be needed by the Tribunal to consider her appeal thoroughly.

         To deprive [the claimant] of support at this point would  be  cruel
         and devastating. She cannot contemplate the  possibility  of  being
         sent back to Sierra Leone: too terrified because of the horrors  of
         the rebel atrocities she suffered and witnessed there. She  has  no
         connection with anyone there as most her of relatives are dead: the
         remainder have fled to other  countries  and  she  only  knows  the
         whereabouts of those in the UK. She  would  have  no  community  or
         specialist support in the Sierra Leone.

         It is widely acknowledged that the aftermath or rape can last  many
         years. .... [The claimant] would face isolation and destitution  in
         Sierra Leone. As an older woman with no family members left  there,
         she is certain that being returned would be a  death  sentence.  We
         believe that it would be impossible for her  to  recover  somewhere
         she feels in such terrible danger".

12. I remind myself that the Tribunal is not criticised in the grounds  for
    the way it evaluated the evidence but for acting without evidence.

13. It is plain that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had evidence before  him
    that the claimant benefited considerably from local support and in  the
    absence of that support would face isolation and destitution. It  would
    be impossible for her to recover and might even take her own life.

14. The point I am making is that it seems to me there was evidence  before
    the Tribunal exactly of the kind that the grounds allege  the  Tribunal
    did not have.

15. Mr Walker very rapidly dissociated himself from ground 3. The drafting,
    of course, was none of his doing.

16. What we are left with then is the suggestion that the  Tribunal  failed
    to give adequate reasons and the suggestion that there were no  reasons
    why the ties with the niece went beyond mere emotional ties.

17. I dealing first with the suggestion that First-tier Tribunal's  reasons
    for allowing the appeal were inadequate.  This, I find,  is  completely
    unsustainable.  It is absolutely plain why the judge made the  decision
    that he did.  He found that removing a vulnerable  elderly  lady  to  a
    country where she has no contacts and very unhappy memories that  could
    be damaging to her health was disproportionate.  I am satisfied that is
    a view he was entitled to reach.

18. The reference in the grounds to no family ties  is  backed  up  with  a
    reference to the case of Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31  but  I  am
    not sure what point is being made  there.   It  surely  cannot  be  the
    Secretary of State's position that removing a person who  has  been  in
    the United Kingdom, however unlawfully, for a period of  years  is  not
    interfering with her private and family life.  It manifestly is  and  I
    do not know why Kugathas is thought to be  a  helpful  or  illuminating
    case at all.

19. There is another half point into that in the grounds that the Secretary
    of State has policies  to  deal  with  things  that  should  have  been
    considered  but  no  policies  have  been  produced   or   specifically
    identified.

20. At the risk of repeating myself there is much more to  this  case  than
    first meets  the  eye.   It  is  clearly  a  humane  and  compassionate
    decision. Much more importantly in my judgment it is a pragmatic and  a
    legally correct one. Still more significantly the grounds on which  the
    Secretary of State chose to bring the appeal do not support  a  finding
    that the First-tier Tribunal acted unlawfully.

21. I dismiss the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 June 2014                   |








