
IAC-FH-NL-V3
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09621/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 March 2015                      |On 27 March 2015                     |
|Prepared 3 March 2015                |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MS MARIA SHEENA DE JESUS LLAO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Kenny, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Jaisri, Counsel instructed by Raffles Haigh
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Philippines, date of birth 30 August  1986,
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse  to  vary
    leave to remain and to make removal directions under Section 47 of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  Her appeal  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju (the judge), who, on 22  August  2014
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and allowed an  appeal
    under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.   The  judge  did  not
    deal with the issue of the removal directions.

3.   Permission to appeal that decision was given to the Secretary of  State
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 9 October 2014.

4.   On 17 December 2014 I determined that the  judge's  decision  contained
    material errors of law such that the Original Tribunal  decision  could
    not stand and the decision on paragraph 276ADE of the Rules would  have
    to be re-made.  Directions were given.

5.   At the hearing on 3 March  2015  Mr  Jaisri  presented  the  Claimant's
    evidence by reference to her original statement dated 31 December  2013
    as supplemented by her additional statement, dated 7  April  2014.   In
    addition reliance was placed upon  the  statement  of  Benita  Catibog,
    dated  30  December  2013,  and  substantially   replicated   but   not
    identically in a further  statement  of  7  April  2014.   In  addition
    reliance was placed upon the statement of Harriet Hayes in a  "To  Whom
    it May Concern" letter dated 7 April 2014.

6.   The Claimant adopted her  two  statements.   In  cross-examination  the
    Claimant confirmed that she had entered the United Kingdom in September
    2008, had at all material times lived with her aunt, had good relations
    with two cousins with all of whom she communicated in English.  She was
    still able to speak Tagalog.  The Claimant confirmed that  her  husband
    who  had  acquired  British  nationality  was   originally   from   the
    Philippines.  Their marriage had broken down and there was  no  contact
    between the Claimant and her husband.

7.   The Claimant said her family's objection to her marriage was such  that
    her two brothers and sister in the  Philippines  and  her  parents  and
    other family did not want anything more to do with her.  Since being in
    the United Kingdom she had worked as a healthcare worker, for a  single
    employer, Heritage Care in Aylesbury,  Buckinghamshire,  a  residential
    home for elderly people.

8.   The Claimant described her contact in the UK with two friends who  were
    of Philippine origin and that essentially  she  was  fully  assimilated
    into life in the United Kingdom.  Her friends spoke  English,  she  ate
    typically English food, she did not go to Filipino restaurants and  she
    would go out with her friends to the public  house  celebrating  events
    including such matters as Christmas.  The Claimant attended a  C  of  E
    Church.  Her own aunt had tried to maintain contact with the family  in
    the Philippines before the  marriage  but  then  and  since  they  were
    unwilling to have any contact with either the  Claimant  or  her  aunt.
    Family birthdays were not recognised by cards or contact.

9.   The Claimant shares her interest in sport activities with  her  friends
    in the UK.  She  confirmed  no  one  was  dependent  upon  her  or  her
    repatriating  money  to  the  Philippines.   The  Claimant   said   her
    qualifications and training in the United Kingdom was applicable to  UK
    work and that she would have to re-train in the Philippines if she  was
    to find work there.  The Claimant had no contact with her  husband  and
    she did not wish to have to return to university  to  re-train  in  the
    Philippines.

10.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju found the Claimant to be  a  credible
    and  reliable  witness  and  the  Claimant's  aunt  gave  corroborative
    evidence.  The judge accepted that, by choosing to  marry  her  husband
    contrary to the wishes of her family, the Claimant's family had severed
    ties with her.  He also accepted that she did not maintain  any  social
    contacts with the Philippines.  The Claimant's  case  appears  to  have
    been accepted that she had no work to return to, she could not transfer
    her skills and qualifications acquired in the United Kingdom  and  that
    she had nowhere to go  because  her  family  did  not  want  her  back.
    Implicit in the decision was that the judge found the Claimant credible
    on her claim that the family had rejected her and that the breakdown of
    her marriage would not help her position: Her  family  would  say  that
    they  have  been  proven  right  and  that   the   Claimant   was   the
    responsibility of her husband, who she had chosen against their  wishes
    and was no longer their responsibility.

11.  The judge also accepted that the  Claimant  in  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of marriage had done so with no expectation of, or
    intention to. return to her own country but rather intended  to  settle
    permanently in the United Kingdom.  The judge also accepted that  since
    arriving here she had  built  a  life  and  created  ties  to  the  UK.
    Likewise her intention to permanently settle in the United Kingdom  was
    consistent with the absence of maintaining any connections with  school
    friends or university friends in the Philippines.

12.  The Claimant expressed anxieties about  returning  to  the  Philippines
    where she had never lived on her own but had  always  been  within  her
    family.

13.  The Claimant confirmed that although she had spent  some  22  years  in
    the Philippines the last six years in the United Kingdom had  been  the
    significant period in her life where she had left her  family  and  its
    control over her life, got married, became self-sufficient, earned  her
    own living, became used to the United Kingdom and the way of  life  she
    had here.

14.  The Claimant believed she had lived a sheltered life within her  family
    in her parents' home as a child and a student.  She had not experienced
    life as an adult in  the  Philippines.  Returning  to  the  Philippines
    filled her with trepidation and anxiety about her safety.

15.  It is apparent from the way the evidence was given and  the  Claimant's
    responses to questions was that she was someone  who  had  worked,  who
    spoke good English, who had come to live in  the  UK  pursuant  to  the
    deceit of her husband-to-be and she had suffered domestic  violence  at
    the hands of her husband.  Thus the Claimant said she had no social and
    family ties with the Philippines,  she  had  a  linguistic  connection,
    speaking Tagalog, there was no family to protect her or assist  her  on
    return and therefore ties as remained were remote and  of  no  material
    value.

16.  In Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 60, at paragraph 123-125,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    said:

         "123.    The natural  and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  'ties'
             imports, we think, a concept  involving  something  more  than
             merely remote and abstract links to the  country  of  proposed
             deportation or removal. It involves there  being  a  continued
             connection to life in that  country;  something  that  ties  a
             claimant to his or her country of origin. If this were not the
             case then it would appear that a person's nationality  of  the
             country of proposed deportation could  of  itself  lead  to  a
             failure to meet the  requirements  of  the  rule.  This  would
             render the application of the rule, given the  context  within
             which it operates, entirely meaningless.

         124. We recognise that the text under the rules is an exacting one.
             Consideration of whether  a  person  has  'no  ties'  to  such
             country must involve a rounded assessment of all the  relevant
             circumstances and is not to be limited  to  'social,  cultural
             and family' circumstances. Nevertheless ...".

17.  The Tribunal continued at paragraph 125:

         "125.    Whilst each case turns on  its  own  facts,  circumstances
             relevant to the assessment of whether a person has ties to the
             country to which they would have to go if they  were  required
             to leave the United Kingdom must include, but are not  limited
             to: the length of time a person has spent in  the  country  to
             which he would have to go if he were  required  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom, the age that the person left that country, the
             exposure that person has had to the  cultural  norms  of  that
             country, whether  that  person  speaks  the  language  of  the
             country, the extent of the  family and friends that person has
             in the country to which he is being deported  or  removed  and
             the quality of the relationships that person  has  with  those
             friends and family members. "

18.  In YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 the statement  set  out  above  was
    accepted by Aikens LJ and he commented at paragraph 51 of the decision:
    "However, the  exercise  that  had  to  be  conducted  was  a  'rounded
    assessment of all the relevant circumstances', which  were  not  to  be
    confined to 'social, cultural and family' issues."  The court  went  on
    to confirm that the First-tier Tribunal  was  required  to  consider  a
    rounded assessment whether the Claimant's familial ties could result in
    support to him in the event of  his  return  to  the  DRC.   The  court
    concluded that "the Strasbourg jurisprudence understands assessment  of
    this matter to require the decision-maker to  take  into  account  both
    subjective and objective considerations and also to consider what  lies
    within the choice of a Claimant  to  achieve.   At  paragraph  16  Lord
    Justice Aikens went on the say that the assessment of those ties has an
    objective as well as a subjective dimension  but  that  the  assessment
    must consider, as a  relevant  consideration,  whether  ties  that  are
    dormant can be revived.

19.  In the case of Bossadi (paragraph 276ADE; suitability) [2015]  UKUT  42
    the Tribunal followed the same approach.  In that case a tie between an
    applicant  and  his  mother  was  "not  a  strong  familial  tie"   but
    nevertheless  one  that  could  be  pursued  and  strengthened  by  the
    applicant if he chose a rather  different  factual  situation  to  this
    Claimant.

20.  In this case on the evidence before me I find  there  is  no  realistic
    prospect of a revival of the relationship between the Claimant and  her
    family.   The  Claimant  would,  if  removed,  be  returning   to   the
    Philippines on her own.

21.  I take into account that the Claimant lived for the first 22  years  of
    her life in the Philippines, speaks Tagalog, and had a life there.   It
    is apparent that subjectively she does not wish to return  and  regards
    herself as having made a new life in the United Kingdom and has nothing
    to return to in the Philippines.

22.  I find that the Claimant for good and understandable reasons broke  off
    past ties and friendships in the Philippines simply because she came to
    make a new life in the UK and she had no idea that she  would  ever  be
    considering a  return  there.   I  find  no  evidence  to  support  the
    conclusion that the Claimant's assessment of her lost relationship with
    her family members was objectively well-founded.  I  have  no  evidence
    that the manner in which her aunt and herself conduct  their  lives  is
    connected to life in the Philippines, for example by having  access  to
    Philippines television, radio or films.  I have no evidence to  suggest
    her diet, eating habits, music choices or indeed anything  relating  to
    any current contact in the Philippines  or  being  influenced  by  life
    there.  There was no challenge in cross-examination to  the  Claimant's
    claim that she had no family, no friends, no job, no home to return  to
    in the Philippines.

23.  It also  seemed  to  me  a  material  consideration  in  terms  of  the
    Claimant's trying to re-establish herself in the Philippines, that  she
    is married, that marriage has failed, and that she  has  no  protector:
    As such I find the likelihood is that she is more vulnerable as a woman
    on her own.

24.  It seemed to me that if being able to speak Tagalog  was  determinative
    anyone who can speak some if not all of their  national  language  will
    simply be outside of the Immigration Rules, paragraph 276ADE.  I  found
    credible that the Claimant has previously made the  conscious  decision
    to become part of the United  Kingdom  in  terms  of  settling  into  a
    community,  her  church,  with  friends  and  acquaintances  and   work
    colleagues.  I did not find the Claimant exaggerated her  evidence.   I
    found her a credible and  reliable  witness  of  fact.   I  accept  her
    sincerity in wishing to have a British lifestyle.

25.  Accordingly,  I  find  the  Claimant  has  shown  that  she  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   In
    reaching that decision I have been fully aware of the  relatively  long
    period as a child and a young  woman  that  the  Claimant  was  in  the
    Philippines.  I too accept she does not have family to return to, there
    is no likelihood of reconciliation with them and she has  lost  contact
    over several years with her school, university friends.   She  has  not
    been living according to Philippine cultural norms.

26.  I have I  believe  reached  a  rounded  assessment  of  the  Claimant's
    connections to the Philippines.  I  remind  myself  that  the  relevant
    requirement is that the Claimant be over 18 years and above, have lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom for less than twenty years  but  has
    no ties (including social, cultural or  family)  with  the  country  to
    which she would have to go if required to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.
    The Secretary of State's view is that there  must  be  a  loss  of  all
    significant ties and in the event that they  have  not  been  lost  the
    Secretary of State adds a further gloss of an ability to  re-assimilate
    to life in the Philippines.

27.  It seemed to me that the length of time  a  person  has  spent  in  the
    Philippines and retained its language are points of  contact  but  they
    are not necessarily ties in terms of the ability of a person to return.
     Rather in this case the accepted disowning  of  the  Claimant  by  her
    family, the breakdown of her marriage,  the  lack  of  anyone  to  have
    recourse to for protection let alone the lack of work or  accommodation
    seems to me to be relevant to the impact on return to the  Phillipines.
    Accordingly, I find that this is one of possibly those few cases, where
    an adult being over the age of 18 but still clearly, until she  decided
    to marry against their wishes, was very much  under  the  influence  of
    family and parents.  She had not been exercising the kind of free  will
    and  decision-making  both  in  terms  of  where  she  lived,  who  she
    associated with and the parental expectations upon her.

28.  In terms of cultural norms the Claimant plainly seeks to live her  life
    in the United Kingdom as if she was British born.  It does not seem  to
    me that anyone who has lived in their home country until the age of  20
    ever entirely  leaves  behind  an  understanding  of  cultural  matters
    arising from their country of origin.   Plainly  what  is  relevant  to
    their life and  how  they  live  their  life  will  change  over  time,
    particularly if living away from their country of  nationality.   I  do
    not find the Claimant has remained living in accordance  with  cultural
    norms in the Philippines nor does the Secretary of State  identify  how
    she is or may do so.

29.  I find  no  evidence  to  support  the  general  proposition  that  the
    Claimant can re-kindle past friendships if there had been those of such
    strength those would have been maintained:  There is no evidence of her
    doing so or knowing the whereabouts of them.  There is no  evidence  of
    contact with her family by email or telephone or at all.

30.  I have also considered because the issue was  raised  the  basis  of  a
    claim founded upon Article 8 ECHR grounds.  It is clear and not  argued
    before me that the Claimant has a private life in  the  United  Kingdom
    and the effects of removal would be significant.  It also appears to be
    accepted by both sides that the Secretary of State's decision is lawful
    in making removal directions and serves purposes arising under  Article
    8(2) of the ECHR.

31.  It is a matter of judgment as to the proportionality of  the  Secretary
    of State's decision. In considering  that  matter  I  fully  take  into
    account and apply Sections 117A and 117B of the Immigration  Act  2014,
    amending the NIAA 2002.  I find that the Claimant has  always  been  at
    any material time either a student or  later  employed,  she  has  been
    lawfully in the United Kingdom.  Her immigration status has never  been
    precarious  at  any  material  time.   The  Claimant  has   skills   in
    healthcare, care home assistant skills which are needed in  the  United
    Kingdom, she has participated within her community and settled into the
    United Kingdom.  No element of  public  interest  has  been  identified
    which shows any harm to it.  The Claimant's continuing presence in  the
    United Kingdom is a benefit to the UK.  The Claimant has  also  through
    employment and paying her taxes contributed to her presence  here,  she
    is entirely self-sufficient and represents no  likelihood  of  being  a
    burden  upon  the  UK  taxpayer.   In  these   circumstances   I   give
    considerable weight to the public interest but I do  not  find  on  the
    facts that the circumstances militate against the  Claimant  remaining.
    The Secretary of State's decisions are disproportionate.

32.  The requirement for removal under Section 47  IANA  2006  is  also  not
    made  out.  I  allow  the  appeal  against  both  of  the  Respondent's
    decisions, dated 4 February 2014.

NOTICE OF DECISION

33.  The appeal on immigration grounds is allowed.

34.  The appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds is allowed.

35.  The appeal against removal directions is allowed.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order is necessary or appropriate.



Signed        Date 23 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has succeeded on the basis  of  much  information  that  was  not
before the Secretary  of  State  in  the  form  that  it  now  is.   In  the
circumstances I find that this is not a case where it would  be  appropriate
to make a fee award.



Signed        Date 23 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
