
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09719/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26 October 2017                    |On 20 November 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR MOHSIN KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwncyz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Chohan of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. I will refer to the Secretary  of  State  as  such
    throughout and to Mr Khan as the claimant to avoid confusion.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 4  January  1985.
    He entered the United Kingdom on 28 September 2008 with a student  visa
    valid until 30 June 2010.  It is not entirely  clear  from  the  papers
    before me what applications were subsequently made by the claimant  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 3.

 4. The claimant applied on 18 December 2014 for leave to remain in the  UK
    outside the Immigration Rules.  The  Secretary  of  State  refused  his
    application in a decision  made  on  20  February  2015.   It  is  that
    decision that was appealed against to the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The claimant first appealed against the Secretary of  State's  decision
    to the First-tier Tribunal in 2015. On 2 July 2015 First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge J S Law dismissed his appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal considered
    the appeal on the papers.  The appeal was dismissed on the  basis  that
    the claimant had failed to submit the grounds for  the  appeal  and  no
    explanation had been provided for that failure.  Having considered  the
    papers the judge concluded that there were no circumstances that  would
    render it inappropriate for the  appeal  to  be  determined  without  a
    hearing and therefore considered the matter.  In  the  absence  of  any
    grounds of appeal the  judge  found  no  basis  to  conclude  that  the
    Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  not  in  accordance   with   the
    Immigration Rules.  The  claimant  applied  for  permission  to  appeal
    against that decision and submitted that grounds  of  appeal  had  been
    faxed to the Tribunal.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In a decision  promulgated
    on 27 October 2015 Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Peart  dismissed  the
    claimant's appeal.  Having considered the papers in the file the  Upper
    Tribunal found no  evidence  of  any  grounds  of  appeal  having  been
    received by the Tribunal.  The Upper Tribunal therefore concluded  that
    the First-tier Tribunal decision did not contain a  material  error  of
    law and dismissed the claimant's appeal.

 6. The claimant then applied for permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  The grounds enclosed documents that  it  was  asserted  should
    have been filed  in  the  claimant's  file  with  the  Tribunal.   This
    included a fax confirmation report which confirmed that seventeen pages
    were sent on 9 March 2015.  On 14 June  2016  Vice  President  Ockelton
    indicated that he proposed to set  aside  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal and direct that the matter be reheard inviting submissions  to
    the contrary within fourteen  days,  having  considered  the  proof  of
    faxing of seventeen pages of documents to the First-tier Tribunal.   On
    1 August 2016 having received no response Vice President  Ockelton  set
    aside the decision of Judge Peart and remitted the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal.  Thus the appeal  came  for  hearing  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herbert in November 2016.

 7. In a decision promulgated on 6 January 2017 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Herbert OBE allowed the claimant's  appeal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    found that there would be insurmountable obstacles to the claimant  and
    his wife integrating into Pakistan.  The judge found that the  claimant
    was entitled to leave to remain under the Immigration  Rules,  Appendix
    FM and Exception EX.1.  The judge also went on to  consider  Article  8
    outside of the Immigration Rules.  He found that there can be  said  to
    be insurmountable obstacles to the claimant and his  spouse  relocating
    to Pakistan.  The judge allowed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules
    and also under Article 8.

 8. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal against  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Herbert's  decision.  On  3  August  2017  Acting
    Resident Judge Appleyard granted the Secretary of State  permission  to
    appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 9. The grounds of appeal assert that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred
    in law by allowing the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  is
    asserted that the judge failed to recognise the high hurdle of the test
    of insurmountable obstacles set out in  EX.1.   Reference  is  made  to
    paragraphs 19 to 21 of the First-tier Tribunal decision and the factors
    identified by the judge that he considered were sufficient  to  justify
    the test.  Those factors plainly cannot satisfy the test  in  light  of
    the guidance given in the case of Agyarko & Others (on the  application
    of) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440.  It is asserted at paragraph 20 of  the
    decision that the judge expressly refers  to  the  convenience  of  the
    couple which is plainly an irrelevant and erroneous consideration.   In
    light of the fact that the British sponsor had herself only arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in 2016  having  lived  in  Pakistan  for  the  vast
    majority of her life and that her entire family  remain  there,  it  is
    hard to see that a judge properly directed as to the test to be applied
    could have reached a rational conclusion that EX.1 was met.

10. The grounds also assert that the appeal allowed outside  the  Rules  on
    Article 8 was vitiated by a material error being tainted by the judge's
    misdirection as to the  insurmountable  obstacles  test.   There  is  a
    complete failure to identify any  compelling  circumstances  justifying
    allowing the appeal outside of the Rules.  Reference  is  made  to  the
    case  of  Treebhawon  &  Others  (NIAA  2002  Part  5A   -   compelling
    circumstances  test)  [2017]  UKUT  00013   (IAC).    The   Article   8
    consideration is based on a factual mistake, at paragraph 24, where the
    judge finds that the claimant has always been in the  UK  lawfully  and
    that Section 117B(4) was not relevant to the appeal.  The claimant  has
    been an overstayer since August 2014, the  current  application  having
    been made out of time in December 2014.

11. Mr Diwycyz relied on the grounds of appeal.  He submitted  that  it  is
    clear from the  case  of  Agyarko  that  the  test  for  insurmountable
    obstacles is a high hurdle to be overcome and that the judge had failed
    to apply the test correctly.

12. Mr Chohan submitted that one of the reasons for refusal was because the
    appellant could not meet the financial requirements.   He  referred  to
    the case of MM (Pakistan) and  said  that  clearly  now  the  financial
    requirements are not set in stone.  He submitted  that  the  judge  did
    consider that there were compelling factors in this case.  He submitted
    that there has been a change in the circumstances which would  have  to
    be taken into account and that EX.1 clearly is relevant to any remaking
    of the decision as the claimant and his  wife  now  have  a  baby.   He
    submitted that the couple have not hidden any  factors.   The  claimant
    was earning but was unable to meet the requirements for  the  threshold
    of earnings.  The judge may well have found that the circumstances were
    exceptional.

13. In reply Mr Diwncyz submitted that the judge relied on inconvenience to
    the couple.

Discussion

14. With regard to insurmountable obstacles the judge set out at  paragraph
    22:

         "22. Taking all those factors into the round I find  that  in  this
             finely balanced  case  under  the  Immigration  Rules  it  can
             clearly be said that there are insurmountable obstacles to the
             appellant and his spouse relocating to Pakistan.  The  primary
             reason for this is that although the appellant has been in the
             United Kingdom since 2008 and has not been  back  to  Pakistan
             since he spent the majority of his life there and  is  clearly
             able in terms of language, culture and custom  to  reintegrate
             into society.  His wife  first  came  to  the  United  Kingdom
             although a UK citizen on 1 January 2016 and would face  losing
             her UK citizenship if she was forced to reintegrate back  into
             society in Pakistan.  That would  present  them  with  clearly
             some hardship and some practical  difficulties  in  that  they
             would both lose their employment and  accommodation  with  the
             appellant's sister in the United Kingdom but they  would  face
             an insurmountable obstacle in that  his  wife  would  have  to
             relinquish a UK citizenship.  Coupled with the  other  factors
             that would amount to  an  insurmountable  obstacle.   In  this
             situation the couple should not  be  forced  to  relocate.   I
             therefore do not find  that  paragraph  EX.1  applies  to  the
             relocation of the appellant and his UK citizen spouse.

15. The judge has erred in his approach. The insurmountable  obstacles  are
    the obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK. The  judge  has
    not considered insurmountable obstacles in terms of family life outside
    the UK, he has focused on what they would lose in  the  UK.  The  judge
    found that the appellant was  able  to  re-integrate  in  Pakistan  but
    considered that the appellant's wife would have to  relinquish  her  UK
    citizenship (although he does not specify  why)  and  that  this  would
    present them with some hardship and practical difficulties because they
    would both lose their jobs in the UK and accommodation here. The  focus
    should have been on the obstacles to their family  life  continuing  in
    Pakistan that the couple would face.

16. In EX.2 insurmountable obstacles is defined:

         "For the purposes of paragraph EX.1(b)  'insurmountable  obstacles'
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

17. In Agyarko & Others the court found:

         45. By virtue of paragraph EX.1(b), "insurmountable obstacles"  are
         treated as a requirement for the grant of leave under the Rules  in
         cases to which that paragraph  applies.  Accordingly,  interpreting
         the expression in the same sense as in  the  Strasbourg  case  law,
         leave to remain would not normally be granted  in  cases  where  an
         applicant for leave to remain under the partner route was in the UK
         in breach of  immigration  laws,  unless  the  applicant  or  their
         partner would face very serious difficulties  in  continuing  their
         family life together outside the UK, which could not be overcome or
         would entail very serious hardship.

18. The 'test' is  a  stringent  one  and  represents  a  high  hurdle.  To
    demonstrate that there are insurmountable obstacles the appellant  will
    have to show that there are very significant difficulties which  cannot
    be overcome or that there would be  very  serious  hardship.  Both  the
    appellant and his partner have lived in Pakistan for  the  majority  of
    their lives and there is family in Pakistan. The factors set out by the
    judge cannot on any reasonable interpretation of  the  test  meet  that
    high hurdle.  The judge has in essence set out a test of inconvenience.
    There was an error of law in the approach adopted by the judge  and  in
    his  failure  to  apply  the  high  threshold  required  to  meet   the
    insurmountable obstacles test.

19. The judge went on to consider the case outside the Immigration Rules.

         23.  ...  There are grounds for demonstrating that removal would be
             unjustifiably harsh given the length of time the appellant has
             been here and the citizenship of his wife.  I therefore go  on
             to  consider  the  appellant's  application  outside  of   the
             Immigration Rules under Article 8 of the ECHR.  In doing so  I
             have  regard  however  to  Section  117A  to  D  of  the  2002
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  implemented  by
             Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014.  I acknowledge Section
             117B that the maintenance of immigration  control  is  in  the
             public interest and that persons who seek to enter  or  remain
             in the United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English  because
             persons who can speak English (a) are  less  of  a  burden  on
             taxpayers and (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         24.  ...  The appellant's wife does have UK citizenship and  rights
             and responsibilities and entitlements to which  she  would  be
             forced to abandon should she be forced to follow  her  husband
             back  to  Pakistan.   The  appellant  himself  is   now   well
             integrated into UK society, lives with his  sister-in-law  and
             her husband in a three bedroomed house.  They are both working
             and clearly have aspirations to make a future  for  themselves
             in the United Kingdom.  There would in my  view  follow  grave
             consequences for both should the appellant be forced to remove
             himself back to Pakistan as on the face of it he would have no
             means of support, accommodation or accommodation to  turn  to.
             I do accept that his father is still a  resident  of  Pakistan
             but most of his family is in the United Kingdom.  His wife has
             family both in Pakistan and in  the  UK  but  it  would  be  a
             considerable interference with his and his wife's private  and
             family life for him to be removed  and  for  her  to  have  to
             follow him back to Pakistan.

         ...

         28.  On the slightly unusual facts of this  case  I  find  that  it
             would  be  wholly  disproportionate  to  the  maintenance   of
             effective immigration control given that this is a genuine and
             subsisting marriage that the decision to be made here  and  it
             be made in favour of the appellant  remaining  in  the  United
             Kingdom together with his wife to continue their  private  and
             family life in the United Kingdom.  I find that as a matter of
             fact that they would face great hardship even for a period  of
             several months' separation and financial insecurity should the
             appellant be forced to return to Pakistan with his wife having
             to make the invidious decision of whether to accompany him  or
             to wait in the United Kingdom for his application to be  made.
             Neither  provides  a  sensible  course  of  action   and   the
             reasonable  and  proportionate  decision  is  to   allow   the
             application under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  outside  of  the
             Immigration Rules."

20. The judge's assessment of proportionality centres on what he  considers
    to be grave consequences, namely the appellant 'would have no means  of
    support, accommodation or accommodation to turn to.  I do  accept  that
    his father is still a resident of Pakistan'. This runs entirely counter
    to his earlier finding  that  the  appellant  could  re-integrate  into
    Pakistan. The judge's  consideration  of  proportionality  is  at  best
    confused.  In finding that 'it would be wholly disproportionate to  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control'  the  reasons  given  are
    'that this is a genuine and subsisting marriage [and] that the decision
    [is] to be made here'.  In Agyarko and others the court held:

         57. That approach is also appropriate when a court or  tribunal  is
         considering whether a refusal of leave to remain is compatible with
         article 8 in the context of precarious family life. Ultimately,  it
         has  to  decide  whether  the  refusal  is  proportionate  in   the
         particular case before it, balancing the  strength  of  the  public
         interest in the removal of  the  person  in  question  against  the
         impact on private and family life. In  doing  so,  it  should  give
         appropriate weight to the Secretary of State's policy, expressed in
         the Rules  and  the  Instructions,  that  the  public  interest  in
         immigration  control  can  be  outweighed,  when   considering   an
         application for leave to remain brought by a person in  the  UK  in
         breach of immigration laws, only where  there  are  "insurmountable
         obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances" as defined. It must  also
         consider all factors relevant to the  specific  case  in  question,
         including, where relevant, the matters  discussed  in  paras  51-52
         above. The critical issue will generally  be  whether,  giving  due
         weight to the strength of the public interest in the removal of the
         person in the case before it, the article 8 claim  is  sufficiently
         strong  to  outweigh  it.  In  general,  in  cases  concerned  with
         precarious family life,  a  very  strong  or  compelling  claim  is
         required to outweigh the public interest in immigration control.




21. The judge has not applied the relevant case law correctly. On the facts
    of this case the factors identified by the  judge  cannot  sensibly  be
    described as very strong or compelling.

22. The judge found that the best place to decide such cases of family life
    is in the UK without requiring a person to leave  to  go  back  to  the
    country  of  origin  and  make  an  application  form  there  following
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40. In R (on the  application  of  Chen)  v  SSHD
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality)  IJR
    [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) it was held  that  there  may  be  cases  where
    temporary separation to enable an individual to make an application for
    entry clearance may be disproportionate. However, in all cases, it will
    be for the individual to place before the Secretary of  State  evidence
    that such temporary separation will interfere  disproportionately  with
    protected rights. It will not be enough to rely solely upon  the  case-
    law concerning Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40. It is not clear that an
    application form Pakistan would be certain to succeed  and  no  factors
    other than the fact that the appellant's wife  is  a  UK  citizen,  the
    financial cost and the appellant's  employment.  At  paragraph  20  the
    judge found that 'there is no logical reason why he should be forced to
    return to Pakistan simply to apply  for  entry  clearance  when  he  is
    eligible to remain under the Immigration Rules in  the  United  Kingdom
    now' and most telling is the  judge's  summary  that  'the  balance  of
    convenience...falls in favour of the appellant.'  The judge appears  to
    have approached the issue on the  basis  of  convenience  and  has  not
    correctly applied the relevant case law.

23. For the reasons set out above the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contained material errors of law. I set that decision aside pursuant to
    section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007
    ('TCEA').

24. I considered whether or not I could  re-make  the  decision  myself.  I
    considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I
    am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

25. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be re-heard
    de novo by the First-tier Tribunal  at Taylor House  before  any  judge
    other than Judge Herbert OBE  pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a)
    of the TCEA. A new hearing will be fixed at the next available date.

26. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed. The case is remitted to  be
heard by the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor  House  before  any  judge  other
than Judge Herbert OBE.





Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 19 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

