
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09522/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 August 2015                              |On 17 August 2015             |
|Prepared 6 August 2015                        |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                mr ayaz ahmad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born on 18 October  1987  appeals,
    with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Graves who in a determination promulgated on 6 February 2015  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State  to
    refuse to vary his leave and to remove him  under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   The appellant entered Britain with leave as a student under Tier  4  of
    the PBS on 24 June 2010.  He received further extensions of stay  until
    31 December 2013.  Before that  date  he  made  an  application  for  a
    further extension of stay to complete  his  accounting  qualifications.
    That application was refused in February 2014 and it  is  against  that
    refusal that the appellant appeals.

3.   The basis of the refusal was that the appellant was refused  under  the
    provisions of paragraph 245ZX(a) because he had been refused on one  of
    the general grounds for  refusal  set  out  in  paragraph  322  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  It  was  stated  that  he  had  provided  proof  of
    finances by way of United Bank statement and a  supporting  letter  but
    that  that  document  had  been  confirmed  as  false  by  the  issuing
    authority.  The notice of refusal went on to say:-

         "You have therefore used deception in this application  and  it  is
         refused under paragraph 322(1A) of  the  Immigration  Rules.   This
         means that any future applications for entry clearance or leave  to
         enter the UK you make could be refused under paragraph  320(7B)  of
         the Immigration Rules."

4.   On the date of the appeal  the  Presenting  Officer  produced  evidence
    that the appellant had entered into a marriage with an EEA national and
    made an application for a residence card.  That  application  had  been
    withdrawn in December 2013 when steps  had  been  taken  to  annul  the
    marriage.  The appellant had then entered into an Islamic marriage with
    a British citizen but that marriage had also been annulled.  In January
    2015 he had been interviewed with an EEA national at  Croydon  Registry
    Office and a decision  had  been  made  that  their  marriage  was  not
    genuine.

5.   The judge also had before  him  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  an
    appeal in 2009 which had been determined on the  papers  but  that  the
    file had been destroyed so no copy of the decision was available to the
    Tribunal.  The appellant denied that he had had an earlier appeal.

6.   Because the Immigration  Officer's  report  regarding  the  appellant's
    third marriage had not been produced until the morning of  the  hearing
    the judge put the hearing back.  The appellant's representative applied
    for an adjournment  to  take  instructions  but  that  application  was
    refused because such a long period had passed since  the  decision  had
    been made and the appeal had been adjourned on one other occasion.   In
    any event the  judge  pointed  out  that  the  appeal  related  to  the
    respondent's claim that the letter from United Bank and the  statements
    were not genuine and that was the main issue before the  Tribunal.   He
    said that he was willing to put the case back if the  appellant  wished
    his partner to attend court but was told that was not necessary as  his
    partner had returned to Portugal.  The appellant's representative  then
    said that he needed time to decide  whether  or  not  to  withdraw  the
    appeal so that the outcome of separate proceedings in relation  to  the
    claimed marriage of convenience could be known but  as  there  were  no
    separate proceedings anticipated and as the appellant had not indicated
    that he did wish to withdraw the appeal the judge decided that that was
    not an appropriate ground on which to adjourn.   It  appears  that  the
    appellant's representative protested that there would be separate legal
    proceedings in relation to the marriage and that the  judge's  decision
    would prejudice the outcome of those proceedings but the judge  pointed
    out that as there was no pre-action correspondence and the  appellant's
    representative could not identify which proceedings would be brought or
    against whom. He could not therefore accept there was any reason why he
    should, as asked, recuse himself.

7.   The judge in his determination, having set out the burden and  standard
    of proof and the relevant law and noting that the burden of  proof  lay
    on the respondent, considered the documentary evidence before him  with
    regard to the email chain running up to conclusion  of  the  respondent
    that the bank statements were not  genuine.   The  appellant  confirmed
    that the email address of the United Bank Limited was the correct email
    address but his representative argued that the emails were not  genuine
    and implied that the respondent had obtained false documents to support
    her case.

8.   The judge noted that the appellant could not explain why the  bank  had
    stated that the documents were not genuine and merely stated  that  the
    bank had made a mistake stating that the  emails  came  from  the  bank
    branch rather than the central office.  The appellant's claim was  that
    his family had closed the account for him.

9.   The judge noted arguments  by  the  Presenting  Officer  regarding  the
    appearance of the documentation on which the appellant had  relied  and
    the judge noted that the signature of the same person was different  on
    two documents as was the contact telephone number and that  there  were
    grammatical errors with missing words and phrases which raised concern,
    such as "please note this accountant has been closed".

10.  The judge correctly stated in paragraph 27 of  the  determination  that
    he had no  expertise  in  the  examination  or  the  authentication  of
    documents, however on the face of the evidence before him he found that
    the respondent had discharged the burden of proof.  He stated:-

         "She has obtained confirmation  from  the  issuing  authority,  the
         contact details of which the appellant accepts  are  correct,  that
         the documents are not genuine.  On their face, the  documents  also
         do not look like official  documents,  and  this  assessment,  when
         taken in the round, with the appellant's own oral evidence and  the
         emails, supports the conclusion that they are not genuine."

11.  In paragraph 28 of the determination he went  on  to  say  it  was  not
    necessary for him to  make  findings  about  the  claimed  marriage  of
    convenience to reach his decision but he did comment in that  paragraph
    that he had not found the appellant to be truthful and gave reasons for
    that conclusion.

12.  He considered the rights of the appellant under Article 8 of  the  ECHR
    and found that the interference in the appellant's private life  rights
    was justified.  He therefore dismissed the appeal under the Immigration
    Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

13.  Although the application was refused in the  First-tier  permission  to
    appeal was granted in the Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
    saying it was arguable that the judge should have adjourned the hearing
    given that evidence had been supplied on the day of the  hearing  which
    had changed the case which the appellant had to meet.  She went  on  to
    state:-

         "It is however arguable that  ultimately  that  Judge  Graves  made
         findings on the issue of the alleged marriage of the appellant  and
         Ms Nunes at paragraphs 28, 29 and 31  without  the  full  interview
         notes  and  thus  contrary   to   Miah   (interviewers'   comments;
         disclosure;  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT   00515;   without   following
         Papajorgii (EEA spouse - marriage  of  convenience)  Greece  [2012]
         UKUT 00038; and that the guidance in Nwaigwe (adjournment fairness)
         [2014] UKUT 418 had not been followed."

14.  At the hearing of the  appeal  before  me  the  appellant  appeared  in
    person.  He stated that he had bank statements from Barclays Bank  that
    would have shown that he had sufficient funds to meet the  requirements
    of the Rules when he had made his application.  He  said  that  he  had
    closed the bank account in Pakistan but in any event he had not  needed
    to rely on that account.  He went on to say that his relationship  with
    Ms Nunes had now ended because  she  had  had  to  return  to  Portugal
    because of the illness and death of her grandmother and was  unable  to
    return to Britain.  He stated that he had obtained a degree from Oxford
    Brookes University.

15.  Mr Nath argued that the conclusions of the judge were open to him -  he
    referred to the email chain which was  before  the  judge  showing  the
    gathering of the evidence from the bank in Pakistan by the British High
    Commission.

16.  I consider that there is no material error of law in the  determination
    of the judge of the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  reality  is  that  the
    appellant was refused because it was believed by the respondent that he
    had attempted to rely on documents from a bank in Pakistan  which  were
    not genuine.  The judge clearly applied the correct standard  of  proof
    and correctly placed the burden of  proof  upon  the  respondent.   His
    conclusions were well-reasoned.  I can see no reason why it would  have
    been appropriate for the judge to have adjourned the appeal and  indeed
    it is clear that the judge very properly not only gave the  appellant's
    representative time to consider the evidence but was willing to adjourn
    the appeal so that Ms  Nunes  could  give  evidence.   The  reality  is
    however that the  issue  before  the  judge  was  the  refusal  of  the
    extension of stay as a student and not that relating to the appellant's
    attempted marriage.  On the issue before him the judge clearly  reached
    conclusions which were fully open to him.

Notice of Decision

15.  In these circumstances, I having found that there is no material  error
    of law in the  determination  of  the  judge  find  that  her  decision
    dismissing this appeal on both immigration  and  human  rights  grounds
    shall stand.

16.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy





I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

