
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09446/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2016                    |On 9 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                              MD SIRAJUL ISLAM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hasan of Kingdom Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He appealed to a  Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  25
    February 2015 refusing him leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.   In
    her decision letter the respondent noted that, though the appellant had
    claimed 30 points under Appendix A of HC 395 for a  valid  Confirmation
    of Acceptance for Studies (CAS), when the Tier 4 Sponsor  Register  was
    checked on 25 February 2015 the college to which the CAS  was  said  to
    have been assigned was not  listed.   He  had  therefore  not  met  the
    requirements  to  be  awarded  30  points  under  Appendix  A  of   the
    Immigration Rules and as he had failed to  provide  a  valid  CAS,  the
    respondent was unable to assess the amount of funds he was required  to
    show in support of his  application  and  therefore  he  could  not  be
    awarded 10 points for maintenance (funds) under Appendix C.

2.   I have seen a copy of a letter  dated  8  December  2014  sent  to  the
    appellant by the respondent, noting that the college's licence had been
    revoked, and as a consequence the CAS he had submitted  was  no  longer
    valid.  In line with  the  Rules  and  guidance  consideration  of  his
    application was suspended for a period of 60 calendar days during which
    period it was open to him to withdraw  his  application  and  submit  a
    fresh application in a different  category,  or  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was said that if he wished to remain in the United Kingdom
    as a Tier 4 Student it was open to him to obtain a new CAS for a course
    of study at a fully licensed Tier 4 educational sponsor  and  vary  the
    grounds of his original application though he would need to find new  a
    Tier 4 educational sponsor who would need to issue him with a new CAS.

3.   The appellant appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision,  and  the
    judge dismissed his appeal.

4.   I do not propose to go into any detail with regard to  the  content  of
    the judge's decision, other than to note the remark by  the  judge  who
    subsequently granted permission to appeal against  the  decision,  that
    the appellant is entitled to know what law he has failed  to  meet  and
    how he failed to meet it.  He went on to say that the  appellant  might
    not qualify for further  Tier  4  status  but  the  reasoning  was  not
    apparent.

5.   In his grounds of appeal the appellant referred to the decision of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Qadir and to the TOEIC cases.   He  also  argued,  in
    reliance on the decision in Patel [2011] UKUT (IAC), that the  decision
    was unfair.  He relied on other authorities and also contended that the
    judge had failed to address an Article 8 claim.

6.   In his submissions Mr Hasan relied on the grounds.  He argued  that  it
    was unclear under which Rule the appeal  had  been  dismissed  and  the
    decision of the judge contained irrelevance.

7.   In his submissions Mr Tufan commented  that  though  there  were  clear
    flaws in the judge's decision any error was not material.  It was clear
    from the authorities such as Patel and EK (Ivory  Coast)  that  it  was
    proper for the respondent to grant the extra 60 days in such a case but
    that whereas in EK there had been a mistake by the college, the  appeal
    was nevertheless dismissed.  The Secretary of State had played no  part
    in the mistake.  The appellant had not been obtained a place within the
    60 days and could not proceed at date of decision.  There was therefore
    no material error of law.

8.   By way of reply, Mr Hasan argued that at the time  of  the  application
    the appellant had a CAS and  while  the  application  was  pending  the
    sponsor lost its licence.  He was correctly given a 60 days letter that
    had run out on 4 February 2015 and he had made  the  point  before  the
    judge that it was in the middle of the year and he could not  catch  up
    and some correspondence with the universities had been produced and  he
    had to wait until September and the fairness issue arose from that.  He
    referred in  particular  to  an  e-mail  which  he  produced  from  the
    University of East London making it clear they  could  not  assess  his
    application in time for the January 2015 intake but were considering it
    for their next intake and would send him an update.  It was argued that
    he should have been allowed  a  further  60  days.   Also  the  judge's
    decision was silent on the human rights issues.  It was  accepted  that
    as a Tier 4 Student he might not satisfy the Rules  or  Article  8  but
    proper reasons were required to be given.

9.   I stated that in light of the lack of clarity in the  judge's  decision
    it was important that the appellant be given  reasons  why  the  appeal
    fell to be dismissed if that were the case, and with the  agreement  of
    both parties I said that I would produce a decision setting out my full
    reasoning, which I now do.

10.  I have set out above the relevant provisions of the  Immigration  Rules
    which led the respondent to refuse the application under the Rules.  It
    is clear from the decision of the Court of Appeal in EK  (Ivory  Coast)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1517, that there is no breach of the duty  of  fairness
    on the part of the respondent in circumstances where a person does  not
    have a valid CAS letter at time of decision.  It was noted at paragraph
    24 of the decision in EK that the appellant there had a limited  period
    of time in which she could make her application to continue her studies
    on an in-country basis granted to her by the Secretary of State to give
    her an opportunity to rectify the position which had arisen as a result
    of the first chosen college losing its authorisation from the Secretary
    of State to issue CAS letters.  In her particular  case  she  made  the
    application within time  but  unbeknown  to  her  as  a  result  of  an
    administrative error for which she had no  responsibility,  the  second
    college withdrew her CAS letter and as a result, after the  period  for
    making a fresh  in-country  application  had  elapsed,  the  respondent
    dismissed her application.

11.  Though the facts are slightly different, the legal effect is  precisely
    the same in my view.  As in EK there was no breach by the Secretary  of
    State who had a public law  duty  to  act  fairly  in  considering  the
    application for leave to remain.  The respondent was not responsible in
    that case, it was said, for the general unfairness which the  appellant
    had suffered.  It was a result of actions and omissions by the college.
     Though  there  has  been  no  actions  or  omissions  by  any  of  the
    universities in this case, but rather simply an  inability  to  provide
    the appellant with a fresh CAS within the 60 day period, that cannot be
    laid at the door of the Secretary of State.  There  is  no  public  law
    unfairness in her conduct in this case.  She quite  properly  gave  the
    appellant the further opportunity of 60 days in which to obtain  a  new
    CAS and the appellant was unable to do so  and  as  a  consequence  the
    application had to be refused.

12.  As regards Article 8, that does not appear to have been pleaded in  the
    grounds to the judge.  Insofar as it is a relevant  issue,  I  consider
    that it cannot be said to be an issue of any materiality in this  case.
    The appellant has not set out any basis upon which he contends that his
    Article 8 rights are breached.  He is a person who has been studying in
    this country and is no longer able to study.   Though  to  that  extent
    there may be said to be an interference with his private life, that  is
    clearly outweighed by the public interest in a fair  and  properly  run
    immigration system.  Accordingly, any breach of the appellant's private
    life rights is clearly outweighed in the proportionality evaluation  by
    the public interest.  Accordingly, though I have found that the judge's
    decision was legally flawed to the extent that it was  not  clear  what
    the reasons for the decision were, I re-made the decision with the same
    outcome.  The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

