
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/09021/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 August 2015                     |On 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                               mr gurmit singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel instructed by Malik Law
                    Chambers Solicitors (Southall)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of  India,  date  of  birth  15  April  1972,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated  4  February  2014  to
    refuse an application, dated 29 December 2012, for indefinite leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  long  residence  with
    reference to paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395,  as
    amended.  The appeal against the adverse decision of the  Secretary  of
    State came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman ("the judge") who  on
    8 October 2014 dismissed the appeal based on the Immigration Rules  and
    under Article 8 ECHR.  Permission to appeal that decision was given  on
    11 March 2015 and on or about 10 June I promulgated a decision  whereby
    I found there was an  error  of  law  which  meant  that  the  Original
    Tribunal decision could not stand and the decision being appealed would
    have to be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.

2.   On 3 August 2015 the matter returned  for  consideration  and  I  heard
    evidence which was wholly directed at the issue of length of  residence
    with reference to the requirements of 276B(i).

3.   The  other  issues  with  reference  to  either  rights  arising  under
    paragraph 276ADE or in relation to Article 8 ECHR were not pursued.

4.   The evidence, coherently provided by  a  number  of  witnesses  who  Mr
    Walker had the opportunity to cross-examine, was that for reasons given
    they remembered when they had first met the  Appellant  in  the  United
    Kingdom in  1995.   The  primary  connection  was  through  a  man  who
    ultimately accommodated the Appellant and  presently  accommodates  the
    Appellant, Mr Parvinder Singh Sahota, a resident of the United  Kingdom
    and a British national.  Other evidence from Mr Gurmail Singh Badyal, a
    UK national, Mr Kulvinder Singh, a UK national, Mr Hurbinder  Singh,  a
    British national, Mr Hindpal Singh  Sindhar,  a  British  national,  Mr
    Gurjinder Singh, a British national and Mrs Surinder Kaur,  a  national
    of India, who identified the period of  time  through  which  they  had
    known the Appellant in the United Kingdom.

5.   I was satisfied that on a balance of probabilities  the  Appellant  has
    discharged the burden of proof that at the  date  of  the  Respondent's
    decision he had between 1995 and 2009/ 2010  a  total   period  without
    interruption of  living  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  fourteen  years'
    continuous residence.

6.   I also found that it is apparent the  Appellant  had  served  a  prison
    sentence of six months  for  the  possession  or  control  of  identity
    documents namely a false passport which he had used to  be  enabled  to
    work. The effect  of  the  Legal  Aid,  Sentencing  and  Punishment  of
    Offenders  Act  2012,  paragraph  139,  had  altered  the  periods  for
    rehabilitation  for adult offenders a custodial sentence of six  months
    or less at the end of a period of 24 months beginning with the date  on
    which the sentence is completed. Once that two year period  has  passed
    and in this case that would have been in January 2012, the  period  had
    therefore expired before the date of the Respondent's decision and  was
    not relevant to the calculation of time.

7.   In the light of the submissions I am satisfied that the  Appellant  has
    still to undertake a 'knowledge of life in the United Kingdom' test.

8.   However it seemed to me that the Secretary of  State  had  not  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter or in the decision considered  or  exercised
    any discretion in relation to the requirements of paragraph 276B(ii)(a)-
    (f).  I find the matter of  discretion   should  be  exercised  by  the
    Secretary of State.  In reaching that decision I conclude in the  light
    of  Ihmedru  [2011]  UKUT  340  and  Ukas  [2012]  UKUT  307  that  the
    appropriate course is for the matter to be returned to the Secretary of
    State to await a decision in accordance with the law.

9.   Given the factual position as  found  it  appeared  to  me  a  material
    consideration to put before the Secretary of State  was  whether  there
    should  be  an  extension  of  stay  under  paragraph  276A(2)  for  an
    additional period to enable the person granted to make the  appropriate
    application for a ' knowledge of life in the UK' test.

10.  For the avoidance of doubt, in the light of the issues pursued  at  the
    hearing of this appeal, I  do  not  find  for  my  own  part  that  the
    Appellant would have succeeded on the face of it under paragraph 276ADE
    nor on the evidence before me under Article 8 of the ECHR.

NOTICE OF DECISION

11.  The appeal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  it  is  returned  to  the
    Secretary of State to await a decision in accordance with the law.

ANONYMITY

12.  No anonymity order is necessary to required.


Signed   Date 10 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although the appeal has to this extent as set out above succeeded  it  seems
to me that it is not appropriate at this stage for a fee award to be made.


Signed   Date 10 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

