

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA097692015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 June 2016                            |On 15 June 2016                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 usman tahir
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Ali, Ash Immigration Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision and
    reasons  statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Raikes  that   was
    promulgated on 2 September 2015.

 2. Judge Raikes found that the Home Office had failed  to  discharged  the
    burden it carried in  relation  of  proving  the  respondent  had  used
    deception to secure an English test  result  and  therefore  found  the
    respondent had met the requirements of the  immigration rules.    Judge
    Raikes made parallel findings relating to the respondent's private  and
    family life rights.

 3. Mr Mills accepted that he was in some difficulty because permission  to
    appeal had been granted only on the Home Office's  secondary  argument.
    The first ground of appeal had argued that Judge Raikes's reasoning was
    inadequate with regard to his finding that deception had not been used.
     Judge Pullig refused permission  on  that  ground  and  there  was  no
    application to the Upper Tribunal to renew that ground.

 4. As we were bound by Judge Raikes' finding on that issue, Mr Mills  said
    he could not pursue a complaint that the  suitability  requirements  of
    appendix FM were not met.  As the suitability  requirements  were  met,
    the public interest arguments relating to article 8  in  terms  of  the
    appellant not complying with the immigration rules had  to  fall  away.
    This meant there was no material legal error in the decision.

 5. Having heard from Mr Mills, I indicated there was no need for Mr Ali to
    make submissions.

 6. I accept that Judge Raikes's assessment under article 8 is inadequately
    reasoned and that amounts to a legal error.  However, it is  immaterial
    because, when read with the preserved findings, such  error  cannot  be
    material to the outcome.

Decision

Although the decision and reasons statement  of  Judge  Raikes  contains  an
error on a point of law because the error is not material  the  decision  is
upheld.


                               Signed                     Date 15 June 2016


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
