
 [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/09840/2014
                                                               IA/09842/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27 October 2014                         |On 24 November 2014            |
|Prepared 27 October 2014                   |                               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                     Mrs Diana Soares (first appellant)
                     Mr Sheryar Raja (second appellant)
                       (anonymity directions NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    None
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The first Appellant, a national of Portugal, date of birth  6  November
    1991, appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 13 October  2013
    to  refuse  a  registration  certificate  under  Regulation  6  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 on the basis that
    she had failed to provide evidence to show that  she  was  a  qualified
    person.  The second Appellant, a national of Pakistan, date of birth  2
    August 1981,  appealed  against  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  13
    October 2013 to refuse an application for a residence card as a  person
    in a durable relationship with an EEA national  under  Regulation  8(5)
    and (6) of the 2006 Regulations.

2.   The basis of that refusal was that the second Appellant had  failed  to
    prove that he was in a durable relationship with the  First  Appellant,
    an EEA national, and in addition the EEA national had failed to provide
    evidence that she was a qualified person exercising treaty  rights.  In
    both decisions no removal  directions  were  made  and  the  Respondent
    indicated  that  a  further  decision  on  removal  would  be  notified
    separately. First-tier Tribunal judge  Clapham  (the  judge)  dismissed
    their appeals on 14 July 2014.

3.   Notices of appeal was made  by  Pride  Solicitors  of  161-163  Staines
    Road, Hounslow, London TW3 3JZ with contact reference 'M. Abdullah'  on
    behalf of the Appellants.  Permission to appeal  the  decision  of  the
    Judge was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Colyer  on  12  September
    2014.

4.   Standard directions were sent out  dated  26  September  2014  together
    with the notice of hearing, , to each Appellant, at their last notified
    address, 107 Sutton Lane, Hounslow, TW3 4LE for a hearing at 10 o'clock
    at Field House on 27 October 2014. A separate  notice  of  hearing  was
    sent to  Pride  Solicitors,  their  representatives.  I  was  satisfied
    notices of the hearing were properly served upon the addresses provided
    by  the  Appellants  and  their  representatives  under  the   Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 Rule 13.

5.   Neither of the Appellants nor Pride  Solicitors  attended  the  hearing
    and no representations were made seeking an adjournment or any  earlier
    postponement of the hearing.  Given the lack of explanation for absence
    and/or the lack of any written representations and a month  has  passed
    since notice of hearing was given by first-class post and not  returned
    I found, having regard to the overriding objective that the fair,  just
    and timeous course, this matter should proceed in  their  absence.   In
    considering this appeal. There was nothing to indicate any  adjournment
    would secure attendance by the Appellant or her representatives. I have
    taken into account the original grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the grounds seeking permission to appeal.

6    I have further taken into account  the  unsigned  and  undated  witness
    statement of the first Appellant which was sent to the Tribunal by  fax
    on or about 22 July 2014 and re-sent unchanged on 24 October 2014  save
    that she added   '12.  In my witness statement to  the  first  tribunal
    the address was mention in the 7th paragraph which is corrected by  me'
    (sic).If there was another statement produced for the  hearing  on  the
    papers in 2014 it is not on the court file. In fact there  is  no  such
    address mentioned in the 7th paragraph of her  statement.  Rather  each
    statement starts with the first Appellant's address as 107 Sutton  Lane
    TW3 4LE. The covering letter of 24 October 2014 from  Pride  Solicitors
    gave the Appellants address as 107 Sutton Lane  TW3  4LE.  Contrary  to
    what is said at paragraph 8 of both statements by the  first  Appellant
    there was no tenancy agreement or utility bills provided  to  show  the
    Appellants were or are living at 118-A High Street, London SE20 7EZ.  I
    note Pride Solicitors letter of 24 October 2014 to the  Upper  Tribunal
    was sent on instructions and said that there was no further evidence to
    be submitted. So far as I can tell the witness statement from the first
    Appellant sent on 22 July 2014 was the  same  as  the  one  before  the
    judge.

7.   The statement of the second Appellant which  is  unsigned  and  undated
    was sent to the Tribunal by fax on 22 July 2014 refers at paragraph  11
    to   'In my witness for the first tribunal the address was  mention  in
    the 7th paragraph which  is  corrected  by  me'  (sic).  In  that  same
    statement at paragraph 7 the second Appellant does refer to a change of
    address but no 'rent agreement' or utility bills were  provided  either
    to the judge or me. The further statement submitted on  24  October  of
    2014 for the Second Appellant is unchanged. The  same  points  as  made
    above concerning the Pride Solicitors letter 24 October 2014  apply  to
    the second Appellant, who is named as a dependant living  at  the  same
    address as the first Appellant. If there was another statement produced
    for the hearing on the papers it is not on the court file

8    The grounds, undated but sent by Pride  Solicitors  on  22  July  2014,
    seeking permission to appeal  the judge's determination, at  paragraphs
    6 to 29 essentially are no more than a recitation of law  and   further
    assertions  that  there  was  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the
    Appellants engaged with the EEA Regulations or Article  8  ECHR.  These
    grounds appeared to be incomplete but are the same grounds re-submitted
    by Pride Solicitors by letter on 24 October 2014 for the hearing on  27
    October 2014. I assume that  no  competent  solicitors  would  fail  to
    submit the complete grounds of appeal once let  alone  twice  and  thus
    nothing material has been omitted.

9.   The original grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  dated  20
    February 2014, assert that the  Respondent's  decision  had  failed  to
    consider the Appellant's entitlement to 'registration  certificate  and
    visa' and the Appellants' rights under Article  8  'as  the  Appellants
    have developed their family and private life'.

9.   The statements of the Appellants referred to above give  no  meaningful
    particulars of their private life together.  Their  statements  equally
    do not give any insight into the family life they claim to have enjoyed
    together.

10.  The Appellants in their appeal forms to the First-tier Tribunal,  dated
    22 July 2014, both identified themselves living  at  107  Sutton  Lane,
    Hounslow, TW3 4LE but again give no insight into that family life.

11.  In the absence of evidence it is difficult to see on what basis it  was
    said that those rights were really exercised as rights  as  opposed  to
    simply the fact that it is said they  have  both  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a period of time.

12.  The judge was faced  with  the  Respondent's  decisions  which  clearly
    showed that there had been a Home Office  arrest  team   visit  to  the
    claimed address of the Appellants at  the  time  of  the  original  EEA
    applications, namely  12  New  Close,  Feltham.  At  which  the  second
    Appellant claimed to be living with the first Appellant, as an extended
    family member, who had claimed to be living at that same address.

13.  The visit by immigration officials  of  the  West  London  Arrest  Team
    (WLAT) with to the address showed that the second Appellant  previously
    had been living at the address but that there was nothing  to  indicate
    that the first Appellant was resident there.  Rather the information on
    what was claimed to be the tenancy agreement for the premises was  open
    to  significant  concern.  The  tenancy  agreement  recorded,  at  that
    address, the sole tenants were the Appellants and the tenancy agreement
    did not indicate shared accommodation.   It  was  perhaps  unsurprising
    that during the visit, in response to EEA  application,  concerns  were
    raised.  First, on arrival the WLAT sought entry only to find a Mr A A,
    a  Pakistan  national,  date  of  birth  7  January  1989,  present.  A
    photograph of the second Appellant was shown and Mr A A stated that the
    second Appellant had lived in the house  with  other  Pakistani  males.
    The Second Appellant was said to have moved away from the address at 12
    New Close some six months before. The visit was recorded as being on  4
    November 2008 which raises concerns over the tenancy  agreement  at  12
    New Close dated 1 January 2013.   The  EEA  residence  application  was
    dated 15 March 2013 with reference to the 12 New Close address. In  the
    circumstances it seems to me that the recorded date  of  the  visit  is
    probably wrong and should have been 2013.

14.  Further at the same visit  in  November  2013,  which  seems  the  most
    likely date, Mr A A then said that he had only moved to the house about
    a month previously and he had never known any females to reside in  the
    property.  The WLAT concluded that the second Appellant was not  living
    in the address which was only occupied by Pakistani males,  there  were
    no females of any nationality residing at the  address.  It  was  clear
    that no females had resided there according to A A; with his  knowledge
    of the property, namely that he had previously visited the house "a lot
    in the past" and had never known any females to reside there.

15.  It seemed to me that in the circumstances of the visit  the  likelihood
    was that neither the first nor second Appellant  was  residing  in  the
    property at that time nor had the first Appellant ever lived there.

16.  The statements of the Appellants do not assist on  the  issue  of  when
    they moved to 107 Sutton Lane.  In the circumstances, when plainly  the
    question of whether they were in a subsisting durable relationship  was
    at the forefront of the Respondent's decision, it  is  surprising  that
    their evidence still does not address those matters.

18.  The statement of the first Appellant, which is undated,  simply  refers
    to the visit by UKBA officers and in  particular  the  first  Appellant
    said with reference to their visit:

         "...Unfortunately few days before we changed our address  therefore
         maybe it was not updated in Home Office records.  Secondly  it  was
         alleged I did not provide..."

19.  What the first Appellant does not do is  identify  the  date  when  she
    claims she did move from 12 New Close.  In her statement, undated,  she
    says that they are living at 118-A High Street, London SE20  7EZ.   The
    second Appellant describes them living at an unspecified  address  they
    were submitting a rental agreement and utility bills to prove they were
    residing together at 118-A High Street, London SE20 7EZ.  Unfortunately
    if there is such evidence of them living at that  address  it  has  not
    been forthcoming and there are no documents of the kind  claimed.    In
    these circumstances I find the Appellants have failed to discharge  the
    burden of proof upon a balancing of probabilities that they were or are
    in any durable relationship.

20.  The tenancy agreement for the address at 107 Sutton  Lane  is  said  to
    have been entered into but the  documentation  does  not  evidence  the
    same.

21.  Given the lack of evidence as to when they moved from 12 New  Close  to
    any other address and the noted evidence of Mr A A I do  not  find  the
    Appellants have shown on a balance of probabilities that they  were  or
    are residing together at any  address  and  in  the  circumstances  the
    appeal fails in that respect.  I further find that  the  evidence  does
    not show on a balance of probabilities that  the  first  Appellant  was
    working in the United Kingdom exercising treaty rights.

22.   The  Respondent's  reasons  for   refusal   address   the   particular
    documentation provided and its sufficiency as  well  as  the  issue  of
    evidence of business trading.  I find that that evidence fell short  of
    being reliable and sufficient to demonstrate that the  requirements  of
    Regulation 6 were met in terms of the first Appellant being a qualified
    person.

23.  It was of course the Appellants' choice to  have  their  appeals  dealt
    with as originally appears to have been the case on the papers when the
    matter came before the First-tier Tribunal.

24.  The grounds challenging the decision  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  do  not
    assist any further in  this  matter.   Accordingly  I  find  that  each
    Appellant has failed to show that they are entitled  to  the  residence
    documents sought under the 2006 Regulations.

25.  Although there was only a passing  reference  to  Article  8  ECHR  the
    position was that it was not dealt with by the judge. As such that  may
    be  an error of law if JM (Liberia) is applicable in  cases  under  the
    2006 Regulations  when no removal decision has been made or when no fee
    has been paid. The question remains is whether the  error  is  material
    and was an Article 8 ECHR claim actually being pursued.

26.  In this  case,  however,  I  do  not  find  that  the  judge's  adverse
    conclusions  in  relation  to  the  durable  relationship  between  the
    Appellants were in error of law.  It may have been better expressed but
    there was no error of law. Accordingly the appeals  by  the  Appellants
    fail on that issue.

27.  On the case law as it presently stands I find the failure  to  consider
    the Article 8 ECHR was an error of law for it was  properly  raised  in
    the grounds and it being an appeal determined on the papers  there  was
    nothing to indicate that  it  had  been  abandoned  before  the  judge.
    However, the position  in  the  judge's  findings  and  indeed  my  own
    assessment of the evidence shows that there was no family life and that
    the  claimed  relationships   between   the   Appellants   was   false.
    Accordingly no claim under Article 8 in relation to family life  rights
    could have succeeded.

28.  In respect of the Appellants' private lives of which  each  claims  the
    other is a part, that too does not succeed.  There is no evidence as to
    how each of them exercises private  life  rights  of  the  kind  to  be
    protected under Article 8(1) other than the fact that they  have  lived
    in the United Kingdom for a period of time and had a private life  here
    of some un-particularised sort..  Absent of evidence as to  the  nature
    of the interference in their respective private lives on the face of it
     there was nothing to indicate the significance of  interference  would
    be of a sufficient kind to engage Article 8(1) ECHR.  It  follows  that
    Original Tribunal made no material error of law.

29.  If I was wrong in that view then  the  Original  Tribunal's  should  be
    remade. Assuming Article 8 private life rights were engaged  and  there
    was sufficient  adverse  impact  then  I  find  that  the  Respondent's
    decision was lawful and properly  served  the  purposes  arising  under
    Article 8(2) of the ECHR.  I further find that the public interest is a
    matter of considerable significance in such cases as these. In  looking
    at this matter now I do so in the context of Section 117A and B of  the
    Immigration Act 2014 amending the NIAA 2002.  I can find  nothing  that
    indicates that the weight to be given to the public interest should  on
    the merits of either Appellant's claim be diminished not least  in  the
    light of  their  deception  over  their  claimed  relationship,   their
    disregard of and lack of respect for  immigration  controls.  There  is
    also the lack of pertinent relevant evidence  addressing  those  issues
    and because the public interest in this case  self-evidently  outweighs
    the bare private  life  claim  raised  by  each  Appellant  I  find  in
    exercising the judgment that I do that the Respondent's decisions  were
    proportionate.

30.  The Original Tribunal's decisions in relation to the  2006  Regulations
    claims stand.

31.  The Original Tribunal's decisions are remade on the issue of Article  8
    ECHR.  The appeal of each  Appellant  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds  is
    dismissed.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order is required or necessary.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The original Tribunal's decision stands on the fee award  and  there  is  no
basis, given the absence of evidence to support the Article  8  ECHR  claims
made by each Appellant.  They have been dismissed  and  accordingly  no  fee
award is appropriate.



Signed        Date 19 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
