
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09020/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 June 2016                                |On 1 July 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Ibironke Oyalowo Adetunji
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Afzal, agent for IIAS


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  Judge
    Colvin, allowing the applicant's appeal under para 276ADE of the  Rules
    against the Secretary of State's decision made on 16 February  2015  to
    refuse to vary her leave to remain in the UK and to give directions for
    her removal.   In this decision I will refer to  the  parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal, the applicant as the appellant and
    the Secretary of State as the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  4  August  1994.   She
    claims to have entered the UK in September 2006.  On  11  January  2012
    she was granted leave to remain as a  dependent  child  of  her  mother
    until 18 August 2014 under the discretionary leave policy.  On 6 August
    2014 she applied for further leave to remain on the basis of her family
    and private life.  Her application was refused  on  16  February  2015.
    The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant was  able  to  meet
    the requirements of para 276A(1) relating to private life or that there
    were any exceptional circumstances justifying a grant of leave  outside
    the Rules under article 8.

The Hearing Before the First-Tier Tribunal Judge

3.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the  appellant  explained
    that she had come to the UK in September 2006 with the help of an agent
    to join her mother who was already here.  The two other children of the
    family came to the UK after her and they and  their  mother  have  been
    granted discretionary leave until 27 January 2018.  The  appellant  had
    been back to Nigeria in 2013 for the marriage of a colleague and  again
    in 2014.  She did not know where her father was.  She worked a  lot  of
    hours as a carer so that she could help out financially at home.

4.   Her mother gave evidence that she had come to the UK in 2002  with  the
    help of an agent and confirmed that the appellant had come in September
    2006.  Her two younger children who were 18 and 16 at the date  of  the
    hearing  came  together  from  Nigeria  when  they  were  12   and   10
    respectively.  She has another son aged 8 who was born in the UK and is
    autistic.  She has a partner in the UK, a British citizen aged  73  who
    was unable to work.  The only income coming into the family was that of
    the appellant.

5.   The judge accepted that the appellant had come to the UK  in  September
    2006 noting that there was a certificate of attendance from her  school
    for 2006 - 2007 and that her immigration status had  subsequently  been
    regularised together with that  of  her  mother  and  two  siblings  in
    January 2012 when limited leave was granted until 18 August  2014.   So
    far as her mother and siblings are concerned leave  has  been  extended
    until January 2018.

6.   The judge set out her conclusions in [14] as follows:

         "On the basis that the appellant arrived in  the  UK  in  September
         2006 she has been here continuously for nine years.  She  was  aged
         20 at the time of the application and is now aged 21 at the date of
         the hearing.  Whilst it cannot be said that she has spent half  her
         life  in  the  UK  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  to  fulfil  the
         requirements of para 276ADE(v), it is necessary to consider whether
         there would be very significant obstacles  to  her  integration  on
         return to Nigeria under  para  276ADE(vi).   Her  immediate  family
         members of her mother and siblings are living in the UK.   She  has
         spent a formative nine years living with her family in the  UK  and
         being educated and working here.  She still lives at  home  and  is
         emotionally dependent on her mother and she helps  financially  and
         with her disabled half-brother.  There are  no  family  members  in
         Nigeria and therefore no-one to support her on return or to provide
         her with accommodation.  Taking account of the  fact  that  she  is
         only aged 21, I am satisfied that the circumstances mean that there
         would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  her  integration  into
         Nigeria."

7.   Accordingly the appeal was allowed under  para  276ADE  and  the  judge
    said that in these circumstances she  did  not  find  it  necessary  to
    consider article 8 outside the Rules.

The Grounds and Submissions

8.    In  the  grounds  it  is  argued  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by
    incorporating factual matters which were irrelevant to the question  in
    issue, whether the appellant could reintegrate into  life  in  Nigeria.
    In  finding  that  reintegration  was  not  possible  because  of   the
    appellant's education, work and family ties in the UK,  the  judge  had
    factored in wholly irrelevant matters.  The assessment should have been
    linked to the appellant's ability to adapt and have a private  life  in
    Nigeria.  It was not an assessment of whether or  not  she  had  family
    here although this might be relevant to a limited extent.  The  grounds
    set out at length the respondent's guidance on matters to be taken into
    account when assessing whether the requirements  of  para  276ADE(1)(v)
    are met.

9.   Mr Tarlow adopted the  grounds.   He  accepted  that  the  Home  Office
    guidance was not binding but  nonetheless  it  indicated  the  kind  of
    factors properly to be taken into account.   The  judge's  findings  of
    fact in [13] and [14] were not sufficient to enable  a  finding  to  be
    reached that there would be  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant
    being able to integrate into Nigeria.  The judge's findings focused  on
    her life in the UK and not on whether she would be able to  reintegrate
    in Nigeria.  In summary, he submitted that the judge had failed to take
    all relevant matters into account and had been swayed by  a  number  of
    irrelevant matters.

10.  Mr Afzal adopted his rule 24 reply  arguing  that  the  judge  had  not
    erred and had not considered wholly irrelevant matters.  It  could  not
    be irrelevant that there was no-one in Nigeria who  would  support  the
    appellant or provide her with accommodation.  It was also relevant that
    the appellant had been in the UK for nine years spending her  formative
    years here, supporting her mother financially and helping her  disabled
    half-brother.  He  referred  to  and  relied  on  the  decision  in  MR
    (permission to appeal:  Tribunal's  approach)  Brazil  [2015]  UKUT  29
    submitting that the respondent's appeal was devoid of any substance  or
    merit and that the judge had made findings open to her  and  had  given
    reasons making it clear how she reached her decision.

Assessment of Whether the First-Tier Tribunal Erred in Law

11.  The issue I must consider is whether the judge erred in law in  such  a
    way that the decision should be set aside.  It is  common  ground  that
    the  appellant  was  not  able  to  meet  the  requirements   of   para
    276ADE(1)(i)-(v).  The judge therefore went on to consider whether  she
    was able to meet the test in subpara (vi) requiring  an  assessment  of
    whether there would be very significant obstacles to her integration on
    return to Nigeria.

12.  This is a high threshold to  meet:  the  obstacles  must  not  only  be
    significant but very significant.  The respondent's guidance set out in
    the grounds of appeal is not  binding  but  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    following accurately sets out the proper approach:

         "A very significant obstacle to integration means  something  which
         would prevent or seriously inhibit the applicant  from  integrating
         into the country of return.  The decision maker is looking for more
         than obstacles.  They are looking to see whether  there  are  'very
         significant'  obstacles  which  is  a   higher   threshold.    Very
         significant obstacles will exist where the  applicant  demonstrates
         that they would be unable  to  establish  a  private  life  in  the
         country of return, or where establishing  a  private  life  in  the
         country of return  would  entail  very  serious  hardship  for  the
         applicant."

13.  The judge took into account that the appellant  has  spent  nine  years
    living with her family in the UK but did not factor into her assessment
    that the appellant had lived in Nigeria until 2006 and had returned  in
    2013 for the marriage of a colleague and again  in  2014.   Whilst  the
    judge accepted that the appellant had no immediate  family  members  in
    Nigeria, and said that therefore she  had  no-one  to  support  her  on
    return or to provide her with accommodation, there was no consideration
    of whether there were extended family members or friends in the country
    of return to whom she would be  able  to  turn  for  assistance  or  of
    whether she would be able to obtain employment taking into account  the
    fact that she has been working  in  the  UK  and  to  that  extent  has
    acquired some experience and she speaks English,  the  language  widely
    spoken in Nigeria.

14.  The judge took into account that she was still living at home  and  was
    emotionally dependent on her mother whom  she  helped  financially  and
    also that she helped look after her  disabled  half-brother.   However,
    the extent of her private life established in the UK would not normally
    be relevant to the assessment of whether  there  are  very  significant
    obstacles to integration into the country of  return  although  it  may
    well  be  very  relevant  to  a  consideration  of  whether  there  are
    exceptional circumstances making refusal unjustifiably  harsh  for  the
    appellant in her particular circumstances.

15.  In summary, I am satisfied that the judge failed to take  into  account
    a number of factors relevant to whether the appellant would be able  to
    meet the  high  test  of  showing  that  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to integrating in Nigeria and further erred  by  not  putting
    into their proper context factors such as the appellant's private  life
    in this country which were of secondary relevance to that assessment.

16.  I am accordingly  satisfied  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  and  the
    decision should be set aside.  This leaves the fact, as I have  already
    indicated,  that  the  appellant  has  an  arguable   case   that   her
    circumstances are such that removal would in her case be  unjustifiably
    harsh so justifying a  consideration  of  whether  discretionary  leave
    should be granted outside the Rules.   As  the  judge  found  that  the
    requirements of para 276ADE(1)(vi) were  met  she  did  not  go  on  to
    consider that issue.  Mr Afzal also  made  the  point  that  there  was
    further evidence the appellant would wish to rely on in support of  her
    appeal.  In these circumstances I am satisfied that the  proper  course
    is for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  full
    rehearing on the merits.

Decision

17.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the  decision  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full  rehearing
    on all issues.

18.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 30 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter



