
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/09580/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th August 2016                          |On 24th August 2016           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                               bikramjit singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India whose date of birth is recorded  as
    4th November 1988.  On or about 29th December 2014 he made  application
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the dependant of his  wife
    Satinder Kaur, date of birth 7th August 1982.  The application made  by
    the Appellant, as indeed that of his  wife  was  made  outside  of  the
    Rules.  On 20th February  2015  a  decision  was  made  to  refuse  the
    application and the Appellant appealed.  His appeal was decided on  the
    papers by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Spear.  In a decision  dated
    16th January 2016 she dismissed the appeal on all grounds including, in
    particular, Article 8 ECHR.

 2. Not content with that decision by Notice dated 26th  January  2016  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The first ground contended that as the Appellant's wife  had
    herself appealed, the two appeals should have been heard  together  all
    the more so because the Appellant's solicitors had, by letter dated 6th
    March 2015, specifically made that request. The failure of the Tribunal
    to hear both cases together was said to offend the rules  of  fairness.
    That was the only ground.  On 1st July 2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Fisher granted permission.  Thus the matter comes before me.

 3. That family members in cases which are clearly based upon the same sets
    of facts ought to have heard their appeals heard  together  is  clearly
    proper and in certain circumstances it might amount to an error of  law
    where in particular one  of  the  parties  has  been  deprived  of  the
    opportunity of being heard. However, records show that the  Appellant's
    wife's appeal was heard on 28th August 2015.  I have no reason to doubt
    that which is entirely consistent with further correspondence from  the
    Appellant's solicitors who asked for the appeal  in  relation  to  this
    particular Appellant to be dealt with on the papers.  The letter making
    that request is dated 2nd September 2015 following, it  is  clear,  the
    appeal of the Appellant's wife.

 4. The Appellant's wife's appeal was dismissed, that is  also  clear  from
    all of the papers.  There  was  no  reason  why,  it  would  seem,  and
    certainly no sufficient reason placed  before  me,  why  the  Appellant
    could not be heard in his wife's appeal.  In those circumstances  there
    was no unfairness.  Still further,  and  importantly,  given  that  his
    wife's appeal has been dismissed and given that he made his  appeal  on
    the basis of being a dependant on his wife, once his wife's appeal  was
    dismissed there really was nothing left  of  his  appeal.   I  note  in
    relation to his wife from the history report that her  appeal  was  not
    only dismissed but that an application for permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal was refused.  That was on or about  17th  February  2016
    and since then there has been no procedural steps  taken.   It  follows
    that so far as her appeal  is  concerned  she  is  now  "appeal  rights
    exhausted".

 5. I come to the view that this is an appeal entirely without merit.   The
    substance of the appeal is that the two Appellants should have had  the
    opportunity  to  be  heard  together;  they  were   not   denied   that
    opportunity.  The Appellant in this appeal, as I have already observed,
    was perfectly free to attend at his wife's appeal  and  give  evidence.
    The judge at that appeal would have  considered  the  merits.   Nothing
    material turns on the ground if indeed there is any  error  of  law  at
    all.  In those circumstances the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed
No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 24 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
