
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09161/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 9 January 2015                             |On 20 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mrs Babeljit Kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy
For the Respondent:    Mr Williams


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal on 1st October 2014 to  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the respondent that she did not  qualify
    for a residence card under the EEA  regulations.  The  decision,  which
    followed a hearing on 22 September 2014, was on the basis that to  deny
    the appellant a residence card would have the  effect  of  forcing  the
    appellant to leave the UK with a consequent disruptive  effect  on  the
    family.


2.   I sympathise with the position  that  Immigration  Judge  Taylor  found
    himself in, particularly since the effect of refusing the  appellant  a
    residence card was perceived to be that  the  appellant's  partner  may
    have to stop work so he could look after their  children.  However,  on
    the balance of probabilities, his decision was not in  accordance  with
    those regulations.

Arguments before the Upper Tribunal

3.   The appellant's position has been fully outlined by  her  solicitor  Mr
    Duffy, as will be explained below. He has pointed out that the basis on
    which the case has been argued for the Secretary of  State  before  the
    Upper Tribunal was not, effectively, the basis on which it  was  argued
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Nevertheless, the grounds of appeal by
    the Secretary of State were thought by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Nicholson to be a seriously arguable.  In particular,  Judge  Nicholson
    thought it clearly arguable that the Secretary of State  had  correctly
    construed the relevant Regulation of the EEA Regulations 2006 (the  EEA
    Regulations). Regulation  15A  of  the  EEA  Regulations  required  the
    appellant not merely to show that  her  children  would  be  unable  to
    reside in the UK if the appellant left the UK but also that they  would
    not be able to live in another EEA state.

Discussion

4.   Regulation 15A requires that P, the relevant  British  citizen,  who  I
    will refer to as the Applicant", must be the primary carer of a British
    citizen. That clearly was satisfied as  the  Immigration  Judge  found.
    Secondly, it had to be shown that the Applicant  was  residing  in  the
    United Kingdom. There  was  also  no  dispute  about  that.  The  third
    requirement was that the relevant British citizen would  be  unable  to
    reside in the UK or in another EEA state if P were required  to  leave.
    That requirement was not met by the appellant in  these  circumstances.
    The appellant resided with her husband, Mr Singh. He was living in  the
    same household and was able to care  for  his  children.  The  guidance
    notes, although they do not have the status of law, do  illuminate  the
    particular Regulation by indicating that where there is another  direct
    relative who can care for the British  citizen,  or  citizens  in  this
    case, that will be sufficient to establish that the relevant Regulation
    cannot apply

4.   This case does not turn on the judge's assessment of credibility or  on
    the judge's assessment of the case more generally  but  on  the  strict
    application of the relevant Regulations to the circumstances as  found.
    Therefore, with some hesitation, having  regard  to  my  obligation  to
    apply the law to the facts of  the  case  I  have  concluded  that  the
    Immigration  Judge  did  not  construe  Regulation  15A  correctly.  In
    particular, Regulation 15A (4A)(c) requires the appellant to show  that
    the relevant British citizen (i.e. the sponsor here) would be unable to
    reside in the UK or  in  another  EEA  state  if  the   appellant  were
    required to leave.  That requirement clearly  was  not  met.  In  those
    circumstances the Secretary  of  State  appears  to  me  to  have  been
    justified in refusing  the  residence  card  that  was  sought  by  the
    applicant under the relevant EEA Regulations.

Conclusions

5.   The appeal is properly brought  and  I  will  allow  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on  the
    basis that there was a material error of law.

6.   I substitute my decision which  is  that  on  the  application  of  the
    Regulations to the facts of the case the appellant does not to  satisfy
    the requirements of 15A (4A).

7.   As a postscript to that finding I should express the  clear  view  that
    if an application were to be made under Appendix  FM  or  indeed  as  a
    freestanding Article 8  claim  that  would  appear  to  me  to  have  a
    reasonable prospect of success given that the appellant is the  primary
    carer of the child. The findings of  the  Immigration  Judge  including
    those in relation to  the  care  provided  by  the  appellant  for  her
    children shall stand. I hope that in due course the correct application
    is made. No doubt it will receive full consideration by  the  Secretary
    of State.

Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed. I substitute  the  decision
of this Tribunal to refuse a residence card.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Date 9 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed        Date 9 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
