
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/09980/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On Tuesday 22 November 2016            |On Monday 20 December 2016          |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                  MR M H K
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Davison, Counsel instructed by Nandy & Co
                 solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.   Although  this  is
not a claim under the Refugee Convention, the Appellant  nonetheless  claims
to have a fear on return to his home country.  It is  therefore  appropriate
to make an anonymity direction in this case.


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Hodgkinson  promulgated  on  8  April  2016  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 24 February 2015 refusing him  leave  to  remain  and
       directing his removal to Bangladesh.


    2. The Appellant arrived in the UK from  Bangladesh  as  a  student  in
       September 2009.  His leave was extended in this category albeit only
       following an appeal  until  December  2014.   He  made  an  in  time
       application for leave to remain on human rights grounds outside  the
       Immigration Rules ("the Rules") on 12 December 2014 and  it  is  the
       refusal of that application which is the decision under challenge in
       this appeal.


    3. The basis of the Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  fears  return  to
       Bangladesh because he is a  homosexual,  his  family  are  prominent
       people in Bangladesh and they do not accept his sexuality.  He  also
       fears the father of his ex-wife who has  discovered  that  he  is  a
       homosexual.  He also fears what will happen to him more generally on
       account of his sexuality in Bangladesh.


    4. Rather unusually, in spite  of  the  fact  that  the  basis  of  the
       Appellant's claim is a fear of return to Bangladesh,  the  Appellant
       has refused to make a protection claim.  He was invited to do so  by
       the Respondent's decision.  It is  made  clear  by  his  solicitor's
       letter dated 17 February 2015 that he declines to do so.


    5. The basis of the Appellant's claim is rather that he seeks a  period
       of  discretionary  leave  until  such  time  as  his  situation   in
       Bangladesh improves.  It is not quite clear given the nature of  his
       claim what it is that he thinks will change.  He says though that he
       should be entitled to remain based  on  either  Article  3  ECHR  or
       because there are very significant obstacles to his  integration  in
       Bangladesh and that his appeal should therefore be allowed  applying
       paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.


    6. Judge Hodgkinson did not accept that the Appellant had a  subjective
       fear or objectively well-founded fear of persecution on return ([20]
       of the Decision).   He found that there would be no real risk to him
       on return.  Based on that finding, he also did not accept  that  the
       Appellant could meet paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).


    7. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Hollingworth on 12 October  2016  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge's
       analysis was arguably insufficient  to  justify  his  conclusion  in
       particular  that  the  Appellant  did  not  face  very   significant
       obstacles on return.   The matter comes before me to decide  whether
       the Decision contains a material error of law and, if so, to re-make
       the decision or remit the appeal for  rehearing  to  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal.

The grounds and submissions


    8. The Appellant's grounds of appeal relate to both Articles  3  and  8
       ECHR.  It is asserted that the Judge failed to consider whether  the
       Appellant's case met the test  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
       Rules namely whether there are very significant obstacles  based  on
       what is said to be his inability to "live in peace due to his issues
       surrounding his sexuality and his previous experience of  harassment
       by the hands of his family members and recently due to fear  of  the
       Appellant's former wife's father".  It  is  said  that  due  to  his
       sexuality, he would not be able to integrate and would  continue  to
       live in fear due to his past experiences.   He  says  he  could  not
       relocate due to the prominence  of  his  family  and  his  ex-wife's
       father.   He also says that he would face societal pressure.


    9. In relation to Article 3, the Appellant says that  no  consideration
       has been given to the  Appellant's  account  of  harassment,  forced
       marriage  and  that  he  has  suffered  ill-treatment  amounting  to
       torture.


   10. Mr Davison drew my attention to [20] of the Decision which  he  said
       contained  the  conclusions  of  the  Judge.   That  paragraph,   he
       submitted, fails to make any reasoned findings on the  core  of  the
       Appellant's claim.  The findings which he said that  the  Judge  has
       failed to make are whether the Appellant is homosexual,  whether  he
       is able to move back to live with his family and if not how he could
       relocate particularly in light of the Appellant's  claim  about  the
       influence of his family and  whether  he  would  face  a  risk  more
       generally on account of his sexuality.


   11. Mr Davison accepted that the Appellant has so far refused to make  a
       protection claim in proper form.  He submitted  that  this  did  not
       matter.  I  pointed  out  that  the  effect  of  this  is  that  the
       Respondent has not been able properly to investigate  the  claim  by
       way of an interview.  His response was that the Appellant had  given
       evidence at the hearing and therefore could  be  cross-examined.   I
       also pointed out that if the Appellant had  not  made  a  protection
       claim, then the Judge in fact had no jurisdiction to deal with  one.
       This is a pre-Immigration Act 2014 appeal and as such  the  previous
       case law concerning the  inability  of  an  appellant  to  bring  an
       initial claim to the Tribunal applies.  Mr  Davison  submitted  that
       this did not obviate the need for the Judge to make  findings  about
       the various elements of the Appellant's claim or  to  determine  the
       issue arising in relation to Article 3 risk.


   12. There was also some discussion about whether it was in fact the case
       that the Judge had failed to make findings on the  various  elements
       of the claim.  I pointed Mr Davison to various paragraphs  which  it
       seemed to me did  contain  findings  albeit  the  Decision  was  not
       structured in such a way as to enable those to be  clearly  seen  at
       once.


   13. I also explored with Mr Davison whether the  basis  of  the  Judge's
       conclusion that there would be no  very  significant  obstacles  was
       justified in terms of the protection elements by the fact  that  the
       Appellant refused to make an asylum claim.  It might  be  said  that
       for this reason the Appellant was unable  to  show  that  he  had  a
       genuine and well-founded fear of persecution on return.   The  basis
       of the Article 8 claim is predicated on what the Appellant  says  he
       fears on return and so the conclusion on one might be said to be the
       justification for the conclusion on the other.


   14. Mr Davison indicated that, if that were the basis on which the Judge
       had decided the case, the Appellant might not be able to  show  that
       there was an error of law.  However, he submitted that this was  not
       what the Judge decided.  He continued to rely on the  inadequacy  of
       reasons given for rejecting the core of the  Appellant's  claim.  He
       focussed in particular on the failure by the Judge to make a finding
       whether the Appellant is credible  in  relation  to  his  sexuality.
       Even if the core of his claim were not accepted,  if  the  Appellant
       was accepted to be credible in relation to his  sexuality  then,  Mr
       Davison submitted, it was incumbent on the  Judge  to  consider  the
       risk to the Appellant based on his sexuality.   Background  evidence
       was included in the Appellant's bundle at [71] to [93] but the Judge
       failed to deal with this.   That  material  included  evidence  that
       homosexuality is a criminal offence in Bangladesh.


   15. Mr  Tarlow  relied  on  the  Respondent's  rule  24  response.   The
       Respondent's position is  summarised  at  [3]  of  the  response  as
       follows:-


           "The findings from the Judge are based on the evidence  provided
           and it is clear that the appellant does  not  fear  persecution.
           The Judge found  the  appellant's  evidence  to  be  vague,  the
           appellant  maintains  a  relationship   with   his   family   in
           Bangladesh.   The  Judge  was  entitled  to  reach  a  dismissed
           decision."


   16. Mr Tarlow drew my attention  to  the  letter  from  the  Appellant's
       solicitors dated  17  February  2015  following  the  Home  Office's
       request that the Appellant book an appointment to  make  his  asylum
       claim in person.  That reads as follows:-


           "We continue to act for the above  client  in  relation  to  his
           immigration matter and write in response to  your  letter  dated
           13th February 2015 in which you have advised our client to  book
           an appointment to attend in person to make an asylum claim.
           However, in our letter of 09th December  2014  we  only  made  a
           request to consider our client's case  under  the  human  rights
           grounds together with the accompanied evidence.  We confirm that
           our client does not wish to claim asylum at this stage and  only
           request further leave to remain in the UK until he find means to
           resolve his issues.


           Therefore, we kindly request you  to  proceed  with  his  FLR(O)
           application and grant him with a favourable decision outside the
           Immigration Rules using your discretion."


   17. Mr Tarlow accepted that the structure of the Decision was such  that
       the findings were mixed with the recital of the  evidence  which  at
       times made it difficult to ascertain what  findings  had  been  made
       without reading the Decision as a whole.  However, he submitted that
       the starting point had to be that the Appellant  had  not  made  and
       declined to make an asylum claim.  Paragraph [18]  of  the  Decision
       took that as the starting  point.   That  was  a  finding  that  the
       Appellant is not at risk on return.  Mr  Tarlow  accepted  that  the
       Judge had not made a finding whether the  Appellant  is  in  fact  a
       homosexual.  However, what the Judge finds at [18] of  the  Decision
       is that it does not matter what is the Appellant's sexuality because
       he has lived in Bangladesh discreetly in the past as he has  in  the
       UK and the Judge finds that he would do so again in the future.


   18. Both representatives were agreed that, if I found a  material  error
       of law, I should remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
       challenge is to a lack  of  reasoned  findings  on  the  Appellant's
       claim.  As such, the Appellant  should  be  entitled  to  a  further
       hearing at first instance for findings of fact to  be  made  in  the
       event that I find the Appellant's grounds to be made out.


    Discussion and conclusions


   19. I begin by considering the nature and grounds of  the  appeal  which
       were before the Judge. The starting point  in  that  regard  is  the
       claim(s) made to the Respondent and how the  Respondent  replied  to
       those.  I have referred above to the solicitor's letter declining to
       make an appointment for the Appellant to make an asylum claim.  That
       letter was a response to a letter from  the  Home  Office  dated  13
       February 2015 which is headed "REFUSAL TO ACCEPT  POSTAL  CLAIM  FOR
       INTERNATIONAL PROTECTION".  That letter continues as follows:-


           "Thank you for your letter of 09 December 2014  and  15  January
           2015  indicating  that  your  client   wishes   to   apply   for
           international protection.  A claim for international  protection
           includes  a  claim  for  asylum  as  a   refugee,   humanitarian
           protection or a human rights claim, where  the  applicant  fears
           serious harm on return to their country of  origin  or  habitual
           residence.  All claims  for  international  protection  will  be
           recorded as an asylum application.


           CLAIMS  FOR  INTERNATIONAL  PROTECTION  MADE  BY  POST  ARE  NOT
           ACCEPTED BY THE  HOME  OFFICE.  THEREFORE,  YOUR  LETTER  OF  09
           DECEMBER 2014 AND 15 JANUARY 2015 WILL  NOT  BE  RECORDED  AS  A
           CLAIM."


   20. As I indicate at [16] above, the Appellant's response to that  is  a
       refusal to book an appointment.  The reason given - that he is  only
       seeking time to find a way "to resolve his issues" - is difficult to
       square with the nature of the threat claimed.  This is not  a  claim
       based on the conditions in his country.  It is a claim based  in  on
       immutable characteristic - the Appellant's sexuality - which  it  is
       said his family will not accept.


   21. In any event, whatever the reason for declining to make a  claim  in
       person, the effect is that the Home Office has refused to treat  the
       application made by post as a protection claim.   For  that  reason,
       the Respondent has not dealt with  the  protection  element  of  the
       claim in her decision.   The  Respondent  expressly  refers  to  the
       Appellant's refusal to make a protection claim.


   22. That is not though decisive of the issues with which the  Judge  was
       obliged to deal.  The Judge was not obliged to deal with  an  asylum
       claim or humanitarian protection claim.  The Appellant had not  made
       a claim under those heads and I did not  understand  Mr  Davison  to
       dispute that.  The Appellant was served  with  a  "one-stop  notice"
       along with the Respondent's decision but there is, so far as  I  can
       see, no statement of additional grounds submitted in response.  This
       is a pre-Immigration Act 2014 appeal.  Accordingly, the jurisdiction
       of the Judge  to  deal  with  an  asylum  appeal  is  based  on  the
       definition of section 113 Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
       2002 and the previous case law which indicates that in order for the
       Tribunal to have jurisdiction over an asylum  claim  it  must  be  a
       claim made to the Respondent.  Following  the  case  of  R  (on  the
       application of) Nirula v First-tier Tribunal (Asylum and Immigration
       Chamber) & Anor  [2011] EWHC 3336 (Admin) and other  cases  to  like
       effect, that does not include a claim made in the grounds of appeal.
        In any event, in this case, the  Appellant  does  not  raise  as  a
       ground of appeal that return to Bangladesh would breach the  Refugee
       Convention.


   23. The focus of the Appellant's claim is  that  his  Article  8  rights
       would  be  breached  because  there  would  be   "very   significant
       obstacles" to his integration in Bangladesh.  However, that turns on
       the risk which the Appellant says that he would face on  account  of
       his sexuality.  Like the Judge, I consider that the Article 8  claim
       either stands or falls with the other human rights grounds of appeal
       which include Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.   Accordingly,  the  Judge  was
       obliged to deal with the Appellant's claim to be at risk  on  return
       on account of his homosexuality.  The  issue  then  is  whether  the
       Judge dealt adequately with that claim.


   24. I deal firstly with the individual claim which the Appellant  makes.
       Before he came to the UK, the Appellant lived with his  family.   He
       says that his father and mother  were  renowned  academics  although
       both are no longer alive.  He says that as a result of his  parents'
       status in society the family was given respect.   However,  he  felt
       that he was a burden to them because of his sexuality.  He  says  in
       his statement that he was in a relationship with another man when he
       was very young and that "as a result of my sexuality I  was  subject
       to sexual abuse from a  very  young  age".   He  says  that  he  was
       "tortured and harassed" at the hands of his family members and  that
       when they found out about his sexuality, they  forced  him  into  an
       arranged marriage.


   25. The Appellant says that, following his marriage, his wife found  out
       that he was homosexual and therefore sought a divorce.  As a  result
       of this, the  Appellant  says,  his  father-in-law  who  is  also  a
       powerful and  influential  man  in  Bangladesh  has  discovered  his
       sexuality and seeks revenge.  The Appellant says that he is at  risk
       of honour killing from that source.


   26. In more general terms, the Appellant's claim is that as a result  of
       his sexuality, he has suffered from a lot of rejection  and  stress.
       He says that his family "dislike him" and that since he has come  to
       the UK, he has felt a sense of relief and security.   He  points  to
       incidents in recent years where  "homosexuals  have  been  arrested,
       tortured and  executed  due  to  this  issue  being  against  Muslim
       beliefs."  He also points to the fact that  it  remains  a  criminal
       offence to be homosexual in  Bangladesh.   The  background  material
       produced on his behalf includes an article relating to the treatment
       of homosexuals in Iran (which is not of any obvious  relevance)  but
       also  a   number   of   articles   dealing   with   the   continuing
       criminalisation of same-sex  relationships  in  Bangladesh  and  the
       government's refusal  to  relax  those  laws  as  well  as  articles
       concerning LGBT rights in Bangladesh.


   27. I begin with the Judge's consideration of the individual claim as to
       the risk that the Appellant says he fears from his family.  I  start
       by  observing  that  it  is  not  entirely  clear  to  me  from  the
       Appellant's statement who his family members actually are  since  he
       says that both his father and mother are dead.  It appears from what
       the Judge says  at  [16]  of  the  Decision,  that  the  Appellant's
       grandfather is still alive.  The Judge deals at [14] to [16] of  the
       Decision with this part of the claim.   The  Judge  notes  that  the
       Appellant seeks only a period of discretionary leave.  However, that
       appears inconsistent  with  a  claim  to  fear  return  based  on  a
       characteristic which on the Appellant's case is immutable namely his
       sexuality.   That,  coupled  with  an  inconsistency   between   the
       Appellant's case that he was ill-treated by his family but continued
       to live with them for many years after divulging  his  sexuality  as
       well as that his grandfather paid for the Appellant's studies in the
       UK led the Judge at [16]  of  the  Decision  to  conclude  that  his
       account was inconsistent with a claim to fear removal to Bangladesh.
       That finding, albeit included amongst the  Judge's  account  of  the
       evidence, is sufficient to dispose of that aspect of the claim.


   28. What I have found more difficult to resolve however is how the Judge
       dealt with the other individual aspect of the Appellant's case  (the
       fear of his ex-wife's family) and,  more  importantly,  the  general
       fear on account of his sexuality due to societal discrimination  and
       criminalisation of same-sex relationships in Bangladesh.


   29. In fairness to the Judge, he does point at [18] of the  Decision  to
       the delay in the Appellant claiming asylum until December 2014  when
       his  divorce  occurred  in  2013  and  in  circumstances  where  the
       Appellant had left Bangladesh in 2009.  In light of that chronology,
       the Judge was entitled to be sceptical about the claimed  risk  from
       the Appellant's former father-in-law.  However, I cannot  read  that
       passage as a finding about the Appellant's credibility  in  relation
       to that claimed risk.


   30. Of more importance is the lack of a finding  about  the  Appellant's
       credibility in relation to his claimed  sexuality.   As  Mr  Davison
       pointed out, and I accept, there is background evidence which points
       to a potential risk at least to a homosexual who is  in  a  same-sex
       relationship, particularly where this amounts to a criminal  offence
       in Bangladesh.  Whilst the Judge has noted that the  Appellant  does
       not claim to have been in a same-sex relationship during his time in
       the UK, the Appellant does say in his statement that  he  was  in  a
       homosexual relationship when he was young in Bangladesh.  Mr  Tarlow
       said that in essence what the Judge  found  was  that  even  if  the
       Appellant was homosexual he would live discreetly as he has done  in
       the UK.  However, I can find no consideration of the case  in  those
       terms. The Judge indicates some  scepticism  about  the  Appellant's
       claim to be homosexual at [18] of the Decision but does  not  go  so
       far as to say that he does not accept that claim.


   31. For the above reasons, I find that there is a material error of  law
       in the Judge's reasoning by virtue of his failure to  make  findings
       on crucial aspects of the Appellant's account.   Both  parties  were
       agreed that, if I found a material error of law in relation  to  the
       inadequacy of findings I should remit to the First-tier Tribunal  as
       the Appellant is entitled to a primary consideration of his case and
       reasoned findings at first instance.



      DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material error of law for
    the reasons given at [24] above. The decision of Judge Hodgkinson
    promulgated on 8 April 2016 is set aside. I remit the appeal to the
    First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge
    Hodgkinson.  I do not preserve any findings.


      Signed           [pic]      Dated:    19 December 2016

      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
