
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/09044/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 October 2013                            |On 25 October 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


Ex Tempore Judgement
                                   Before

                THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY,
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MRS RESNA BEGUM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In attendance but unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appeal has its origins in a refusal letter written by the UK Border
    Agency directed to Mrs Begum, the  Respondent  to  this  appeal.   This
    letter records that Mrs Begum applied for leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom as the unmarried partner of Masud Ahmed.  This application  was
    refused by letter dated 6 March 2013.  In this letter it  was  recorded
    that Mrs Begum had been granted permission to enter the United  Kingdom
    on 6 March 2012 for a period of  six  months  as  a  visitor.   It  was
    further recorded:

             "We  acknowledge  that  you  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with your spouse and you have a child together".


    The conclusion made was that the Respondent was unable to  satisfy  the
    relevant requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Some consideration was
    also given to Article 8 ECHR.  It was noted that the Respondent had not
    demonstrated any insurmountable obstacles that would prevent  her  from
    continuing her family life outside the United Kingdom.  Beyond that the
    consideration given to Article 8 is properly described as scanty.

 2. The Respondent exercised her right of appeal, giving rise to the  first
    instance  Determination  promulgated  on  19  August  2013.   She   was
    unrepresented at the hearing.  Some evidence was given by her  and  her
    husband, Mr Ahmed, through an interpreter.  The very brief  summary  of
    this evidence in the text of the Determination suggests that it was  of
    limited  content  and  dimensions.   The  First-tier  Judge  made   two
    principal conclusions.  The first  was  that  the  Respondent  did  not
    satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The second was that
    the refusal decision would infringe rights under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The Secretary of State appeals to  this  Tribunal  against  the  latter
    conclusion.   In  granting  permission  to  appeal  it  was  considered
    arguable  that  there  were  inadequate  reasons   contained   in   the
    determination.  It was  suggested  that  there  was  an  obligation  to
    provide more detailed reasons in  support  of  the  judge's  Article  8
    assessment and conclusions.  In the body of the determination the judge
    records, firstly, in what is couched as a finding in paragraph 18  (h):



             "There is no evidence that it would be unreasonable to  expect
             the child to leave the United Kingdom  if  it  left  with  its
             mother".

    Next the judge states in paragraph 18 (i):


             "There is no evidence from someone other than the Appellant or
             her husband  to  establish  any  insurmountable  obstacles  to
             family life with the Appellant's  husband  continuing  outside
             the United Kingdom."


    Following this, the judge found there was no satisfactory evidence that
    the Respondent has no ties, social, cultural or family  in  Bangladesh,
    in paragraph 18 (j).  This was followed by a finding about  the  extant
    established family life, in paragraph  18  (k).   The  judge  said  the
    following:


                  "Family life with which this appeal is concerned  is  the
             mutual family life of the Appellant, her  husband  and  child.
             If the Appellant returns to Bangladesh, even for a short time,
             it will interfere with the family life."







    And in the following paragraph, 18  (l),  the  judge  begins  with  the
    words:

               "On the assumption that the interference  with  family  life
           engages Article 8 ...".


    It is within these passages, in paragraph  18  sub-paragraphs  (k)  and
    (l), that one finds  the  foundation  of  what  we  consider  to  be  a
    significant and material error of law on the  part  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.


 4. It was incumbent on the Tribunal to undertake the exercise of enquiring
    into and making findings about the question of interference with family
    life.  This in every case is a forecasting exercise. It  also  requires
    an assessment of reasonable expectations.  It  was  necessary  for  the
    Tribunal to juxtapose the impugned decision with all  of  the  evidence
    pertaining to these considerations and to make findings accordingly.

 5. In Article 8 cases the first question  is  whether  there  will  be  an
    interference with the family life pursuant to  the  impugned  decision.
    The enquiry necessary to provide answers to that basic question was not
    undertaken in this case. The Determination ought to have  recorded  the
    nature of the enquiry undertaken  and,  most  important,  the  specific
    findings made by the court pursuant thereto.  In particular, the  judge
    was required to address the question of whether the established  family
    life of the three members in question, father, mother and  child  would
    in some way  be  fragmented,  broken  or  undermined  by  the  impugned
    refusal. The judge was also required to address the issue of reasonable
    expectation. There is no indication at all that the  necessary  enquiry
    was carried out and there are no findings in the Determination  bearing
    on these fundamental issues.  The closest one comes  to  a  finding  is
    that to which I have already adverted in paragraph 18 (h) namely, there
    is no evidence that it would be unreasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom if it left with its mother, the  Respondent  ;
    and in paragraph  18 (i) that there is no evidence from  someone  other
    than  the  Respondent  or  her  husband  to  establish   insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with the husband continuing outside the United
    Kingdom.

 6. On the face of the Determination it seems to us that  a  clear  finding
    was made that there was no evidence at all from any source  that  there
    would be any obstacle, insurmountable or otherwise, to full family life
    continuing outside the United Kingdom pursuant to  the  refusal  order.
    We conclude that the necessary enquiry under the  first  stage  of  the
    Article 8 assessment was not conducted by the judge.  The determination
    is bereft of the necessary findings pursuant to the first stage Article
    8 enquiry viz the question of interference.  This is a clear  error  of
    law.  This error of law is compounded by the judge's preoccupation with
    the question of legitimate aim and proportionality which merely  serves
    to expose the gravity of the fundamental  error  which,  in  our  view,
    permeates and infects the whole of the decision made.  The  materiality
    of the error  of  law  is  self-evident.   A  necessary,  indispensable
    exercise was not carried out by the judge.

 7. It follows from this assessment and  these  conclusions  that  we  must
    allow the  appeal.   We  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  This gives rise to the question  of  whether  this  Tribunal
    should retain the matter with or without preserved findings  or  should
    remit to a  differently  constituted  Tribunal.   We  have  given  some
    consideration to this.  Subject to any submissions from either party we
    are minded to remit since we consider that a properly  conducted  first
    instance hearing must be carried out before any question of recourse to
    this appellate tribunal arises afresh.

     Decision

 8.  We  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Having
    considered the parties' representations,  we  remit  the  matter  to  a
    differentially constituted FTT.


                                Signed:   [pic]

                                    Mr Justice McCloskey,
                                              President     of   the   Upper
     Tribunal                                     Dated:   20 October 2013


