
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: IA/09793/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Determination Promulgated |
|On: 23rd July 2014                     |On: 25th July 2014        |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                             Betty Ama Atta-Saow
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     -
For the Respondent:    Mrs Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Ghana born on  the  13th  January  1990.
She has permission to appeal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal  (Judge Greasley) dated the  23rd  May  2014  to  dismiss  her
appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse to issue her with  a
residence  card  as  confirmation  of  her  right  of  residence  under
Regulation  10(3)  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
Regulations 2006.

The matter in issue was whether the Appellant had  retained  rights  of
residence. She had previously  been  given  a  residence  card  as  the
dependent family member of her stepmother Vicky  Lammertyn,  a  Belgian
national exercising treaty rights in the UK. The basis of  the  present
application was that the Appellant had established herself in  the  UK,
and although her stepmother had left the UK and returned to Belgium she
asserted that she had retained rights of residence.

The Respondent had refused the application on the  grounds  that  there
was insufficient evidence that the EEA sponsor had ceased  to  exercise
treaty rights here.  It was said that  she  had  left  the  country  in
November 2012 but a letter  from  her  former  employer  Tower  Hamlets
council indicated that she was still being paid in  January  2013.  The
Appellant had further failed to show that she was  still  in  education
when her stepmother left the UK.

The matter was determined on the papers before the First-tier Tribunal.
 At paragraph 8 of the determination it is  recorded  that  "no  actual
grounds of appeal were included with the IAFT-1", and I infer from  the
determination that the Judge did not believe there to be any additional
documentary evidence.

As First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle  observed  in  granting  permission,
there are fully reasoned grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
appended to the IAFT-1. Indeed had there not been, the appeal would not
have been listed.  The grounds of appeal are attached to the IAFT-1  in
the appeal papers in the file. They refer  to  a  number  of  documents
which were relevant to the determination of the issues,  in  particular
correspondence from HMRC addressed to Ms Lammertyn in Belgium, payslips
from her work in Belgium and a signed statement from her explaining why
she had continued to be paid by Tower Hamlets after she  had  left  the
country (she had accrued holiday leave).   There  is  also  a  Eurostar
ticket showing that she did travel from the UK in November 2012.   None
of that evidence was considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
determination of this appeal. It is clearly referred to in the grounds.
  I am satisfied that it was an error of law  not  to  have  regard  to
those grounds and that evidence.

The Appellant has not had a fair hearing in that  for  whatever  reason
the Judge did not look  at  the  evidence  and  grounds  that  she  had
submitted. In the circumstances I consider that  the  most  appropriate
remedy would be for the matter to be determined afresh  in  the  First-
tier Tribunal.


Decisions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and it
is set aside.

The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

I make no direction as to anonymity.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             23rd  July 2014
