
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09241/2014
                                                             & IA/09242/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20th January 2015                            |On 21st January 2015       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                             Mr Gurcharan Singh
                            & Mrs Kulwinder Kaur
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEpartment
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Momoh Counsel instructed by Chipatiso Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Shilliday, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants, Mr Gurcharan Singh date of birth 2nd June 1980 and  Mrs
    Kulwinder Kaur date of birth 2nd June 1980, are citizens of India.  The
    Appellants are husband and wife.

 2. I have  considered  whether  it  is  necessary  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction in these proceedings. Having considered all the circumstances
    I do not consider it necessary to make such direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge K S H  Miller   promulgated  on  20  October  2014,
    whereby  the  judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against   the
    decisions of the Respondent dated  31st  January  2014  to  refuse  the
    Appellants further leave to remain in the United Kingdom and  thereupon
    to remove them to India.

 4. By decision made on 3 December 2014 permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade.  In  granting
    permission the judge indicates that it is arguable error  of  law  that
    the judge at first instance failed to consider Article 8  correctly  in
    light of the case of CDS (PBS: "available": Article  8)  Brazil  [2010]
    UKUT 00305 and failed to consider that  the  application  was  not  for
    indefinite leave to remain but merely to enable the first Appellant  to
    complete his  course  of  study  and  for  his  dependant,  the  second
    Appellant, to remain with him.

 5. The first appellant had come to the United  Kingdom  as  a  student  in
    January 2010 with the second appellant coming later as  his  dependent.
    It appears that having commenced upon a  course  of  study,  the  first
    college and then the second college, at which the first  appellant  was
    studying, had both closed down.

 6. It was noted within the determination that despite assurances given  to
    the ECO prior to original entry as to the financial means to enable the
    first appellant to complete his  studies,  it  was  necessary  for  the
    second appellant to come to the United Kingdom to work to  support  the
    first appellant to enable him to continue  his  studies.  In  order  to
    complete his studies the first appellant would have to  register  at  a
    further college paying the required tuition fees and to meet the  rules
    would require sufficient funds  to  maintain  himself  and  the  second
    appellant.

 7. The grounds of appeal accept that  the  appellants  did  not  have  the
    financial means to find an alternative college or the  financial  means
    to continue to support themselves in the UK at the time of the decision
    or hearing. The judge noted in paragraph 23 that the appellants have no
    money at all and are now dependent upon  the  charity  of  friends  and
    relatives.  The  appellants  did  not  have  the  funds  to  meet   the
    requirements of the rules to fund another college course or to maintain
    themselves. (see ground 1)

 8. Ground 1 goes on to argue that the first  appellant  was  only  seeking
    limited leave sufficient to enable the first appellant to complete  his
    studies. In ground one it is  then  asserted  that  a  grant  of  leave
    sufficient to enable the first appellant  to  complete  his  course  of
    study "would represent a proportionate remedy  for  the  breach".  That
    seems to ignore the fact that the first appellant  does  not  have  the
    funds for the tuition fees.

 9. The grounds argue that the decision under  Article  8  in  relation  to
    private life is unreasonable and unlawful. The appellant seeks to  rely
    upon the case of CDS (PBS: "available": Article 8) Brazil  [2010]  UKUT
    00305.

10. In CDS the appellant had the funds necessary to enable her to  complete
    a course available both at the time of the application and at the  time
    of  decision.  In  respect  of  the  present  appellants  there  is  no
    suggestion that they have the available funds.

11. I also draw attention to the case of Patel [2013] UKSC 72 paragraph  57
    where it is made  clear  that  the  opportunity  of  an  individual  to
    complete a course in the UK is not of itself in general terms  a  right
    protected by Article 8. Paragraph 57:-

         57.  It is important to remember that Article 8 is  not  a  general
         dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the  Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human rights. The merits of
         the decision not to depart from the rules are  not  reviewable  one
         appeal: section 86 (6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call in
         Pankina for "common sense" in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in the UK for some years (see para
         47 above). However, such considerations do  not  bother  themselves
         provide grounds of appeal under Article 8, which is concerned  with
         private or family life, not education as such. The opportunity  for
         a promising student to complete his course in this country, however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under Article 8.

12. The appellants' stated intention is to return to India once  the  first
    appellant has obtained a good education. The Rules provide a  means  by
    which a person can complete a course of study.  The  appellants  simply
    cannot meet the requirements of the rules. There is no right to  remain
    in the UK to be educated when the Appellants do not have the  means  to
    support themselves.

13. Even if private life were engaged it has to be  noted  that  the  rules
    provide a means by which an individual  can  complete  their  education
    once started in the United  Kingdom  but  that  is  dependent  upon  an
    individual having the financial means to support themselves. It is  not
    a breach of someone's private life, if they wish  to  study  in  United
    Kingdom to expect them to be able to support themselves.

14. In the light of that even if private life were engage on the  facts  as
    presented the main aspect  of  private  life  relied  upon  relates  to
    completing the education of the first appellant but that cannot be done
    without the funds. On the basis of the evidence the judge was  entitled
    to find that even if private life were engaged on  the  facts  and  the
    decisions constitute  a  breach  of  such,  the  decision  will  be  in
    accordance with the law and for the purposes of maintaining immigration
    control as an aspect of the economic well-being of the country.

15. As a final issue consideration the judge was entitled to find that  the
    decisions were proportionately justified. In light of the fact that the
    rules enable an individual to complete their course  of  study  in  the
    United Kingdom  provided  they  have  the  financial  means,  expecting
    appellant to meet  those  rules  would  in  all  the  circumstances  be
    reasonable. Accordingly any decision to refuse further leave and remove
    the appellants would in the circumstances be proportionate. That was  a
    finding open to the judge on the facts.

16. Within the determination the judge has referred to the  fact  that  the
    first appellant's English was poor. The judge goes on to  suggest  that
    she would not be  satisfied  that  the  appellant  could  complete  the
    course. Whatever the judge said with regard to the English of the first
    appellant, it does not  alter  the  fact  that  the  appellants  cannot
    complete the educational course as they do not have the means.

17. The judge has taken account of all the evidence. She has considered the
    unfortunate circumstances  that  the  appellants  find  themselves  in.
    However that does not alter the fact that the rules provide a route  by
    which the first  appellant  could  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  to
    complete his education. The  appellants  cannot  meet  the  immigration
    rules.  The  judge  has  clearly  considered  all  the  relevant  facts
    including that they entered the United Kingdom on a temporary basis and
    that the reason for entry can no longer  be  attained.  The  judge  was
    entitled in the circumstances to find that the decisions in respect  of
    the appellants were proportionately justified

18. Accordingly  there  is  no  arguable  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination. I uphold the decision to dismiss these  appeals  on  all
    grounds.



Signed   Date 20th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
