

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA096792015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5th May 2016                            |On 9th June 2016               |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                       SAJIDBHAI NOORMAHMADBHAI VAHORA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Cogan, instructed by Marks and Marks Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




   1. Mr Vahora was granted permission to appeal a  decision  of  FtT  judge
      Norton-Taylor dismissing his appeal against a  decision  refusing  him
      leave to remain as a  dependant  based  on  family  and  private  life
      grounds. Mr Vahora's appeal was listed for hearing on  17th  September
      2015. At 9.35am on 17th September 2015 his solicitors faxed a request,
      dated 16th September 2015, for an adjournment stating  that  they  had
      been informed that morning by him that he was "still not fit and  well
      enough to attend court". The  adjournment  was  refused.  The  grounds
      seeking permission to appeal assert:


                  ...
                  2. ... should be set aside as the determination  discloses
                  material errors of law.


                  3. It is submitted that the decision of the FtT is not  in
                  accordance with the caselaw.


                  4. The decision of the FtT fails to properly consider  the
                  rights of the Applicant.


                  5. ... should have granted an adjournment based  upon  the
                  fact that the Appellant's representatives had faxed to the
                  court an adjournment request on 16 September 2015  and  17
                  September 2015 by fax (please see attached  copy  and  fax
                  transmission report). The learned Judge  has  refused  the
                  adjournment request on the basis that the appellant or his
                  representatives were not present despite the fact that the
                  Judge had received over fax a statement of fitness to work
                  clearly showing that the appellant is not fit to work  due
                  to pain.


                  6. ... the case was listed on 17 September and  was  on  a
                  float list. Due to the fact that the appellant was not  in
                  attendance  and  there  was  not  sufficient  time  on  17
                  September 2015 the appeal was looked at  on  18  September
                  2015. No notice had been issued for this date and  neither
                  the appellant nor his representatives had been notified of
                  the new date. The hearing should have been  adjourned  for
                  the sole reason that there was not sufficient time for the
                  court to deal with the matter on 17 September 2015 ...


   2.  Although  the  grounds  seeking  permission  stated  that  the   copy
      adjournment requests were attached, they were not but the fax sent  on
      16th September 2015 at 12.26 and the one sent  on  17  September  0935
      were in the file.


   3. In submissions before me Mr Cogan sought only to rely upon the grounds
      relating to the refusal of the adjournment and the decision by the FtT
      judge being taken on 18 September 2015 without notice to the  parties.
      This was a wise decision. The grounds asserting the decision  contains
      material errors of law, was not in accordance with caselaw and  failed
      to  properly  consider  the  rights  of  the  appellant  were  totally
      unparticularised and did not even begin to identify evidence that  had
      not been considered, what caselaw had not been followed or in what way
      the appellant's rights had not been considered.


   4. Mr Vahora had previously been granted an adjournment  of  his  hearing
      fixed for 8th September  2015  on  the  basis  of  medical  treatment.
      Accompanying the request for the adjournment  of  the  17th  September
      hearing was a significantly illegible notice. Some of the  words  were
      identifiable. In particular the note was headed "Statement of  fitness
      for work for social security or Statutory Sick Pay".  A box that seems
      likely to identify the reason for the  Certificate  has  an  illegible
      word followed by "pain".  A box beside the words "you are not fit  for
      work" has an "X" in it. A box headed  "Comments  including  functional
      effects of your condition" is blank. There is nothing else significant
      on the form that is  legible.  Designated  Judge  Taylor  refused  the
      application for an adjournment on 17th September 2015 (see paragraph 2
      of the FtT decision).


   5. The case, which was on the float list  for  17th  September  2015  was
      then, at some time, passed to Judge  Norton  Taylor.  He  records,  in
      paragraph 3 of his decision, "The appeal then came  before  me  on  18
      September".


   6. Paragraph 28 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 reads:


             'If a party fails to attend a hearing the Tribunal may proceed
             with the hearing if the Tribunal -
   a) Is satisfied that the party has been notified of the hearing  or  that
      reasonable steps have been taken to notify the party of  the  hearing;
      and
   b) Considers that it is in the interests of justice to proceed  with  the
      hearing.'


   7. Paragraph 9 of the Practice Direction Immigration and Asylum  Chambers
      of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal reads, in so far  as
      relevant, as follows:




                  '9.1 Applications  for  the  adjournment  of  appeals  ...
                  listed for hearing before the Tribunal must  be  made  not
                  later than 5.00pm one clear working day before the date of
                  the hearing.

                  ...

                  9.3  The application for an adjournment must be  supported
                  by full reasons ...

                  9.4  Any application made later than the end of the period
                  mentioned in paragraph 9.1 must be made to the Tribunal at
                  the hearing and will require the attendance of  the  party
                  or  the  representative   of   the   party   seeking   the
                  adjournment.

                  9.5  It will only be in the most exceptional circumstances
                  that  a  late  application  for  an  adjournment  will  be
                  considered  without  the  attendance   of   a   party   or
                  representative.

                  9.6  Parties must not assume that an application, even  if
                  made in accordance with paragraph 9.1, will be  successful
                  and they must always check with the  Tribunal  as  to  the
                  outcome of the application.

                  ...

                  9.8  If an adjournment is not granted and the party  fails
                  to  attend  the  hearing,  the  Tribunal  may  in  certain
                  circumstances proceed with the  hearing  in  that  party's
                  absence.'



   8. The application  for  an  adjournment  was  not  accompanied  by  full
      reasons. There was no indication of any issue affecting the  appellant
      other than some sort of unparticularised pain and that he was not  fit
      for work. That does not mean he was unfit to  attend  a  hearing.  The
      covering letter from the solicitors did not even state  what  sort  of
      pain the appellant was in. There is no indication that the  solicitors
      or the applicant  contacted  the  Tribunal  to  establish  whether  an
      adjournment had been granted. No reasons  were  put  forward  why  the
      application for an adjournment should be considered in the absence  of
      a party or representative (see paragraphs 9.1, 9.3, 9.5 and 9.6 of the
      Practice Direction).


   9. Neither the applicant, nor his wife nor his representative attended on
      17th September - see paragraph 9.4 of the Practice Direction.


  10.  The  reliance  upon  an  assertion  that  the   appellant   and   his
      representative  were  not  notified  of  a   new   hearing   date   is
      misconceived. There was no attendance at the scheduled hearing. It  is
      not apparent that the case was not reached on the float list  and  was
      therefore passed over to the next day. That neither the appellant  nor
      his representative attended may well have resulted  in  the  case  not
      being called and another case from the float list being heard but that
      makes no difference to the outcome namely that the appellant  and  his
      representative were not present and the appeal  was  scheduled  to  be
      determined. No good or even legible reason had been  given  for  their
      non-attendance.


  11. The fact that the appeal was determined the  following  day  makes  no
      difference - the appellant had an expectation that his appeal would be
      dealt with on 17th September and he did not attend. It must have  been
      apparent  to  the  appellant  and  his  representatives  that  if  the
      adjournment request were refused (as it was) then the appeal would  be
      determined in his absence (as it was).


  12. In any event the decision was comprehensive and  detailed.  The  judge
      gave his full attention to the evidence before him  which  included  a
      113 page bundle of documents which had been  lodged  for  the  earlier
      adjourned hearing. There was not (and has not been) any indication  of
      any evidence that was not taken into  account  by  the  judge  or  any
      failure to properly apply the relevant legislation,  Immigration  Rule
      or caselaw. There is no error of law, whether  material  or  not.  The
      appellant's claim was hopeless.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision; the decision of the FtT judge  stands.


                                    Date 5th May 2016
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
