
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/09849/2013
     IA/09850/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th March 2015                            |On 10th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                             (1) Shailika arora
                              (2) Sandeep Kumar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P J Holmes, promulgated on 19th August 2013, following a  hearing
    at Stoke on Trent on 6th August 2013.  In the determination, the  judge
    dismissed the  appeals  of  Shailika  Arora  and  Sandeep  Kumar.   The
    Appellants applied for, and were granted, permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are citizens of India.  The principal Appellant  is  the
    wife.  The second Appellant is her husband.  The  principal  Appellant,
    the wife, was born on 1st October 1986, and  her  husband,  the  second
    Appellant, was born on 1st September 1980.  They entered the UK on 20th
    February 2010 with entry clearance valid  until  18th  September  2012.
    This was on the basis of the  first  Appellant's  entry  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student.  The second  Appellant  entered  as  her  dependant.
    They have a child, born in this country in August 2010.  On  15th  June
    2012 the Appellants  apply  each  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  same
    respective categories.  The first Appellant was seeking leave in  order
    to study  with  Finance  Business  Training  Limited,  on  a  full-time
    Chartered Institution of Management Accountants (CIMA) Course.  On 18th
    March 2013, the Respondent issued a letter of  refusal  in  respect  of
    each of the applications.  The refusal letter for the  first  Appellant
    was made under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.  The  second
    Appellant was refused  in  the  light  of  the  refusal  of  the  first
    Appellant because he could not satisfy the  requirements  of  paragraph
    319C(b) of the Rules.

 3. The basis of the refusal is that the first Appellant  had  submitted  a
    previous application which included bank statements  that  were  false.
    In the present application she failed to disclose the fact.   This  was
    considered to be a material  non-disclosure.   Furthermore,  after  the
    first Appellant's current place of study was  taken  off  the  approved
    register, and after she had been given 60 days in which to find another
    Sponsor, she had in November 2011 submitted an  application  to  remain
    under Tier 4 in order to follow a course of  study  at  an  institution
    called "Equinox College" for an Advanced Diploma in  Hotel  Management.
    This application was subsequently withdrawn.  In the meantime, however,
    the Respondent had conducted a check on an  ICICI  bank  statement  and
    concluded that the document was false.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge dismissed the  appeal.   He  considered  the  explanation  on
    behalf of the Appellants.  This was that they had been the victim of  a
    deception themselves.  They had engaged an agent to make an application
    on their behalf who had filed a fraudulent application on the basis  of
    a fraudulent bank statement.  However, before that application had been
    considered, it was withdrawn in February 2012.   Therefore,  since  the
    act of withdrawal was indicative of an act of "honesty" on their  part,
    they could not be treated as having wilfully misled the authorities  in
    sending  an  application  that  was  in  the  first  instance  a  false
    application.

 5. The judge, however, rejected this reasoning on the basis of  the  well-
    established case  law  in  AA  (Nigeria)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  773  which
    established that an applicant may be held to have used "deception" even
    though the dishonesty  in  question  was  not  that  of  the  applicant
    personally (see paragraph 11 of the  determination).   The  judge  also
    observed that the Appellant's answer in relation to question D.16, "Has
    the student ever used deception when seeking leave to enter or leave to
    remain", was answered with the entry of "No".  This did not augur  well
    for the Appellants (see paragraph 17).  The  judge  reasoned  that  the
    first Appellant was "an intelligent and well educated woman" and that,

         "I find it impossible to believe that she  could  have  thought  it
         would not be material for her to disclose that she  had  previously
         made an application for leave for the purpose of studying  at  what
         (by the time of submitting the present application) she believed to
         be a non-existent college, supported by what  (by  that  time)  she
         knew to be a fake bank statement.  I find that the first  Appellant
         withheld these facts knowing them to be material.  I observed  that
         these facts have come to light only as a result of the Respondent's
         verification inquiry and not through any  voluntary  disclosure  by
         the Appellants.  I did not accept (and as have already pointed out,
         the Appellants have  not  even  clearly  alleged)  that  the  first
         Appellant was given any advice to the effect that this  information
         could be legitimately withheld ..." (paragraph 18).

 6. The judge concluded that there was "no evidence to show that any  steps
    of this nature were taken before about May 2013 - that is to say, after
    the refusal currently appealed, whereby the Appellants learned that the
    Respondent knew of the deception" (paragraph 19).  The judge  ended  by
    making the observation that, "It could possibly be true that the  first
    Appellant was the victim of a fraudster, but this fact, if it is  true,
    does not excuse the first Appellant from her own obligations of honesty
    in her  dealings  with  the  Respondent"  (paragraph  21).  Thereafter,
    consideration was given to the position under  human  rights  law  (see
    paragraphs 23 to 27) but the appeal was  dismissed  on  this  basis  as
    well.

 7. The Grounds of Appeal allege that the judge failed to  appreciate  that
    an  earlier  application,  containing  a  false  document,   had   been
    withdrawn.  This could not be treated as a valid application capable of
    triggering refusal on general  grounds.   On  6th  September  2013  the
    application was rejected by the First-tier Tribunal.  On 24th September
    2013, the application was rejected by the Upper Tribunal.  Following  a
    further appeal to the High  Court,  which  was  successful,  the  Upper
    Tribunal then granted permission in the light of  the  observations  of
    the High Court, in a decision dated 18th November 2014.  The matter now
    comes before this Tribunal.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 20th March  2015,  however,  there  was  no
    attendance by the Appellants.  There was no explanation for their  non-
    attendance.   Neither,  was   there   any   attendance   by   a   legal
    representative on their behalf.   This  had  been  listed  as  an  oral
    hearing  and  so  it  was  altogether  surprising  why  there  was   no
    attendance.

 9. For his part, Mr Smart submitted that  the  appeal  could  not  succeed
    because the judge had applied AA (Nigeria) faithfully.   Moreover,  the
    Upper Tribunal determination of Ahmed (general  grounds  of  refusal  -
    material non-disclosure) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00351 confirmed that  the
    failure to disclose a material fact is  also  classed  as  "deception".
    This deception can be by someone acting on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.
    Judge Holmes had made it quite clear, in the reasoning at paragraph  11
    of the determination, that the dishonesty  need  not  be  that  of  the
    applicant personally.

10. Second, as far as the argument  that  the  fraudulent  application  was
    never decided  upon,  is  concerned,  this  was  of  no  avail  to  the
    Appellants.  This is because Rule 34G of the Immigration Rules makes it
    clear that an application is defined as being valid from the time  that
    it is posted or received.  This means that  it  does  not  have  to  be
    decided upon.  Reliance was placed upon the Court  of  Appeal  case  of
    Raju.

11. Third, the judge even allowed for the possibility  that  the  Appellant
    was "the victim of a fraudster" but still decided that the appeal  fell
    to be dismissed for the reasons that were given.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision.   In  fact,  the
    determination  of  Judge  Holmes  is  a   clear,   comprehensive,   and
    thoughtfully  constructed  decision.   The  judge  allows   for   every
    possibility and decides the matter on the basis of the applicable  law.
    The facts are properly found.   The  appeal  fails  for  the  following
    reasons.

13. First, the judge is clear that  AA  (Nigeria)  does  not  require  that
    "deception" has to be that of the applicant  personally.   Second,  the
    judge's findings are clear that, "The first  Appellant  withheld  these
    facts knowing them to be material" and the relevant facts have "come to
    light only as a result of the Respondent's verification inquiry and not
    through any voluntary disclosure by  the  Appellants"  (paragraph  18).
    The  Appellant  did  not  allege  that  she  was  advised  to  withhold
    information.

14. Third, the judge was equally clear that no  steps  were  taken  by  the
    Appellant before May 2013, which was after the refusal of the currently
    appealed decision, "whereby the Appellants learnt that  the  Respondent
    knew of the deception" (paragraph 19).  These facts  totally  undermine
    the claim of the Appellants who have in any event decided not to attend
    this hearing today.

15. Finally, the judge allows for the possibility that even  if  the  first
    Appellant "was the victim of a fraudster" this still "does  not  excuse
    the first Appellant from her own  obligations  of  honesty"  (paragraph
    21).  The judge's findings in relation to  human  rights  were  equally
    entirely sustainable.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date: 7th April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss


