

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number:  IA/09423/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at:  Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 11th February 2015                        |On:  31st March 2015         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                      Rajeev Mohan de Silva Sandaradura
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Harris, Counsel instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka date of birth 19th March 1981.
     His wife and minor child are treated as his dependents for the purpose
    of this appeal.  He appeals with permission the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Ghani) to dismiss his appeal against a decision to
    remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999.


 2. The Appellant has been in the United Kingdom a long time. He arrived in
    2003 and made various successful applications for leave to remain as  a
    student, then as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur.   The decision under appeal  to
    the First-tier  Tribunal  was  a  refusal  decision  arising  from  the
    Respondent's refusal to grant the Appellant indefinite leave to  remain
    on the basis of his lawful long residence.  The  Respondent  had  found
    that the Appellant could not succeed under the 'ten year' rule  because
    there had been breaks in the continuity of his lawful leave. The First-
    tier Tribunal upheld the Respondent's  analysis  that  there  had  been
    breaks, some of them quite lengthy. There is  no  appeal  against  that
    decision.

 3. The alternative ground of appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    that the Appellant and his family should be granted leave on the  basis
    that their removal from the United Kingdom would be a  disproportionate
    interference with the private lives that  they  had  established  since
    their  arrival.     The  Tribunal  considered  the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant suffered from a rare  genetic  condition  known  as  Berger's
    Disease, which affects his kidneys; regard was had to the fact that his
    son, aged four at the date of the determination, had been born  in  the
    UK and had lived here all his life; the family in Sri Lanka were living
    in straightened circumstances and were largely dependent on remittances
    sent from relatives abroad and that the Appellant himself had been here
    since 2003.   Against all of these factors was weighed  the  fact  that
    the Appellant could never have had any expectation  that  he  would  be
    permitted to stay permanently in the UK, he still had close connections
    to Sri Lanka including his parents and had visited (with  his  son)  as
    recently as 2012, there was no evidence to suggest that  he  would  not
    receive treatment in Sri Lanka (as in fact his brother  had  done)  and
    that his son would be able, at his young age, to learn Sinhalese, adapt
    and receive an education in Sri Lanka.  Having considered all of  these
    factors the First-tier Tribunal found the  decision  to  remove  to  be
    proportionate and lawful, and the appeals were accordingly dismissed.

 4. The Appellant has permission to appeal[1] on the grounds that the First-
    tier Tribunal arguably erred in failing to make express findings on the
    best interest of the child contrary to the guidance  in  ZH  (Tanzania)
    [2011] UKSC 4.


    No Error of Law

 5.  I  am  grateful  to  both  parties  for  their  careful  and   helpful
    submissions.


 6. It is correct to say that this determination nowhere contains the words
    "I find that  the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's  son  are...".
    However having read this careful and comprehensive determination  as  a
    whole it is apparent that the Tribunal was addressing  itself  to  that
    matter at paragraph 25:

         "The case law  of  course  recognises  that  there  is  a  need  to
         safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are in the United
         Kingdom. The Respondent maintains that  the  Immigration  Rules  as
         they stand currently, incorporate this aspect and in particular the
         requirements of s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
         2009. The Courts have of course recognised that the welfare of  the
         child is not a factor of limitless importance in the sense that  it
         will prevail over all other considerations. It is a factor  however
         that must rank higher than any other. Where the best  interests  of
         the child clearly favour a certain course, that  course  should  be
         followed  unless  countervailing  factors  of  considerable   force
         displace them. The  Appellant's  child  is  only  aged  4.  He  has
         recently commenced schooling. Although his parents try and speak to
         him in Sinhalese, he does not respond. There is no reason  why  the
         child would not be able to understand and learn Sinhalese  language
         if surrounded by people  who  speak  the  language.  The  child  is
         clearly at an adaptable age. The Appellant has confirmed that there
         is  private  education  available  in  Sri  Lanka.  The   Appellant
         maintains that because he has not resided in Sri Lanka for the last
         5 years, his child will not be able to secure a  place  in  school.
         However there is no objective evidence to confirm this...."

 7. If the  Tribunal  erred  in  not  completing  this  paragraph  with  an
    unambiguous finding on where the  child's  best  interests  lay,  I  am
    satisfied that it is not an error that can have had any material effect
    on the outcome of this  appeal.  It  was  clear  where  the  Tribunal's
    thinking lay. A very young child with no significant  health  concerns,
    with the support of his parents (and grandparents) and  an  ability  to
    access education would not face any real difficulties  in  adapting  to
    life in his country  of  nationality.   Even  if  it  could  have  been
    established that disruption of the nascent private life of a four  year
    old would be contrary to his best interests, it could not, in light  of
    the Judge's findings about his life in Sri Lanka, be  found  to  be  so
    contrary  to  his  best  interests  so  as  to   render   his   removal
    disproportionate: EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.


      Decision

 8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    30th
                                 March 2015
                           -----------------------
[1] Granted on the 13th November 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Levin

