
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09045/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 May 2014                                   |On 2 June 2014             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                    Mr Kamal Gamini Arunapriya Puwakwatta
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Vidhyadharan
For the Respondent:    Mr I Palmer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is a resumed hearing of the Secretary of  State's  appeal  against
    the decision of a First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissing the respondent's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules but  allowing  it  under  Article  8
    ECHR.

 2. For ease of reference the parties are hereafter  referred  to  as  they
    were in the First-tier Tribunal so that Mr Puwakwatta is the  appellant
    and the Secretary of State for the Home Department is the respondent.



Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who applied on 24 October  2012
    for variation of his leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    application was refused  and  he  appealed  the  decision.   A  removal
    decision was also made by way of directions under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006  but  that  was  not  a
    decision made in accordance with the law and fell away.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal the  decision  allowing  the
    appeal under Article 8. At an error of law  hearing  before  me  on  11
    February 2014 I found that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to
    reason properly her determination on  the  Article  8  issue  and  this
    amounted to a material error of law. A written decision to that  effect
    was served on the parties. The resumed hearing took place before me  on
    7 May 2014.

The Resumed Hearing

 5. Before me I had all the documentation that was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  In addition a further bundle was produced numbered  1-
    56 and also a skeleton argument filed on behalf of the appellant.

 6. The appellant gave evidence in English and confirmed the truth  of  his
    two statements on the court file.  Ms Vidhyadharan then  cross-examined
    him.  Either because he did not understand or he was being  obfuscatory
    it took a  number  of  questions  put  in  different  ways  before  the
    appellant accepted that he made the application for  further  leave  to
    remain as his wife's dependant in December  2010  even  though  he  was
    already in a relationship with his current partner Ms Shah before  that
    date in April 2010.  He  was  asked  whether  he  thought  that  was  a
    dishonest application but he did not agree that it was.  He had entered
    into an arranged marriage which did not work and the relationship  fell
    apart.  He was confused and did not know  what  to  do  and  he  became
    mentally ill through all the stress.  Ms Shah was the only  person  who
    helped him.  He did not think it was a problem if he did not  tell  the
    Home Office about his change of circumstances.  He did not know he  had
    to inform them but appeared to accept that he  had  applied  merely  so
    that he could stay in the United Kingdom with Ms Shah.  The  up-to-date
    position is that the decree nisi of divorce has been pronounced and the
    application for the decree absolute  will  be  able  to  be  lodged  in
    approximately 6 weeks. (It appears from a discussion with counsel  that
    there were difficulties with service of the  divorce  petition  on  the
    appellant's wife as the appellant did not know where  she  was  living.
    However, an acknowledgment of service was  received  dated  5  February
    2014 and after that the petition was able to proceed.)

 7. In further cross-examination the  appellant  said  that  his  partner's
    mother is 80 or even older than that.  She  has  other  family  members
    living in north  London.   Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    determination recorded that the sponsor is  not  her  mother's  primary
    carer she has always been her carer although there  were  a  couple  of
    ladies who helped.  Ms Shah makes daily visits and takes her mother out
    in the car and to go shopping.  It is still the case that Ms Shah  does
    not see her son.  Ms Shah is some ten years older than  the  appellant.
    Just the two of them live together.  Ms Shah has a  brother  who  is  a
    very busy man.  Occasionally he visits his mother late in the  evenings
    after his shop closes.  The appellant himself has an uncle here but has
    not seen him for approximately three years.

 8. There was no re-examination.  I elicited from the  appellant  that  his
    mother lives in Sri Lanka as does his younger sister who is married and
    lives there also.  His other sister lives in Australia.

 9. I heard evidence from Leena Shah who filed two witness  statements  and
    confirmed their contents to be true.  Cross-examined by Ms Vidhyadharan
    Ms Shah said that the appellant has applied for his  divorce  and  that
    she was in a relationship with him when he applied  with  his  wife  to
    stay as her spouse.  Ms Shah  accepted  that  the  appellant  made  the
    application to enable his  relationship  with  her  to  continue.   She
    applied for him because she did not want to lose  him.   She  confirmed
    her mother's age to be 80 and that her brother lives  in  another  town
    and visits once or twice per month.  Her  mother  had  carers  but  the
    situation has now changed.  Her  carers  were  not  looking  after  her
    mother properly as she is now getting  older.  A  new  carer  would  be
    employed if a suitable one could be  found.   She  confirmed  that  the
    appellant has an uncle in the UK but she has not met  him  because  the
    appellant and he do not get along.  The appellant  has  family  in  Sri
    Lanka being a mother and sister "and other family".

10. Re-examined by Mr Palmer  Ms  Shah  said  that  her  brother  lives  in
    Southgate and her mother in Harrow.  By the time  the  application  was
    made to remain the appellant's wife had already left home.   Ms  Shah's
    brother owns a shop which is open seven days a week. He works from nine
    to five and on Sundays for half a day.   She  has  not  approached  the
    council for help with looking after her mother as  she  does  not  want
    anyone else to help her.  Ms Shah prepares food for her.  Her  mother's
    health is deteriorating.  Ms Shah's father died in September  2012.  Ms
    Shah also said that  it  is  difficult  having  a  carer  from  another
    community.  They do not eat the same food and her mother does not speak
    English.

11. I heard submissions from both representatives.  I noted them  and  have
    taken them into account in arriving at my decision.

My Findings

12. I heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  Ms  Shah.   I  have
    considered their statements, their cross-examination,  the  submissions
    and the skeleton argument.  In general the facts in this appeal are not
    in dispute in any major way. There were small differences  between  the
    evidence given by the appellant  and  Ms  Shah  but  nothing  of  major
    importance. For instance, the appellant said  that  Ms  Shah's  brother
    works until late during the week - this being the reason given that  he
    is unable to help look after his mother - whereas Ms Shah said that  he
    works 9-5 which does not suggest to me that he does work late.

13. I was unimpressed by Ms Shah's comments regarding the lack of help  for
    her mother and the reasons given as to why she no longer  has  the  two
    carers that she did have. Her  mother's  reported  reluctance  to  have
    anyone else care for her who does not speak her  language  and  prepare
    her food in the way she wishes supports the argument that Ms Shah could
    not go to Sri Lanka with the appellant because  her  mother  needs  her
    here as her primary carer. Of course I am able to understand  that  she
    would like Ms Shah to be with her constantly to meet her  needs  and  I
    can understand also that Ms Shah wishes to be with her mother but  that
    is far away from the situation where Ms Shah is the only person who can
    look after her to the exclusion of  others.  I  would  need  a  lot  of
    persuasion on much better evidence than I have heard before  concluding
    that Ms Shah is her mother's primary carer out of necessity rather than
    choice.  Her mother is not in good health and needs help  with  certain
    tasks but appears to have a  degree  of  independence.  Ms  Shah  works
    approximately 36 hours per week according to her  payslips  and  during
    that time I assume that her mother looks after herself. If Ms Shah were
    not available others would help care for her mother.

14. On other matters the appellant and Ms Shah are now aged 39 years and 50
    respectively. They are both in good health.  Ms Shah arrived in the  UK
    in 1976, is divorced, has a grown-up son with whom she has no  contact,
    and she has lived with the appellant since March 2012.   The  appellant
    is a Sri Lankan national who first arrived in the UK as  a  student  in
    January 2001. It appears from the documentation, although I am not sure
    about it, that he remained here  with  some  form  of  leave  until  he
    returned to Sri Lanka to marry Ms Perera in February 2008  in  Colombo.
    He then returned to the UK leaving his wife in Sri Lanka but went  back
    there in May 2009 returning to the UK in October 2009 as a dependent of
    his wife who herself obtained entry clearance as a student. It  is  not
    clear to me for what  reason  the  appellant  was  refused  a  visa  in
    February 2009, as is recorded in his application form, but in any event
    he subsequently obtained entry clearance.

15. According to the appellant his arranged marriage to Ms  Perera  was  in
    trouble from the start. Shortly after returning to the  UK  in  October
    2009 he met Ms Shah in April 2010 and  their  relationship  began.  The
    appellant's wife moved out of the matrimonial home towards the  end  of
    2011 and she  and  the  appellant  finally  separated  by  the  end  of
    February/March 2012.  Thereafter he moved into Ms  Shah's  property  in
    March 2012.

16. It is not denied that by the time the  application  was  made  for  the
    appellant  to  be  included  as  a  dependent  spouse  on  Ms  Perera's
    application of 10 December 2010 his marriage to her had already failed.
    It is reasonable to assume that  the  request  for  further  leave  was
    granted on the basis of false representations having been made  in  the
    application. On the basis  that  the  appellant  represented  that  his
    marriage was still subsisting leave was granted until 21 January 2013.

17. Before the appellant's further leave expired he applied on  24  October
    2012 for leave to remain as the unmarried partner of Ms Shah and it  is
    that application which was refused and is the subject of this appeal.

18. It is common ground that the appellant cannot meet the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.  In essence the appellant cannot show that he is
    a partner within the meaning of Appendix FM and he does not fall within
    paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (Private  Life).   I  am
    satisfied from the oral and written evidence that the appellant and  Ms
    Shah are  in  a  subsisting  relationship  and  that  they  are  living
    together.

19. There are no children involved.  Ms Shah cares for her mother but as at
    the date of the hearing although her mother is suffering from a  number
    of problems she is able to live on her own.  She had carers helping her
    but, for whatever reason, they no longer do so.  Ms  Shah  states  that
    she is her mother's primary carer and that her brother is too  busy  to
    help look after his mother.  From the evidence given I conclude that it
    must be the case that Ms Shah indeed helps her mother as no  doubt  any
    loving daughter would help an elderly relative but that  she  does  not
    look after her  full-time  because  she  herself  works  as  a  Mayoral
    Assistant.  If her mother's health were to fail  to  a  greater  degree
    then it may only be possible for  her  to  be  hospitalised  or  become
    resident in a care home, and that would be with or  without  Ms  Shah's
    help.

20. In considering the requirements to be met by the appellant for leave to
    remain on the ground of  private  life  as  per  paragraph  276ADE  and
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules the case law, including R  (Nagre)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin),
    shows that the Immigration Rules were amended in 2012 to  address  more
    explicitly the factors according to domestic and  Strasbourg  case  law
    weighing in favour of or against a claim by a foreign national based on
    Article 8 ECHR to remain in the United Kingdom.   The  amendments  were
    introduced with the intention  to  align  the  Immigration  Rules  more
    closely with the approach to be taken under  Article  8  and  to  unify
    consideration under the Rules of  Article  8  and  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  which  deals  with  the
    welfare of children, where there are any.  Instructions were issued  by
    the Secretary  of  State  regarding  the  approach  to  be  applied  by
    officials in deciding to grant  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules.
    Those instructions were that if the  Rules  are  not  met  it  will  be
    appropriate normally to refuse the application but leave can be granted
    where exceptional circumstances in the sense  of  "unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences" for the individual would result.  As Sales J  stated  the
    residual discretion "fully accommodate[ed] the requirements of  Article
    8".

21. In Haleemudeen v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA
    Civ 558 paragraph 40 states:-

         "40. I, however, consider  that  the  FTT  Judge  did  err  in  his
             approach to Article 8.  This is because he did not consider Mr
             Haleemudeen's case for remaining in the United Kingdom on  the
             basis of his private and family life against the Secretary  of
             State's policy as contained in Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE  of
             the  Immigration  Rules.   These   new   provisions   in   the
             Immigration Rules are a central part of  the  legislative  and
             policy context in which the interests of  immigration  control
             are balanced against the interests and rights  of  people  who
             have come to this country and wish to settle in  it.   Overall
             the Secretary of State's policy as  to  when  an  interference
             with an Article 8 right will be regarded  as  disproportionate
             is more particularised in the new Rules than it had previously
             been.  The new Rules require stronger bonds  with  the  United
             Kingdom before leave will be given under them.   The  features
             of the policy contained in the Rules include the  requirements
             of twenty year residence, that the applicant's  partner  be  a
             British citizen in the United Kingdom, settled here,  or  here
             with leave as a refugee or humanitarian protection,  and  that
             where the basis of the application rests  on  the  applicant's
             children that they have been residents for seven years."

    And at 43:-

         "43. In Nagre's case Sales J stated (at [26] and [29]) that  it  is
             necessary to find 'particular factors in individual cases  ...
             of especially compelling force in favour of a grant  of  leave
             to remain' even though those factors are not  fully  reflected
             in and dealt with in the new Rules and  'to  consider  whether
             there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised
             under the new Rules to require the grant of such  leave'.   In
             MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, albeit in the context of deportation and
             Article 8, this court stated (at [44]) that the Rules  are  'a
             complete code', and that the  provision  in  paragraph  398(c)
             that  where  the  exceptions  to  mandatory   deportation   in
             paragraphs 399 and 399A do not apply,  'it  will  only  be  in
             exceptional  circumstances  that  the   public   interest   in
             deportation will be outweighed by other factors' involves  the
             application of a  proportionality  test  as  required  by  the
             Strasbourg jurisprudence."

22. I turn to look at Article 8 ECHR and have considered  the  decision  of
    the House of Lords in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11.  There the House  of
    Lords reaffirmed the analysis given in Razgar, R  (on  the  application
    of) v SSHD [2004]  UKHL  27  and  also  reaffirmed  the  importance  of
    continuing reliance on established Strasbourg jurisprudence relating to
    Article 8.  I have taken the step by  step  approach  in  Razgar.   The
    proposed removal will be an  interference  with  the  exercise  of  the
    appellant's right to respect for his private life and his  family  life
    with Ms Shah and this engages the operation of Article 8.  It is not in
    issue that the interference is  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  is
    necessary in the interests of  immigration  control.   Although  not  a
    legitimate end in itself it is a well established means  of  protecting
    the economic wellbeing of the country.  I therefore proceed to consider
    whether the interference is proportionate to the legitimate public  end
    sought to be achieved and it is for the respondent to show this.

23. According to the appellant's statement he has been  a  student  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2001.  He had or should have had no expectation as
    a student that he would be entitled to remain here after the conclusion
    of his studies. He had or should have had no expectation  that  if  his
    marriage foundered in its early stages, as in  fact  it  did,  that  he
    would be allowed to remain to pursue another relationship.

24. When the appellant arrived with leave in 2009 following his marriage it
    was already in trouble.  He, with Ms Shah's help, made  an  application
    for further leave based on the appellant's continuing marriage with  Ms
    Perera.  Ms Shah in evidence said that this was done  because  she  did
    not want to lose him.  I  find  that  the  appellant  would  have  been
    perfectly aware that if the true circumstances about the state  of  his
    marriage had been known at the time he sought further  leave  he  would
    not have been able to remain here. That is because the whole  basis  of
    his application for leave was his continuing dependency upon the  leave
    granted to his wife. I find further that if his  relationship  with  Ms
    Shah was by then sufficiently established he should  have  returned  to
    Sri Lanka and made an application from there.  The passage of time  has
    enabled their relationship to develop and they are living  together.  I
    have little doubt that it is a genuine relationship and that they  wish
    to continue to cohabit and may  wish  to  marry  in  due  course.   The
    appellant is employed as a Clinical Support worker in the NHS.  I  take
    all of this into account.

25. There are no particular difficulties for the appellant to return to Sri
    Lanka. His mother and sister live there. There is no good reason why he
    should not return to live there and find a job.  Ms Shah could apply to
    return there with him. Any such application would be subject to the Sri
    Lankan immigration laws as far as Ms Shah is concerned, presumably.

26. I understand that Ms Shah wishes to be  close  to  her  mother  in  her
    mother's later years and with  her  declining  health.   Doubtless  her
    mother would wish her to remain here also and receive  the  benefit  of
    her daughter's attentions and that it would affect her adversely if her
    daughter were to leave the country.  For those reasons it is  therefore
    much more likely in my finding that if the appellant left  the  country
    Ms Shah would not go with him. However, sometimes hard choices have  to
    be made. It would not seem impossible for Ms  Shah  to  travel  to  Sri
    Lanka to visit the appellant.  He would be free to make an  application
    to rejoin Ms Shah in this country and if he then met  the  requirements
    of the Rules he would be able to do so.

27. The case of Chikwamba (Chikwamba v Secretary for  the  Home  Department
    [2008} UKHL 40) is not one that can properly  be  argued  supports  the
    appellant's claim to be able to succeed under Article 8. In that appeal
    the female applicant failed in her asylum claim but on account  of  the
    conditions in Zimbabwe at the time removals of failed asylum seekers to
    that country were temporarily suspended. While in this country in  that
    state of limbo the applicant married a Zimbabwean national who had been
    granted asylum and, accordingly, he had the right to remain. This was a
    genuine marriage and a daughter was  born  to  the  appellant  and  her
    husband. After the lifting of the suspension  of  forced  removals  the
    question arose as to whether the appellant, presumably  with  her  very
    young daughter, should be required to return to Zimbabwe  in  order  to
    apply from there for permission to come to the United Kingdom in  order
    to resume her life with her husband. As was said in that case it  ought
    to have been  accepted  that  the  applicant's  husband  could  not  be
    expected to return  to  Zimbabwe,  that  the  applicant  could  not  be
    expected to leave her child behind or perhaps return to  Zimbabwe  with
    her to endure "harsh and unpalatable" conditions, and if she were to be
    returned to that country she would have every prospect of succeeding in
    an application made for permission to re-enter and remain in the United
    Kingdom with her husband.

28. The circumstances in the current appeal are very different as  must  be
    apparent from the facts that have been found and are set out above.

29. As was said in Chikwamba generally  speaking  would-be  immigrants  who
    desire to remain permanently should  apply  for  permission  to  do  so
    before coming here. Although the appellant was entitled to come here as
    the dependent of his wife he was less than frank about the  failure  of
    that marriage when applying for further  leave  on  the  basis  of  his
    continuing marriage and leave was granted on  the  basis  that  it  was
    continuing.  He  should  have  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  to  make   his
    application to join Ms Shah from there. It is not in my finding in  the
    particular circumstances of this case disproportionate to  require  the
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom now to make such  an  application
    which may or may not succeed. If he now meets the requirements  of  the
    Rules then any such application will succeed. If he is not successful I
    take into account that there are no children involved.  Although  there
    would be undoubted difficulties for the relationship to  continue  they
    are not such that they cannot be overcome either by Ms Shah joining the
    appellant in Sri Lanka, or by visits, however unsatisfactory  that  may
    be in the shorter term. Such visits would presumably  last   until  the
    appellant's application to return  here  is  successful  or  Ms  Shah's
    family circumstances in the UK change at some time  in  the  future  to
    enable her to join the appellant in Sri Lanka on a permanent basis.

30. All these matters are in the  balance.  On  the  particular  facts  and
    weighing the appellant's human rights against the  public  interest  as
    codified in the Immigration Rules I find that this is not  one  of  the
    exceptional cases where the appellant's rights and the rights of others
    who are affected by the decision lead me to conclude that  there  would
    be a  disproportionate  interference  in  the  appellant's  family  and
    private life by refusing this appeal. This is for the reasons  set  out
    earlier in this determination. Therefore the appeal fails.

Decision

31. For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and under Article 8 ECHR.

32.  There  has  been  no  anonymity  direction  thus  far  and  given  the
    circumstances of this appeal I see  no  good  reason  to  make  such  a
    direction now.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
