
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09171/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23rd September 2016                    |On 26th September 2016           |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                               MS NIRANTHA [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. S Jegarajah, instructed by Jacobs & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Moore promulgated on 24th February 2016, in which  he  dismissed  the
       appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
       Department of 15th February 2015, to refuse the  appellant  leave  to
       remain in the UK.


Background


    2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  On 16th November 2011, she
       was granted limited leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  until  29th
       December 2014 to join her spouse, Mr Jananthan Rasiah. She arrived in
       the UK on 13th December 2011.  On 22nd December 2014, she applied for
       further leave to remain in the UK,  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,
       "due to her exceptional circumstances".  The covering letter  to  her
       application  sent  by  KTM  Legal  Consultants  explained  that   the
       applicant has  experienced  marital  problems  and  her  husband  has
       applied for a divorce that is pending before  Romford  County  Court.
       The appellant's representatives stated that the appellant "needs some
       time to deal with the divorce proceedings", and enclosed a number  of
       documents in support of the application.


    3. The application was refused for the reasons set  out  in  a  decision
       dated 15th February 2015 and  it  was  that  decision  that  was  the
       subject of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


    4. The appeal  was  first  listed  for  hearing  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal sitting at Taylor House on 26th October 2015.  On that date,
       neither party attended the hearing.  The  hearing  was  adjourned  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge  Shiner  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  a
       decision promulgated on 18th November 2015.  The Judge stated:


             "4.  However the Tribunal service received an email on the  26
             October  2015  at  just  after  8  pm  from  the   Appellant's
             solicitors, that email refers to an earlier telephone call  to
             the Tribunal service, it  also  attaches  a  short  GP  letter
             stating in terms that the Appellant could not attend that  day
             as she was suffering from "headache palpitations and stress".


             .....


             7.   I am to consider whether having regard to the  overriding
             objective  I  can  fairly  decide  this  matter  on  a   paper
             application. I conclude that  I  cannot.  I  consider  in  the
             circumstances that I should allow the adjournment  request  to
             enable the Appellant, with or without the Sponsor,  to  attend
             and to give evidence.  I do so  in  light  of  the  Appellants
             inability to attend on the 26 October 2015 through ill  health
             and in light of the  issues  raised  in  the  Appeal,  by  the
             Appellant, to which I have referred to above."


    5. The matter was listed for hearing before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Moore, at Taylor House, on 16th February 2016.   The  respondent  was
       represented at that hearing by  a  Mr  P  Whitehead,  a  Home  Office
       Presenting Officer.  Neither  the  appellant,  her  fianc�,  nor  her
       representatives attended the hearing.   I  have  had  regard  to  the
       record of proceedings from which it  is  clear  that  the  Judge  was
       satisfied that the  Notice  of  Hearing  had  been  served  upon  the
       appellant.  He went  on  to  hear  submissions  from  the  Presenting
       Officer.


    6. There is in the Tribunal file, a copy of an email that  was  sent  to
       the Tribunal, by the appellant's present representatives (Jacobs & Co
       Solicitors) at 15:06 on 16th February 2016. The email states:


             "We refer to our  earlier  telephone  conversation  with  your
             office regarding the above matter. Our client could not attend
             the hearing this morning since she was not  feeling  well.  We
             now attach herewith medical certificate for your perusal.   We
             shall be thankful if you could let us  have  the  new  hearing
             date at your earliest convenience."


    7. A medical certificate dated 16th February 2016 was  attached  stating
       that the  appellant  "is  suffering  from  vomiting  related  to  her
       pregnancy and therefore unable to attend for reporting on  16/02/16".
       It is not clear from the file whether the Judge  was  made  aware  of
       that email or the attached medical certificate.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


    8. The Judge notes at paragraph [2] of his decision, the decision  under
       appeal and at paragraph [4] notes that no-one appeared at the hearing
       centre on behalf  of  the  appellant.   He  was  satisfied  that  the
       appellant had received adequate notice of the hearing and that it was
       appropriate to determine the appeal on the papers in accordance  with
       Rule 25 (2) of the Tribunal Procedure Rules.


    9. The Judge went on to consider the appeal.  The  evidence  before  the
       Judge is set out at paragraph [5] of the decision.  At paragraphs [9]
       to [12] of his decision, the Judge sets  out  the  appellant's  case.
       Importantly, the Judge records at paragraph [11] of the decision:


             "11. Towards the end of 2014 the appellant claimed to have met
             a man named Mr. [SK] at her aunt's home in  Ilford  in  Essex.
             They soon became close and in March 2015 decided to  marry.  A
             cultural  wedding  took  place  on  5th  April  2015  and  the
             appellant and Mr. [K] have lived together since that time. The
             marriage was unable to be  registered  since  the  appellant's
             original passport was with UKVI."


   10. At paragraphs [13] to [18] of the decision the  Judge  sets  out  his
       findings of fact and conclusions.  The Judge states inter alia:


             "13. The appellant applied for leave  to  remain  as  she  was
             undergoing divorce proceedings. However,  from  the  documents
             before me it would appear that the grounds of divorce were not
             contested and reference to page 12 -  14  of  the  appellant's
             bundle confirms that a decree absolute was obtained  from  the
             Family  Court  at  Romford.  A  letter  from  Jacobs  and   Co
             Solicitors confirmed that the appellant's divorce file was now
             closed and that the original decree absolute was forwarded  to
             the appellant for her records.


             ..


             15.  In refusing the appellant's application consideration has
             been given to the appellant's private life under Article 8  by
             reference to Paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Rules.  The  appellant
             entered the UK aged 26 years on 13th December 2011.  In  those
             circumstances she has not therefore lived continuously in  the
             UK for at least  20  years.  Furthermore,  the  appellant  has
             failed to provide reliable evidence that she has  severed  all
             social, cultural and family ties to her home  country  in  Sri
             Lanka. She resided in that country up until she was  26  years
             of age and in the absence of evidence to the contrary  retains
             significant knowledge of the culture and  traditions  and  the
             language of that country. I am satisfied that  this  appellant
             would not face significant obstacles to   reintegrating   into
               life   in   Sri    Lanka.    In    all    the  circumstances
             she   cannot   satisfy     any   of   the   requirements    in
             Paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.


             16.  There is no credible and reliable evidence  demonstrating
             that   the   appellant     is     now     in     a     genuine
             relationship   with   her   new  partner/spouse.  The  witness
             statement from the appellant's partner is incredibly short and
             states little more than he supports his partner's  application
             and nothing more than that. There  is  no  evidence  that  the
             appellant's new partner is a British citizen and it would seem
             that he may also be a national of Sri Lanka."


   11. The Judge went on at  paragraphs  [17]  and  [18],  to  consider  the
       Article 8 claim by reference to  the  factors  identified  in  Razgar
       (2004) UKHL 27.  The  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  any  proposed
       removal would be an interference with the exercise of the appellant's
       right to respect for either her private or family life, but  even  if
       it were, the Judge found it would be  lawful  and  necessary  on  the
       grounds of effective Immigration control  and  the  decision  of  the
       respondent would be proportionate.


The appeal before me


   12. The appellant advances two grounds of appeal.  First,  the  appellant
       contacted the Tribunal to notify  her  unfitness  to  attend  to  the
       hearing and that was  followed  by  an  email  from  the  appellant's
       representatives explaining her absence. Thus the First-tier  Tribunal
       has unreasonably denied the  appellant  an  opportunity  for  a  fair
       hearing.  Second, the  Judge  has  totally  ignored  the  appellant's
       family life in the UK.  The  Tribunal  has  failed  to  consider  the
       evidence submitted by the appellant and the appellant was also denied
       an opportunity to establish with evidence at a hearing, that she  has
       formed a durable relationship with a British National.


   13. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Hollingworth on 2nd August  2016.  The  matter  comes  before  me  to
       consider whether or not  the  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Moore involved the making of a material error of  law,  and  if
       so, to remake the decision.


Error of Law decision


   14. The issue of fairness in the context of adjournments  was  considered
       by the Upper Tribunal in the case of Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)
       [2014] UKUT 418.  The President gave the following reminder;


             "7. If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment request,
             such decision could, in principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in
             several respects: these include a failure to take into account
             all    material    considerations;    permitting    immaterial
             considerations to intrude; denying the party concerned a  fair
             hearing;  failing  to  apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
             irrationally. In practice, in most cases the question will  be
             whether the refusal deprived the affected party of  his  right
             to a fair hearing. Where an adjournment refusal is  challenged
             on fairness grounds, it is important  to  recognise  that  the
             question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  FtT  acted
             reasonably.  Rather,  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
             fairness: was there any deprivation of  the  affected  party's
             right to a fair hearing? Any temptation to review the  conduct
             and decision of the FtT through  the  lens  of  reasonableness
             must be firmly resisted, in order to avoid a  misdirection  in
             law. In a nutshell, fairness is the supreme criterion.


             8.  The  cardinal  rule  rehearsed  above  is   expressed   in
             uncompromising language in the decision of the Court of Appeal
             in  SH  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284, at [13]:


                       "First,  when  considering  whether  the  immigration
                  Judge ought to have granted an adjournment, the  test  was
                  not irrationality. The test was not whether  his  decision
                  was properly open to him or was Wednesbury unreasonable or
                  perverse. The test  and  sole  test  was  whether  it  was
                  unfair".


             Alertness to this test by Tribunals at both tiers  will  serve
             to prevent  judicial  error.  Regrettably,  in  the  real  and
             imperfect world of contemporary litigation,  the  question  of
             adjourning a case not  infrequently  arises  on  the  date  of
             hearing, at the doors of the court. I am conscious, of course,
             that in the typical case the Judge  will  have  invested  much
             time and effort in preparation, is understandably  anxious  to
             complete the day's list of cases for hearing and may well feel
             frustrated  by  the  (usually)   unexpected   advent   of   an
             adjournment request. Both the FtT and the Upper Tribunal  have
             demanding   workloads.   Parties   and    stakeholders    have
             expectations, typically elevated  and  sometimes  unrealistic,
             relating to the throughput and output of cases in the  system.
             In the present era, the spotlight on  the  judiciary  is  more
             acute than ever before. Moreover, Tribunals must  consistently
             give effect  to  the  overriding  objective.  Notwithstanding,
             sensations of frustration and  inconvenience,  no  matter  how
             legitimate, must always yield to the parties' right to a  fair
             hearing. In determining applications for adjournments,  Judges
             will also be guided by focusing on the  overarching  criterion
             enshrined in  the  overriding  objective,  which  is  that  of
             fairness."


   15. There is some force to the submission made by Mr. Clarke on behalf of
       the  respondent  that  there  was  in  fact  no  application  for  an
       adjournment.  There was certainly no explanation  before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge as to why the appellant's representatives had not
       attended the hearing that they had notice of, or why the  appellant's
       partner  could  not  have  attended,  even  in  the  absence  of  the
       appellant.   The  appellant's  representatives  did  not  inform  the
       Tribunal that they would not be attending the hearing.  I  also  note
       that any application that there may have been to adjourn the hearing,
       was not made at the earliest opportunity, but left to the morning  of
       the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.


   16.  I  accept  however  that  an  email  was  sent  by  the  appellant's
       representatives, albeit after the hearing had  concluded,  explaining
       the appellant's absence.  There is no reference to that email  or  to
       the medical certificate in  the  decision  of  the  Judge  and  I  am
       prepared to accept that the Judge appears to have gone on to make his
       decision, in ignorance of that email and  medical  certificate.   The
       Judge cannot in any way be criticised for doing so.  It is not  clear
       whether that email and medical certificate were  before  him  at  the
       time that the decision was made and promulgated.  However,  I  remind
       myself that the decision in Nwaigwe, makes it clear that the  crucial
       question is not whether the decision  of  the  First-tier  Judge  was
       reasonable, but whether the refusal deprived  the  appellant  of  her
       right to a fair hearing.


   17. There is no explanation offered even now as to  why  the  appellant's
       representatives or her partner had not attended the hearing, if  only
       to make a formal application for an  adjournment.   They  should  not
       have assumed that the matter would be relisted  for  further  hearing
       simply on the strength of an email and a medical certificate sent  to
       the  Tribunal  after  the  hearing  had  concluded.      Whilst   the
       submissions advanced by  Mr.  Clarke  have  some  force,  I  am  just
       persuaded that the appellant was deprived of  her  right  to  a  fair
       hearing, when there was before the  Tribunal  a  medical  certificate
       explaining her absence.  Although it was sent to the  Tribunal  after
       the hearing had concluded,  it  was  before  the  Tribunal  when  the
       decision was promulgated.


   18. In the circumstances I am persuaded that the appellant was denied the
       opportunity of a fair hearing and that it is appropriate to set aside
       the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Re-making the decision


   19. I pause at this juncture  to  record  that  following  the  grant  of
       permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, directions were issued to
       the parties making it clear that there is a presumption that, in  the
       event of the Tribunal deciding that the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal is to be set aside as erroneous in law, the re-making of the
       decision will take place at the same hearing.  The directions  issued
       make it clear that the fresh decision will normally be based  on  the
       evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  any  further  evidence
       admitted, together with  the  parties'  arguments.  The  parties  are
       warned that they must be prepared accordingly,  and  Rule  15(2A)  is
       highlighted.  The directions issued to the parties make it clear that
       a failure to comply with Rule 15(2A) will be regarded  as  a  serious
       matter and  may  result  in  fresh  or  further  evidence  not  being
       considered  by  the  Tribunal.   A  timetable  is  set  out  in   the
       directions, again making it clear that any notice  by  the  appellant
       pursuant to Rule 15(2A) must be sent  ten  working  days  before  the
       hearing of the appeal at the latest.


   20. Ms. Jegarajah accepts that no Rule 15(2A) application has  been  made
       identifying the nature of any further  evidence  to  be  adduced  and
       explaining why it was not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.    No
       further witness statements or hearing bundle has been prepared by the
       appellant's representatives and there was no explanation offered  for
       the delay in producing the evidence.  Ms.  Jegarajah  invited  me  to
       adjourn the matter to the back of the hearing list, so that she could
       formulate an application and write out in  manuscript  form,  witness
       statements of the appellant and her partner.  Ms.  Jegarajah  submits
       that the appellant has not had an opportunity to properly  deal  with
       this matter because she has given birth to her  child  on  13th  July
       2016, and until that time, was suffering a difficult pregnancy.  That
       is why she had been unable to attend the hearing  before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal on 16th February 2016.


   21. I refused the  application  to  admit  further  evidence  under  Rule
       15(2)(A).  I have had regard to the history of this appeal  and  note
       that the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on 16th February 2016
       followed a previous adjournment.  Permission to appeal was granted on
       2nd August 2016 and the Notice of the hearing before me, was sent out
       to the parties on 31st August 2016. The appellant was on notice  that
       in the event of the Tribunal deciding that the decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal is set aside as erroneous in law, the re-making of  the
       decision will, absent good reason, take place at the same hearing.


   22. The appellant gave birth to her child before the grant of  permission
       to appeal, and there has in my judgement, been ample opportunity  for
       the appellant and her partner to make  any  Rule  15(2A)  application
       that they may have wished to, to adduce further evidence.   They  did
       not seek to do so in accordance with the  directions  issued  by  the
       Tribunal and even at the  hearing  before  me,  there  was  no  draft
       witness statement  or  bundle  of  additional  evidence.   There  was
       nothing before me indicating the nature  of  the  evidence  that  the
       appellant would seek to  adduce  beyond  a  bare  submission  by  Ms.
       Jegarajah  that  the   evidence   would   concern   the   appellant's
       relationship with her partner and their child.  The  undated  witness
       statements of the appellant and her  partner  that  were  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal make no reference whatsoever  to  the  pregnancy.
       There is no explanation for the failure to adduce the evidence at  an
       earlier stage and in my judgement, there  has  been  an  unreasonable
       delay in producing  any,  as  yet  unidentified  evidence,  that  the
       appellant now seeks to rely upon.  If I were  to  admit  the  further
       evidence, the respondent will have no opportunity  to  consider  that
       evidence.  That would result in the hearing before me being adjourned
       to another date.  Given the history of this appeal, in my  judgement,
       it would not be in the interests of justice to admit new  or  further
       evidence in the re-making of my decision.


   23. I invited Ms. Jegarajah to  make  submissions  upon  the  appellant's
       Article 8 claim by reference to the  evidence  that  was  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal.  Ms. Jegarajah submits that the appellant is now
       in a relationship with  a  British  citizen.  Her  partner  has  been
       recognised as a refugee and they now have a child together,  born  on
       13th July 2016. The appellant's partner and child  had  attended  the
       hearing and the appellant's  partner  was  looking  after  the  child
       during the hearing before me.  The child's birth certificate has  not
       been  adduced  in  evidence,  but  Ms.  Jegarajah  submits  that  the
       appellant is the mother, and her partner is the father, of the child.
        Ms. Jegarajah submits that the appellant is now  in  a  relationship
       with a British citizen and she is the mother of a  qualifying  child.
       She submits that in any  assessment  of  the  appellant's  Article  8
       claim, there can be no doubt that the  appellant  has  established  a
       family life in the UK.  In  assessing  whether  the  removal  of  the
       appellant is proportionate, the issue is therefore whether  it  would
       be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom.  Ms.
       Jegarajah submits that it cannot be reasonable for the appellant  and
       her child to be removed to what she describes as an "alien location",
       or to separate the appellant from her child, or the child and father.


   24. In reply, Mr. Clarke submits that there is no merit to the appeal  on
       Article 8 grounds, given the very limited evidence  that  was  before
       the First-tier Tribunal.   He submits that the immigration rules  are
       not met.  At its highest, the appellant and  her  partner  have  been
       living  together  since  5th  April  2015.   They  cannot  meet   the
       requirements of the Immigration Rules.   He submits there is  nothing
       compelling about the appellant's case such  that  it  is  capable  of
       succeeding  on  Article  8  grounds  in   circumstances   where   the
       immigration rules cannot be met.


   25.  In reaching my decision, I have had regard to the bundle  comprising
       of 63 pages  that  was  sent  by  the  appellant  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, under cover of a letter  dated  21st  October  2015.   That
       bundle includes an undated statement from  the  appellant  in  which,
       insofar as is now relevant, she simply states that she  met  Mr  [SK]
       (the appellant refers to her partner as [SK],  whereas  his  name  is
       [KS]) at her aunt's house in the latter part  of  2014.   She  states
       that they soon became very close friends,  and  in  March  2015  they
       decided to marry. They had a cultural wedding on 5th April  2015  and
       they have been living  together,  happily,  since  that  date.    She
       explains that they have been unable to register their marriage  since
       her original passport is with the respondent.  The appellant's bundle
       also includes an undated statement from the appellant's  partner,  Mr
       [KS] which states nothing more than "I had an opportunity to read the
       witness statement prepared on behalf of Nirantha and I  am  satisfied
       with the contents of the above statement". The bundle includes a copy
       of Mr [S]'s passport identifying him as a British Citizen and a  copy
       of a letter sent to him by the Home  Office,  dated  9th  June  2001,
       informing him that he has been granted indefinite leave to enter  the
       United Kingdom as a refugee  recognised  under  the  1951  Convention
       relating to the status of refugees.  There is no evidence  before  as
       to the background to that claim for refugee status.


   26. Both the appellant and her partner's statements  are  devoid  of  any
       evidence about their relationship, and in particular the  basis  upon
       which they contend, they could not live together as a family unit  in
       Sri Lanka.


   27. In re-making the decision,  I  remind  myself  that  insofar  as  the
       appellant challenges the decision made by the  respondent  under  the
       Immigration Rules, it is for the appellant to discharge the burden of
       proof  and  the  relevant  standard  of  proof  is  the  balance   of
       probabilities. As to Article 8, the  burden  of  proof  is  upon  the
       appellant to show, on the balance  of  probabilities,  that  she  has
       established a family and private life in the UK, and that her removal
       from the UK as a result of the respondent's decision, would interfere
       with that right. It  is  then  for  the  respondent  to  justify  any
       interference caused. The respondent's decision must be in  accordance
       with the law  and  must  be  a  proportionate  response  in  all  the
       circumstances. I can take into account circumstances at the  date  of
       the appeal hearing before me.


   28. On 22nd December 2014 the appellant applied for leave  to  remain  in
       the UK outside the Immigration Rules due to what her  representatives
       described as her exceptional circumstances, to deal with her  divorce
       proceedings.  At page [12] of  the  appellant's  bundle  there  is  a
       decree absolute confirming that the appellant's marriage to Jananthan
       Rasiah was dissolved on 3rd August 2015.  The grounds of  appeal  now
       proceed on  a  completely  different  basis,  on  the  basis  of  the
       appellant's family and private life with Mr. [KS] and their child.


   29. Ms. Jegarajah did not advance  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
       appellant is able to meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,
       but for the avoidance of any doubt, I  have  considered  whether  the
       requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph   276ADE(1)   of   the
       Immigration Rules can be met by the appellant.


   30. With regard to Appendix FM of the Rules, Section R-LTRPT sets out the
       requirements for limited leave to remain as a parent or  partner.   I
       find that the appellant does  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  R-
       LTRPT.1.1.(b) as she has not made a valid application for limited  or
       indefinite leave to remain as a parent  or  partner.   Ms.  Jegarajah
       conceded before me that it is open to the appellant to make  such  an
       application.  The appellant has chosen not to  do  so.   Furthermore,
       the definition of  "partner"  in  GEN.1.2.  is  not  satisfied.   The
       appellant and Mr. [S] have not been living together for at least  two
       years prior to the date of the application. In her witness statement,
       the appellant states that she and Mr. [K]  became  close  friends  in
       March 2015 and that they have been living together since the cultural
       wedding on 5th April 2015.


   31. With regard to the requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
       to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  private  life,  the  only  possible
       immigration Rule that could  apply  to  the  appellant  is  paragraph
       276ADE(1)(vi).  To satisfy that requirement, the appellant would have
       to demonstrate that there would be very significant obstacles to  re-
       integration into the country to  which  she  would  have  to  go,  if
       required to leave the United Kingdom.   I find that the  requirements
       of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) are not met on the basis of  the  evidence
       before me.  There is  no  evidence  before  me  that  there  are  any
       obstacles, let alone very significant obstacles to the appellant's re-
       intergration into Sri Lanka.  I note that  in  her  application  form
       FLR(O) signed by the appellant on 19th December 2014,  the  appellant
       states that her mother remains in Sri Lanka.  On the evidence  before
       me, I find that the appellant's mother remains in Sri Lanka and  that
       the appellant therefore has a close family member to whom  she  could
       turn, for assistance upon her  initial  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   The
       appellant  and  her  partner  are  both  Sri  Lankan  nationals.    I
       acknowledge that the appellant's partner was granted refugee  status,
       but that was in 2001, at a time when the political landscape  in  Sri
       Lanka was very different. I also  acknowledge  that  the  appellant's
       child may be a British Citizen.  There is however, no evidence before
       me that the appellant's partner could not return to Sri Lanka now, or
       that the family could not live together  as  a  family  unit  in  Sri
       Lanka.  The child is two months old and the  best  interests  of  the
       child are served by  remaining  with  the  parents.   No  significant
       obstacles have been suggested on the appellant's behalf.  Accordingly
       I find that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
       relevant Immigration Rules, either on the basis  of  her  private  or
       family life.


   32. The reason that the appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of  the
       immigration rules is that she has not made an application  under  the
       rules as required, and she has not been living with her  partner  for
       the two years required.  As the appellant has not made an application
       under the rules,  the  respondent  has  not  considered  whether  the
       evidential  requirements  set  out  in  Appendix   FM-SE   are   met,
       particularly with regard to the  income  of  the  appellant  and  her
       partner.


   33. The immigration rules are said to reflect the  respondent's  view  of
       where a fair balance should be struck between the  right  to  respect
       for private  and  family  life  and  public  interest  considerations
       relating to the maintenance of an  effective  system  of  immigration
       control (paragraph GEN.1.1 Appendix FM). The rules should be read  in
       a way that reflects a proper  interpretation  of  Article  8  of  the
       European Convention. However, there may some cases where the rules do
       not address relevant Article 8  issues.  In  such  cases  it  may  be
       necessary to consider whether there are compelling  circumstances  to
       justify granting leave to remain outside the immigration rules:  SSHD
       v SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387.  This  should  be  assessed  by
       reference to the five stage test outlined by the House of Lords in  R
       v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] 3 WLR 58.


   34. The appellant and Mr. [S] have entered into a cultural  marriage  and
       now have a child together.  The child's  birth  certificate  has  not
       been provided in evidence but for present purposes I am  prepared  to
       accept that the appellant and Mr. [S] have a child  together.   As  I
       have already set out, in her witness statement, the appellant  states
       that she and Mr. [K] became close friends in March 2015 and that they
       have been living together since the cultural  wedding  on  5th  April
       2015.  On the evidence before me, I am prepared to  accept  that  the
       appellant first met Mr. [S] during the latter part of 2014  and  that
       they have undergone a cultural wedding on 5th April 2015.   I  accept
       that the appellant and Mr. [S], a British citizen, have  been  living
       together since 5th April 2015. I bear  in  mind  that  following  the
       decisions in AG (Eritrea) v SSHD [2007] INLR 407 and  VW  (Uganda)  v
       SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 5, the threshold  for  showing  an  interference
       with an appellant's rights under Article 8 is not particularly  high.
       I find that it is likely that the appellant has established a  family
       and private life in the UK and that in all the circumstances of  this
       case, removal would interfere with that life in a sufficiently  grave
       way as to engage the operation of Article 8 (points  (i)  &  (ii)  of
       Lord Bingham's five stage approach in Razgar v SSHD [2004] INLR 349).


   35. Article 8 of the European Convention protects the right to family and
       private life. However, it  is  not  an  absolute  right  and  can  be
       interfered with by the state in certain circumstances.  It  is  trite
       law that the state has a right to control immigration and that  rules
       governing the entry and residence of people into the country are  "in
       accordance  with  the  law"  for  the  purpose  of  Article  8.   Any
       interference with the right to private or family life must be  for  a
       legitimate reason and should be reasonable and proportionate.


   36. I have had regard to section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
       Immigration Act 2009 and I have had regard to the best  interests  of
       the child as a primary consideration.  I accept  that  the  appellant
       has been living at the same address as Mr. [S] since  their  cultural
       marriage and that they now have a child together, born on  13th  July
       2016, but I do not accept, as is submitted on the appellant's behalf,
       that removal of the appellant from the country would  cause  harm  to
       the child  because  the  family  would  be  returning  to  an  "alien
       location"  or  would  break  up  the  family  unit  that   has   been
       established.  In particular, I do not accept on the  evidence  before
       me, that Mr. [S] could not return to, or travel to Sri Lanka now.  As
       I have noted previously the grant of refugee status was made  to  him
       in 2001, when the circumstances in Sri Lanka  were  quite  different.
       Their child is of an age upon which the child  relies  entirely  upon
       the parents, and could  adapt  to  wherever  the  appellant  and  her
       husband live.


   37. In assessing whether removal in consequence of the decision would  be
       a proportionate response I am  required  to  take  into  account  the
       public interest  considerations  set  out  in  section  117B  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA  2002").  I  take
       into account that it  is  in  the  public  interest  to  maintain  an
       effective system of immigration control (s.117B(1)).


   38.  At  the  time  that  the  relationship  developed,  the  appellant's
       immigration  status  can  only  be  described  as  "precarious",   as
       specified in s117B(5) of the NIAA 2002.  The  appellant  had  limited
       leave to remain in the UK until 29th December 2014, and her  marriage
       to Mr. Rasiah that had given rise to the grant  of  that  leave,  had
       broken down.  The appellant must  have  known  that  there  is  every
       possibility that she would not be permitted to remain in the UK.   In
       fact that appears to have been acknowledged  by  the  appellant,  who
       made an application on 22nd December 2014 for leave to remain in  the
       UK, outside the Immigration Rules, simply seeking "time to deal  with
       the divorce proceedings.".   Her application  for  further  leave  to
       remain depended  on  exceptional  circumstances  outwith  the  Rules.
       Section 117B (5) states that:


             (5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious".


   39. Interpretation of this sub-section is  to  be  found  in  AM  (S117B)
       Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC), in particular at paragraph 32  whether
       it is said:


             "... To put the matter  shortly,  it  appears  to  us  that  a
             person's immigration status is precarious" if their  continued
             presence in the UK will be dependent upon  their  obtaining  a
             further grant of leave. It is precisely because such a  person
             has no  indefinite  right  to  be  in  the  country  that  the
             relationships they form ought to be considered in the light of
             the potential need to leave the country should that  grant  of
             leave not be forthcoming".


   40. I consider that this is apposite to this appeal as both the appellant
       and Mr. [K] were aware of the appellant's immigration status, both at
       the time that they commenced a relationship  and  at  the  time  they
       entered into a cultural marriage.  In my judgement, Mr. [S] must have
       known that there was every possibility  that  the  appellant,  a  Sri
       Lankan national, may not secure further leave to remain  in  the  UK,
       and that would mean that  any  family  and  private  life  that  they
       establish, may have to continue in Sri Lanka.  There is  no  evidence
       before me to suggest that they entered into  their  relationship  and
       the cultural marriage, in ignorance of the immigration status of  the
       appellant.


   41. The public interest considerations outlined in section 117B are  only
       one  part  of  the  proportionality  assessment  and  may  still   be
       outweighed if the appellant can  show  that  there  are  particularly
       compelling circumstances that might justify granting leave to  remain
       even though she does not meet the  requirements  of  the  immigration
       rules. I find that there is nothing in the circumstances of this case
       that could properly be  described  as  raising  any  such  compelling
       circumstances. Unfortunately, the appellant's  understandable  desire
       to remain in the UK does not equate to a right to  do  so  under  the
       law.


   42. I do not accept that the decision to remove the appellant gives  rise
       to hardship, beyond matters of "mere" hardship, "mere"  obstacles  or
       "mere" inconvenience as specified in the case of VW (Uganda)  v  SSHD
       [20091 EWCA Civ 5.   There is no evidence before me to establish that
       the  appellant's  rights  to  a  family  life  under  Article  8  are
       compromised by a requirement that the family unit  live  together  in
       Sri Lanka or that the appellant returns to Sri Lanka to make a  fresh
       application to enter the United Kingdom as the spouse of Mr. [K],  if
       she so chooses.


   43. I find that on the evidence before me, removal in consequence of  the
       decision would  amount  to  a  proportionate  interference  with  the
       appellant's right to private life under Article  8  of  the  European
       Convention (points (iv) & (v) of Lord Bingham's five  stage  approach
       in Razgar).


   44. It follows that the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and  or  on
       Article 8 grounds is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


   45. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


   46. I remake the decision and the appeal is dismissed.


   47. No anonymity direction is applied for, and none is made.


Signed                                  Date

       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD


Although I have set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  I  have
remade  the  decision  and  dismissed  the  appeal.   There  can,   in   the
circumstances, be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
