
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/09660/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 7 October 2013                             |On 11 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     SK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr C H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, whose  date  of  birth  has  been
   recorded as 1 January 1958.  An anonymity direction is in place.

2) This appeal is against  a  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Doyle,  promulgated  on  28  June  2013.   I  have  concluded  that   the
   determination requires to be set aside and the case heard afresh  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal.  This is notwithstanding the fact that the  decision
   reached by the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains no legal  error,  based
   on the evidence before him, and notwithstanding the lack of focus in  the
   case presented to the Upper Tribunal.

3) There has been unfairness resulting from a mistake of fact.  It  did  not
   arise through fault of the judge.  It was not the fault of the  appellant
   either, but of her representatives.  It is of a nature such that  by  way
   of a convenient legal fiction it amounts to material error of law.

4) The appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  taken  against  refusal  of
   indefinite leave to remain as the spouse of a person present and  settled
   in the UK.  The appellant did not  attend  for  interview,  and  did  not
   provide evidence to enable her application to succeed.  The decision  was
   in itself impeccable.

5) The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, filed on 27 March  2013
   through the appellant's present solicitors, are these:

    The decision is contrary to law.


    The decision is not  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8 of ECHR.


6) The hearing was fixed for 21 June 2013.  On 18 June 2013 the  appellant's
   representatives wrote to the First-tier Tribunal stating that  they  were
   to rely on paragraph 289A of the Rules "on the basis that  the  appellant
   has been a victim of domestic violence at  the  hands  of  her  husband".
   They also asked for this ground to be noted "pursuant to section  120  of
   the Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002".  The letter does not say
   whether the matter was also intimated to the respondent.

7) In his determination at  12(e)  the  judge  noted  that  the  appellant's
   separation from her husband and her determination to remain in the UK  as
   a victim of domestic violence was said to have crystallised  on  6  March
   2013, yet she was unable to  explain  why,  with  the  benefit  of  legal
   advice, she instructed grounds of appeal as  above.   The  judge  thought
   that even on 27 March 2013, and beyond, the appellant was representing to
   her solicitors that she was party to a  valid  and  subsisting  marriage.
   The judge said that her solicitors were:

      "... a reputable firm with an experienced  and  dedicated  immigration
      law department.  It was (clearly) not until  a  few  days  before  the
      hearing that the appellant chose  to  tell  her  solicitors  that  her
      circumstances  had  changed.   Until  June  this  year  the  appellant
      maintained that she was part of a valid and subsisting marriage ...  a
      significant prior inconsistent statement."

8) There was before the judge an email of 6 March 2013 (noted  at  11(g)  of
   the determination) from  an  aid  centre.   This  was  sent  not  to  the
   appellant directly but to her nephew (a  witness  in  the  appeal).   The
   email gives the appellant  advice,  in  light  of  complaints  about  her
   husband's conduct, about whether she might stay with him or leave him.

9) In her grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal the  appellant  says  that
   her grounds to the First-tier Tribunal  were  "general  ...  without  any
   specification whatsoever" and did not justify  the  conclusion  that  the
   appellant mentioned domestic violence only in  June  2013.   The  grounds
   also maintain that the letter of 18 June 2013  was  not  "variation"  but
   "specification" of the grounds.

10) Those are weak points.  Grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   should not be over-extensive, but they should state  the  nature  of  the
   appellant's case concisely,  and  in  terms  not  so  general  as  to  be
   meaningless.  They ought  to  disclose  such  a  radical  switch  as  the
   appellant abandoning a claim  to  remain  as  a  spouse  and  relying  on
   breakdown of her  marriage  through  domestic  violence.   Otherwise,  an
   appellant runs the risk that an adverse inference may be drawn.

11) Mr Ndubuisi mentioned authority  for  the  proposition  that  additional
   grounds in response to a section 120 notice may be  put  forward  at  any
   time, perhaps even at the hearing.  That may be so, but good practice  is
   that additional grounds should be intimated to the respondent and to  the
   Tribunal as soon as feasible.

12) I raised the question whether the  appellant  should  have  submitted  a
   fresh application to the respondent.  Mr Ndubuisi said  this  would  have
   had the disadvantage that refusal would not carry a right of appeal,  and
   so the appellant rightly preferred to keep appeal proceedings live and to
   shift her ground within them.  I give no weight  to  the  fact  that  the
   appellant did not elect to make a fresh application.

13) There is attached to the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal a  copy
   letter from the appellant's solicitors to the appellant  dated  19  April
   2013.  This states that their instructions (obtained  not  directly  from
   the appellant but through her  nephew)  are  that  the  relationship  had
   broken down due to domestic violence.

14) There  was  no  application  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  terms  of
   Procedure Rules and Practice Directions for this letter to be admitted as
   evidence, in order to show error of law, and the  requirements  for  such
   admission were not addressed.  The letter is said to be evidence that the
   appellant's solicitors were "fully advised that the case was of  domestic
   violence from the very beginning".  The letter, by  its  date,  does  not
   quite hit that target, but I accept the assurance from Mr  Ndubuisi  that
   such were their instructions all along.

15) The appellant did not offer any analysis of how error of law  may  arise
   through unfairness resulting from  a  mistake  of  fact.   The  following
   discussion appears in Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice, 8th  ed.,
   vol. 1, at 20.11:

      The Court of Appeal in E v Secretary of State for the Home Department,
      having acknowledged that unfairness resulting from a mistake  of  fact
      would be an error of law held that to establish such  an  error  would
      normally require the following:


      "(i)     there must have been  a  mistake  as  to  an  existing  fact,
      including a mistake as to the availability of evidence on a particular
      matter;
      (ii)     it must be  possible  to  categorise  the  relevant  fact  or
      evidence as "established" in the sense that it was  uncontentious  and
      objectively verifiable;
      (iii)      the  appellant  (or  his  advisers)  must  not  have   been
responsible for the mistake;
       iv) the  mistake  must  have  played  a  material  (not  necessarily
           decisive) part in the Tribunal's reasoning."


      An evidential dispute as to the existence of the 'existing fact' would
      remove the matter from the 'narrowly confined' scope of  the  'mistake
      of fact amounting to an error of law' ground. The requirement that the
      appellant's adviser should not have been responsible for  the  mistake
      must now apply with less, if any force in the  light  of  the  Court's
      subsequent decision in  FP  (Iran).  New  evidence  to  establish  the
      existence of such a mistake could be admitted if the 'Ladd v  Marshall
      principles'4 were satisfied, although they might be departed  from  in
      exceptional circumstances where the  interests  of  justice  required.
      Those principles are that:


            a) the new evidence could not with  reasonable  diligence  have
               been obtained for use at the trial (or hearing);
            b) the new evidence must be  such  that,  if  given,  it  would
               probably have had an important influence on  the  result  of
               the case (though it need not be decisive); and
           (c)     the new evidence was  apparently  credible  although  it
      need not be incontrovertible.


16) FP (Iran) [2007] EWCA Civ 13 is reported at [2007] Imm AR  450.   As  to
   not fixing the appellant with mistakes made by  her  representatives,  FP
   was followed in SL (Vietnam) v SSHD [2010]  EWCA  Civ  225,  reported  at
   [2010] INLR 651 (see paragraph 38).

17) The judge was misled into the finding that  the  appellant  changed  her
   ground with her solicitors only a few days before the hearing.  It  is  a
   point which need not have been decisive, but which played a material part
   in the judge's reasoning.  The appellant is not directly responsible  for
   the mistake, which was brought about  by  her  representatives.   Perhaps
   stretching matters in her favour, I find that  she  is  not  irredeemably
   stuck with the mistake, due to the latitude allowed in this jurisdiction,
   even although the mistake has been compounded  by  not  acknowledging  it
   directly, and by not presenting the correct application for admission  of
   further evidence to establish it.  The consequence is that  the  decision
   will have to be remade, with unnecessary waste of time and money.

18) Parties did not pursue  before  me  the  observation  in  the  grant  of
   permission that  the  appellant  would  have  to  overcome  the  apparent
   difficulty of pursuing her appeal on a different basis from that in which
   she applied for leave to remain.  To describe this as "clarification"  or
   "specification" rather than a change  of  ground  goes  rather  far,  but
   whether that makes any difference can be left to the next hearing.

19) There  was  another  ground  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
   appellant said that the judge erred in suggesting  that  her  failure  to
   provide any  specific  form  of  evidence  was  fatal.   That  ground  is
   misconceived.  The judge did not proceed on  any  principle  inconsistent
   with Ishtiaq, and the Rules have changed significantly  since  that  case
   was decided.  To comment on the absence of a particular type of  evidence
   is different from falling into the error that a specific type of evidence
   is legally required.

20)  I  note  on  the  file  an  incomplete  copy   of   AIT   determination
   IA/16779/2007, promulgated on 29 November 2007.  This appears  to  relate
   to the appellant, and to have  been  lodged  by  the  respondent  at  the
   hearing.  Its contents may be relevant to her  credibility.   It  is  not
   mentioned in the determination.  Both parties should endeavour to provide
   a full copy, and to explain the bearing (if any) it has  on  the  present
   case, at the next hearing.

21) There is nothing legally new in this  case,  but  it  may  be  a  useful
   reminder to representatives that (i) grounds of appeal should be specific
   and accurate; (ii) significant changes in  grounds  should  be  intimated
   promptly to the tribunal and to the other side; and (iii) if a case  goes
   wrong through representatives' error, they should face up  to  that,  and
   not blame the judge.

22) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  None of  its
   findings are to stand.  Under section 12(ii)(b)(i) of the  2007  Act  and
   Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent  of  judicial  fact  finding
   necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The member(s) of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case  are  not  to  include  Judge
   Doyle.



                               [pic]
                                9 October 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


