
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/09754/2011
                                                               OA/11414/2011
                                                               IA/18389/2011
                                                               OA/22874/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 September 2014                          |On 4 December 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                           LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                               gyanendra rana
                                 NORESH RAI
                                SHANI GURUNG
                                REMESH GURUNG
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:    Mr C Howells
For the Respondent: Mr Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   These four appeals have come before the Upper Tribunal by order of  the
    Court of Appeal dated 14 February 2013.  These follow from  appeals  of
    the Upper Tribunal and the reported Court of Appeal decision  Gurung  &
    Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  1WLR  2546.
    All of these cases involve what might be called  the  historical  wrong
    which was suffered by the men and families of Gurkhas  serving  in  the
    British army who, until the  reversal  of  the  decision  by  the  Home
    Office, had been denied entry into the United Kingdom  for  settlement.
    A number of cases have been heard both in the Upper Tribunal and in the
    Court of Appeal and it is  not  necessary  for  us  to  look  at  these
    particularly in light of the attitude which has  been  adopted  by  the
    Presenting Officer for the Home Office in this case.

2.   The reasons why the decisions in the Upper Tribunal were set aside  are
    given in the decision of the Master of  the  Rolls  in  Gurung  and  in
    particular at paragraphs 40  to  42  and  45  to  46.   Some  of  these
    decisions had been overturned in their entirety, others simply  on  the
    basis of the assessment of proportionality under Article 8(2).

3.   Turning to the individual  appeals,  appellant  (1)  who  is  Gyanendra
    Rana, that one was set aside insofar as it related to the  question  of
    proportionality under Article 8(2).  In a decision  promulgated  on  11
    April 2012 Mrs Justice Ryan, sitting as a Judge of the  Upper  Tribunal
    with Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan accepted that a family life  had  been
    established  and  that  is  seen  in  paragraphs  59  to  65   of   the
    determination but  then  found  that  on  applying  the  principles  of
    proportionality,   considered   that   removal   was   justified    and
    proportionate because of the public interest  in  firm  and  consistent
    immigration policy.  It is clear from the decision in Gurung that  that
    was an error of law and falls now to be re-made.

4.   In the case of Ghising (number 2) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) the  Tribunal
    said at paragraph 59 that where Article 8 is held to be engaged and the
    fact that but for the historic wrong  the  appellant  would  have  been
    settled in the  UK  long  ago  is  established,  this  will  ordinarily
    determine the outcome of the proportionality assessment  and  determine
    it in the appellant's favour and the explanation for  that  was  to  be
    found not in the concept of any new or additional  burdens  but  rather
    that in the weight to be afforded to the historic wrong of  settlement.
    That principle is not contested by Mr Walker, appearing  for  the  Home
    Office.

5.   Having heard today from Mr Gyanendra Rana's  mother,  the  widow  of  a
    Gurkha officer, it is clear to us that when he retired in 1991 after 27
    years' service he would, had he been able to, have come to the  UK  and
    settled here and the reason that was given was in order to provide  for
    a better life for his family and for his children.  There has  been  no
    submission made to us that there has been any other  reason  to  refuse
    this appeal on the basis of public policy and in those circumstances we
    allow that appeal.

6.   The next appeal which was argued was that of the fourth  appellant,  Mr
    Remesh Gurung.  The same considerations apply in relation to this  one.
    The Tribunal's decision was overturned insofar as  it  related  to  the
    proportionality assessment under Article 8(2).   In  this  case  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lewis in a determination dated 31 January 2012 had
    dismissed the appeal against the refusal of leave  to  enter  which  is
    dated 4 August.  He found at paragraph 16 of his determination  that  a
    family life had been established, however at paragraph 21 he said  that
    the long overdue recognition that Gurkhas should have their service  to
    this country rewarded by being allowed to settle here does  reduce  the
    weight to be put into the public interest side of the balance  even  if
    not by very much.  So he went on "the issue is as always the weight  to
    be attached to it as one of the factors in the Article 8  balance.   In
    this case it seems to me that the weight should be limited."  That  was
    a clear error of law.  The Court of Appeal disagreed with it and so  it
    remains to us to re-make that.  In this case we heard evidence from  Mr
    Remesh Gurung's father who served for 22 years in the Gurkhas, retiring
    in 1986.  Mr Remesh Gurung was born in 1988, however Mr  Gurung  Senior
    gave evidence that if he had been allowed to apply to settle in the  UK
    in 1986 would he have done so and he said that he would  have  done  so
    and would have applied as a family.  Accordingly it is clear  that  had
    he done that Mr Remesh Gurung  would  have  been  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom  and  would  have  been  here  as  a  member  of  his   family.
    Accordingly  we  are  satisfied  that  family  life  would  have   been
    established here in the UK at that time.  Again no  reasons  have  been
    put before us as to why the public interest  should  require  that  the
    appeal be refused and accordingly we allow it.

7.   The second appellant is Mr Noresh Rai.  His one is  slightly  different
    in the sense that the reasons for  the  setting  aside  were  given  in
    paragraphs 8, 31, 33, 36 and 37 of the  skeleton  argument  before  the
    Court of Appeal and in the judgment of Master of the Rolls in Gurung at
    paragraphs 45 to 46.  The First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper  Tribunal
    found that family life had not been established.  However, before us Mr
    Howell submitted that that  was  wrong.   He  referred  us  to  Ghising
    (Number 1) (family life - adults - Gurkha  policy)  [2012]  UKUT  00160
    (IAC) at paragraphs 53 to 72 and in particular to the way in which  the
    Upper Tribunal had considered the issue of an adult  being  part  of  a
    family when they formed an independent  life.   In  this  case  it  was
    submitted that the appellant was part of a family life and that was the
    reason set out in paragraph 16 of the skeleton  argument.   We  do  not
    need to rehearse the issues there, no  issue  was  taken  with  it  and
    therefore we find that family life in terms of Article  8(1)  has  been
    established.

8.   We then pause for us to look  at  the  issue  of  proportionality.   Mr
    Howells submitted that there can only be only be one outcome  to  this,
    that having engaged Article 8(1) the proportionality should be assessed
    in the same way as the other cases to which we  have  referred  and  we
    agree with that and allow the appeal.

9.   Appellant (3) is Shani Gurung.  This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department.  First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lingard  had
    in his judgment carefully considered the issue of whether or not family
    life was established and came to the conclusion that it was.  That  was
    overturned by Judge Freeman in the  Upper  Tribunal.   Judge  Lingard's
    determination was  promulgated  on  2  August  2011  and  the  relevant
    paragraphs are those contained at paragraphs 3, 15, 18 and  31  through
    to  39.   Upper  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Freeman  in   a   determination
    promulgated on 9 December 2011 overturned that and Mr  Walker,  in  his
    submissions, accepted that it would be very  difficult  now  to  argue,
    given the passage of time in the cases which have followed during this,
    that family life was not established and while he was not conceding the
    point he did not appear to be supporting  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge.  Accordingly, we shall refuse the appeal in that case.



     DECISION

     Appeals of first  second  and  fourth  appellants  allowed,  appeal  of
    respondent in the case of the third appellant dismissed.





     Lord Boyd of Duncansby

     4 December 2014
