
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/09027/2014
                                                               IA/09029/2014
                                                               IA/09033/2014
                                                               IA/09034/2014
                                                               IA/09037/2014
                                                               IA/09041/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 January 2015                             |On 14 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                           Mr AK (first appellant)
                          Mrs BS (second appellant)
                          Miss AK (third appellant)
                         Miss SK (fourth appellant)
                         Miss SdK (fifth appellant)
                        MASTER UAK (sixth Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Harris, Counsel instructed by Maliks and Khan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are all citizens of India.  The first appellant Mr  AK's
    date of birth is  20  January  1974.   He  is  married  to  the  second
    appellant, Mrs BAS, whose date of birth is 11 February 1973.  They have
    four children.  Their eldest child is AK and her date of  birth  is  15
    February 2001.  She is the  third  appellant.   The  fourth  appellant,
    their second child and daughter SK's date of birth is  2  August  2002.
    The fifth appellant and their third child and daughter is SDK  and  her
    date of birth is 2 January 2007.  The sixth appellant,  their  youngest
    child and son UAK's date of birth is 28 June 2011.

2.   The first four appellants came to the UK in  2005  as  visitors.   They
    were granted leave until 6 January 2006.  They  have  overstayed  since
    the expiry of their leave. The fifth appellant and the sixth  appellant
    were born here.  On 12 October 2010 the appellants made an  application
    to remain here which was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  a
    decision of 22 October 2010.  They made a  further  application  on  12
    March 2013 which was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of
    1 May  2013.   It  appears  that  the  Secretary  of  State  agreed  to
    reconsider the application and this generated a decision of 1  February
    2014 whereby the Secretary of State dismissed the application under the
    Rules and outside the Rules concluding that there were  no  exceptional
    circumstances.  It  is  this  decision  against  which  the  appellants
    appealed.

3.   Their appeals were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Khawar  under
    the Immigration Rules and Article 8 in a decision that was  promulgated
    on 2 October 2014 following a hearing on 10 September  2014  permission
    to appeal was granted by Judge Zucker on 12 November  2014.   Thus  the
    matter came before me.

The Decision of the FtT

4.   The adult appellants' evidence is that  their  children  would  not  be
    able to adapt to the education system there where  children  are  badly
    treated and corporal punishment is  commonplace.  The  first  appellant
    would not be able to get a  job  in  India.   There  is  a  functioning
    education system for the wealthy only and it would be difficult for all
    the children to adapt to the culture and  mentality  in  India.   There
    would be no family support.  The first appellant, having left India  in
    1999, has lost social and cultural ties there and removal  would  be  a
    devastating disruption to their lives.  The  children  have  laid  down
    roots in the UK.  Their eldest daughter is in year 9 and she is used to
    going to school in the UK where she has many friends and where  she  is
    doing well academically.  Their second daughter  also  attends  primary
    school.  There is evidence from the eldest child, Miss AK, in the  form
    of a witness statement.  Her evidence is that she came  here  when  she
    was aged 4 and attended primary  school  here.   In  2013  she  started
    secondary school.  She has not returned to India since 2005 and she  is
    doing well at school here. The second daughter, SK, has also produced a
    witness statement and her evidence is that she does not remember  India
    and she is scared of returning there to school.  She is doing well here
    in the UK.  There is a statement from the fifth appellant, Miss SDK, in
    the form of a witness statement and her evidence is that she  is  doing
    well at school.  She  was  born  here  and  she  likes  it  here.   The
    appellants relied on school reports which relate to the  children,  all
    of which are positive about their  progress  here.  This  evidence  was
    before the FtT.

5.   The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  made  findings  between  [15]  to
    [34]:

         "15. It is well settled law that the  best  interests  of  a  child
             requires to be  given  primary  consideration;  ZH  (Tanzania)
             [2011] UKSC4.  Therefore in considering the best interests  of
             the children in this case under Section 55 of the  UK  Borders
             Act 2009, I consider first the position of the Appellants four
             children; under Section 55 the Secretary of State is  required
             to have regard to the  'need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
             welfare of the children who are in the United Kingdom).


         Consideration of the Children's appeal under  paragraph  276ADE  of
         the immigration Rules.


         16.  The legal position under the immigration Rules is that if  the
             Third Fourth and  Fifth  Appellants  succeed  under  paragraph
             276ADE(iv) then the First Second  and  Sixth  Appellants  also
             succeed under the Immigration Rules (Appendix FM).  The  Third
             Fourth and Fifth Appellants have resided in the United Kingdom
             for a period in excess of seven years in each case.  The  only
             issue is the question of whether 'it would not  be  reasonable
             to expect the applicant to leave to the United Kingdom'.


         17.  It is asserted that it is not reasonable  to  expect  them  to
             return to India due to the fact that  they  do  not  speak  or
             write Urdu, this being the principal language in India.  It is
             further asserted that the children are totally adapted to  the
             UK way of life and are very Anglicised.  They are not familiar
             with Indian culture.  They have no knowledge of  the  language
             and  the  way  of  life  in  India.   In  addition  they   are
             established in the United Kingdom education  system  and  that
             each of the three eldest daughters have made lots  of  friends
             at school and are doing well academically.  The eldest  child,
             A, who is now 13 years of age,  is  in  Year  9  at  Secondary
             School.  She was four years of age when she first came to  the
             United Kingdom.  The Fourth Appellant is now 12 years  of  age
             and at the same secondary school and is the year below A.  She
             came to the United Kingdom when she was merely one  year  old.
             The Fifth Appellant, was born in the  United  Kingdom  on  2nd
             January 2007 and is now 7 years of age.  She has always  lived
             in the United Kingdom.  She is at primary school.


         18.  The First Appellant's assertion that the children know nothing
             about  Indian  culture  is  highly  unlikely   to   be   true;
             photographs of the children submitted in the Appellants bundle
             show them to be wearing traditional Indian clothes  consistent
             with Indian cultural norms.  In addition the First Appellant's
             assertion that the children do not speak Urdu is also unlikely
             to be true because during oral evidence the  Second  Appellant
             said that she studied at Government schools in the  medium  of
             Urdu and not English.  Furthermore that after  coming  to  the
             United Kingdom and she had to learn to speak in English.   She
             gave  evidence  through  an  interpreter  during  this  appeal
             hearing.  Consequently, given that she has been the  principal
             day to day carer whilst the First Appellant has been  out  and
             about at work, it is more  likely  than  not  she  would  have
             communicated with the children in Urdu and/or Telegu.


         19.  Further and in any event, although no objective  evidence  has
             been served by either side, I take judicial notice of the fact
             that there are many  schools,  colleges  and  universities  in
             India where the medium of tuition  is  the  English  language.
             Indeed a great many professionals such  as  computer  experts,
             engineers and doctors emigrate on an annual basis, from  India
             to Western countries -  on  the  basis  of  their  educational
             achievements in India.


         20.  I also note that the substance of the private life established
             by the eldest three children is entirely dependent upon  their
             schooling.  There is no evidence before  me  to  suggest  that
             they would not be able to settle into similar schools in India
             where the medium of teaching is in the English language.   The
             fact that the First Appellant asserts he  will  not  be  in  a
             position to be able to afford such education for his  children
             is somewhat academic.  Time and again  the  Higher  Courts  in
             this country have stated that impecuniosity is not a  material
             consideration.  Further and in any, the  First  Appellant  has
             qualifications as an electronic engineer and worked  in  India
             in his profession for five years and thereafter for  some  six
             years in the United Kingdom -  as  an  electronics  engineers.
             There is no evidence before me to suggest that he would not be
             able to find suitable employment in his field upon  return  to
             India.   The  fact  that  he   fell   out   with   his   elder
             brother/family is also somewhat academic as there  is  nothing
             to prevent the Appellants in this  case  establishing  a  home
             well away from the First Appellant's family.


         21.  Neither party has submitted any objective evidence in relation
             to the educational systems in India except that, post hearing,
             the Appellant's representatives,  forwarded  to  the  Tribunal
             marked for my attention, a document on corporal punishment  in
             schools in India.  It is suggested I requested  such  document
             be forwarded to me.  That is simply  not  the  case.   As  the
             Respondent has not been given an  opportunity  to  comment  on
             this evidence, I disregard it.  Further and in  any  event,  I
             note the First and Second Appellants were themselves  educated
             in India - in particular the First Appellant who  (it  emerged
             during oral evidence) is effectively a  qualified  electronics
             engineer having studied a Diploma  in  Electronic  Engineering
             and worked in such capacity in India for a period of some  six
             years - although none of this is referred to in their  witness
             statements.  Therefore the First and Second Appellants  cannot
             possibly attempt to credibly maintain that they would  not  be
             able to adequately deal with any unwarranted 'harsh treatment'
             of their children in the Indian school setting, in  the  event
             of return.


         22.  The Appellant's Representative  submitted  that  the  type  of
             education in India is different in that it  relies  more  upon
             'rote learning' through repetition  whereas  children  in  the
             United   Kingdom   are   encouraged   to   investigate/express
             themselves and thereby learn.  During his  oral  evidence  the
             First Appellant also claimed that the first language  used  by
             Government Schools in the province where  they  come  from  is
             Telegu.  The  Second  Appellant  made  no  reference  to  this
             language but said that government schools conducted  education
             in Urdu.  Both were consistent in suggesting  that  there  are
             private schools  available  where  children  are  educated  in
             English.  However such schools tend to be  expensive  and  the
             First Appellant maintains that he would not be in  a  position
             to be able to afford such expenditure.  As noted above and  as
             became apparent only during the Appellant's oral evidence,  he
             is a qualified Electronic Engineer  and  will  undoubtedly  be
             able to find employment upon return.  In addition he said that
             the Second  Appellant  is  also  educated  and  is  a  fashion
             designer.  I conclude therefore that subject  to  child  care,
             the Second Appellant would also be able to take up  employment
             if she so desired.


         23.  The most significant consideration is that the children  would
             be returning to India with their parents  as  a  family  unit.
             The First and Second Appellants would be able to support their
             children whilst they  become  used  to  living  in  India  and
             enjoying their full rights as Citizens of India.   Furthermore
             the child Appellants in this case are still of such minor ages
             to be considered  as  being  adaptable;  Azimi-Moayed  [2013].
             Consequently in relation to the  only  issue  under  paragraph
             276ADE(iv) I conclude that it would be  reasonable  to  expect
             the Third Fourth and Fifth  Appellants  to  leave  the  United
             Kingdom as their parents would be able to  provide  for  their
             education, safety and welfare.  Accordingly,  the  appeals  of
             the  Third  Fourth  and  Fifth  Appellants  must  fail   under
             paragraph 276ADE.  Similarly as the Sixth  Appellant  has  not
             lived continuously in the United Kingdom for  at  least  seven
             years, his appeal also fails thereunder.


         24.  All Six Appellants also seek to rely on Article 8  outside  of
             the Immigration Rules.  In my judgment, paragraph  276ADE  and
             Appendix FM provide for a full consideration  of  all  of  the
             circumstances in this case and thus represent a complete  code
             - Nagre [2012]/Gulshan  [2013].   Furthermore,  there  are  no
             'arguably good grounds' (Gulshan) for a grant of leave outside
             of the Immigration Rules.


         25.  However out of an abundance of caution (in view of  the  Court
             of Appeal Judgment in MM [2014]) I have considered  the  right
             to respect for private and family life  under  Razgar  v  SSHD
             [2004], Huang and Kashmiri v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11, EB  (Kosovo)
             v SSHD [2008] UKHL41, and Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008].


         26.  In relation to family life Article 8 of the  ECHR  is  clearly
             not engaged in the circumstances of the present  case  because
             all six members of the family would return together to  India.
             Apart from their nuclear family the Appellants do not have any
             other family in the United Kingdom.


         27.  In relation to private life I have considered the  five  steps
             propounded by Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] (which  I  do  not
             reiterate as  the  Appellant  is  legally  represented)  I  am
             satisfied  the  first  two  questions  are  to   be   answered
             affirmatively in favour of the Appellant; the Appellants  have
             established private lives in the UK and  their  removal  would
             constitute an interference with such rights.


         28.  The third and fourth questions under Razgar are to be answered
             affirmatively in favour of  the  Respondent;  the  Appellant's
             removal would be in accordance with the Immigration Rules  and
             the  law  and  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  for  the
             protection  of  the  rights  and   freedoms   of   others/firm
             immigration control.


         29.  As to the final question, that of proportionality of  removal,
             I resolve in favour of the Respondent.  As established in  the
             aforesaid House  of  Lords  decisions,  the  test  is  whether
             family/private life can reasonably be  established/enjoyed  in
             the  Appellant's  country  of  origin.   In  carrying  out   a
             balancing exercise of  factors  in  favour  of  the  Appellant
             against those in favour of the Respondent, I take into account
             all the circumstances in this case.


         30.  As established in  various  Court  of  Appeal/House  of  Lords
             decisions, considerable weight is required to he  attached  to
             the public aim/public interest in the protection of the rights
             and freedoms of others/firm immigration control.


         31.  In carrying out a balancing exercise I note that the First and
             Second Appellants entered the United Kingdom with their eldest
             two children on the basis of visit visas valid for six months.
              There is no sensible explanation provided as to why they  did
             not return.  The First Appellant  maintains  that  he  was  in
             dispute with his eldest brother and did not wish to return  to
             India.  On any view, India is a very substantial  country  and
             there was nothing to prevent the Appellants returning to India
             with a view to setting up their home elsewhere  within  India,
             well away from the First Appellant's family and  any  disputes
             that may have existed in the past.  I also note that the First
             Appellant appears to have been employed  in  the  UK,  for  at
             least six years as an electronics engineer  and  there  is  no
             evidence that he  obtained  a  legitimate  National  Insurance
             number and/or paid his taxes as would have been required.   He
             stated in oral evidence that currently he is only  undertaking
             'odd jobs' because the electronics firm  he  was  working  for
             could not continue to employ him due to potential legal risks.
              Therefore the First Appellant's private  life,  in  terms  of
             employment, is somewhat insignificant.


         32.  No doubt  the  First  and  Second  Appellants  have  developed
             relationships with friends/colleagues  within  the  community.
             In my judgment there would be no significant difficulty in the
             Appellants seeking to maintain such  relationships  by  modern
             means of communication and/or through visits either  to  India
             or to the United Kingdom.  Furthermore, as noted above,  I  am
             left in no doubt that the First Appellant  would  be  able  to
             find employment on return given his  qualifications  and  work
             experience both in India and the United Kingdom.


         33.  I also note that by virtue of section 117B of the  Immigration
             Act 2014, I am required to  ascribe  'little  weight'  to  the
             private and family life established by the  Appellants  during
             the family's precarious stay in  the  United  Kingdom.  -  the
             Appellants having overstayed beyond  their  six  months  visit
             visa, by a substantial number of years.


         34.  I conclude on the totality of  evidence  before  me  that  the
             Respondent has discharged the burden  of  proof  upon  her  to
             establish that the removal of the Appellants is  proportionate
             to  the   duty   upon   her   to   ensure   firm   immigration
             control/protect the rights and freedoms of others.   Therefore
             this appeal  also  fails  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  as
             developed under the Common Law."

The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

6.   The grounds of appeal argue that the Judge failed to make a finding  as
    to the best interests of the children and this is a material error.

7.   At the hearing before me I heard submissions  from  both  parties.   Mr
    Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 response which argues  that  it  is  clear
    when reading the determination as a whole that the Judge  assessed  the
    best interests of the children.  The thrust of the argument appears  to
    focus on the children's education and the  adult  appellants  showed  a
    wholesale disregard for immigration control. The respondent in the Rule
    24 response refers to Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74,  Azimi-Moayed  and
    others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013]  UKUT  197
    (IAC) and the more recent case of EV (Philippines) & Ors v SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874.  It is argued that it is not unreasonable in the  context
    of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  to
    expect the elder of the minor appellants to leave  the  UK  with  their
    parents.

8.   In oral submissions Mr Tarlow stated that although  he  relied  on  the
    Rule 24 response, he was unable to argue that the  Judge  had  made  an
    assessment of the best interests of the children. He would like to  say
    that this error was not material, but he felt unable to do so.

9.   Mr Harris relied on  the  grounds  seeking  permission.   Both  parties
    addressed me in the event that the decision was set aside and  re-made.
    Mr Tarlow  relied  on  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter.   Mr  Harris
    submitted that the eldest child  was  now  very  much  integrated  into
    British society and that there were no countervailing  factors  against
    her.  It was accepted that the family could  not  succeed  outside  the
    Rules if  it  were  not  for  the  children.   Adaptability  is  not  a
    determinative factor and it was accepted that there would be  education
    provision in India but the focus of the appeal was  on  the  children's
    private lives.

Error of Law

10.  Contrary to the evidence of the  adult  appellant's,  the  Judge  found
    that the children were familiar with the culture and Urdu language  and
    that in any event tuition in India would  be  in  English.   The  Judge
    found that the substance of the children's private lives was  dependent
    upon their education here and that there  was  no  evidence  that  they
    would not be able to settle in school in India.  The Judge  found  that
    it was not material that the appellants'  father  would  not  be  in  a
    position to afford to educate his children privately and in  any  event
    there was no evidence that he  would  not  be  able  to  find  suitable
    employment in India having worked here as an  electronic  engineer  and
    having previously worked as an engineer in India.  The Judge noted that
    both the adult appellants were educated in India and  that  the  second
    appellant was educated as a fashion designer and the  family  would  be
    returning to India as a family unit.  In the Judge's view in the  light
    of the ages of the children they would be adaptable and would  be  able
    to enjoy their full rights as citizens of India.  In his view it  would
    be reasonable in the context of paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules to expect the third, fourth and fifth appellants to leave the  UK
    with their parents.

11.  It is clear, having read the determination as a whole, that  the  Judge
    did not make an assessment of the best interests of  the  children  and
    that he should have done so.  In my view,  as  a  result  of  this  the
    Judge's findings in relation to reasonableness and proportionality  are
    flawed. The best interests of the child is  an  integral  part  of  the
    proportionality  assessment  which  must  be  a  primary  consideration
    although not always the primary.

12.  In the light of the nature  of  the  error  of  law  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  and  remake  the  decision
    pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(ii).   In my view there is no reason to go
    behind the primary findings  that  the  Judge  made  as  there  was  no
    challenge to these.  However,  it  is  necessary  to  assess  the  best
    interests of the children and reasonableness  in  the  context  of  the
    Immigration Rules and Section 117B of the 2002 Act and  proportionality
    pursuant to Article 8 of the 1950 Convention on Human Rights.

13.  I have had regard to relevant jurisprudence on the  issue.   In  Azimi-
    Moayed and others the Upper Tribunal in considering  the  case  law  in
    relation to  decisions  affecting  children  identified  the  following
    principles to assist in the determination of appeals where children are
    affected by the appealed decisions:

         "(i) As a starting point it is in the best interests of children to
             be with both their parents  and  if  both  parents  are  being
             removed from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.


         (ii) It is generally in the interests  of  children  to  have  both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.


         (iii)    Lengthy residence in a country other  than  the  state  of
             origin  can  lead  to  development  of  social  cultural   and
             educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in
             the absence  of  compelling  reason  to  the  contrary.   What
             amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear-cut  but  past  and
             present policies have identified seven  years  as  a  relevant
             period.


         (iv) Apart from the terms of  published  policies  and  Rules,  the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age 4  is  likely  to  be
             more significant to a child that  the  first  seven  years  of
             life.  Very young children are focused on their parents rather
             than their peers and are adaptable.


         (v)  Short periods of residence, particularly ones without leave or
             the reasonable expectation of leave to enter or remain,  while
             claims are promptly considered, are unlikely to give  rise  to
             private  life  deserving  of  respect  in   the   absence   of
             exceptional factors.  In any event, protection of the economic
             wellbeing of society amply justifies removal in such cases."

14.  In Zoumbas  v  SSHD  at  paragraph  10  there  is  set  out  the  legal
    principles which guide me in considering the best interests of a  child
    which are  deemed  to  be  an  integral  part  of  the  proportionality
    assessment under Article 8.  Paragraph 10 states:

         "In their written  case  Counsel  for  Mr  Zoumbas  set  out  legal
         principles which were relevant in this case and which they  derived
         from three decisions of this court, namely ZH (Tanzania) (above), H
         v Lord Advocate [2012] SC (UKSC) 308 and H(H) v  Deputy  Prosecutor
         of the Italian Republic [2013] 1 AC 338.  Those principles are  not
         in doubt and Ms Drummond on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  did
         not challenge them.  We paraphrase them as follows:


         (1)  The best interests of a child are  an  integral  part  of  the
             proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR;


         (2)  in making that assessment, the best interests of a child  must
             be a primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the  only
             primary consideration; and the child's best interests  do  not
             of themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;


         (3)  although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by
             the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no  other
             consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;


         (4)  while different Judges might approach the question of the best
             interests of a child in different ways, it is important to ask
             oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in  order  to
             avoid the risk that the best interests of  a  child  might  be
             undervalued when other important considerations were in play;


         (5)   it  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of   a   child's
             circumstances and of what  is  in  a  child's  best  interests
             before one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed
             by the force of other considerations;


         (6)  to that end there is no substitute for a  careful  examination
             of all relevant factors when the  interests  of  a  child  are
             involved in an Article 8 assessment; and


         (7)  a child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is
             not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

15.  I have also had regard to the more recent case of  EV  (Philippines)  &
    Ors v SSHD [2014] and have taken into account  the  decision  including
    the following paragraphs:

         "58.  In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world.  If one parent has no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against which  the  assessment  is  conducted.   If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment  is  conducted.   Thus
             the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?


         59.  On the facts of  ZH  it  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
             children to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because
             the family would  be  separated  and  the  children  would  be
             deprived of the right to grow up in the country of which  they
             were citizens.


         60.  That is a long way from the facts of our case.   In  our  case
             none of the family is a British citizen.  None has  the  right
             to remain in this country.  If  the  mother  is  removed,  the
             father has no independent right to remain.  If the parents are
             removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the children
             to go with  them.   As  the  Immigration  Judge  found  it  is
             obviously  in  their  best  interests  to  remain  with  their
             parents.  Although it is, of course a question of fact for the
             Tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of being educated
             at public expense in the UK can outweigh the  benefit  to  the
             children of remaining with their parents.  Just as  we  cannot
             provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate
             the world."

16.  The appellants' primary submission is that at least  the  eldest  child
    satisfies the requirement under 276ADE(iv) which reads as follows:

         "is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the  UK
         for at least 7 years and it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
         child to leave the UK."

17.  In addition Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act is  relied  upon  and  this
    reads as follows:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -


         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and


         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

18.  In my view the focus is very much upon the eldest child, Miss  AK,  who
    was aged 4 when she arrived here.  She is now aged 13 and has been here
    for nine years since she was aged 4.  The Immigration  Rules  and  case
    law consider seven years to be of significance.

19.  The starting point is that it is in all the children's  best  interests
    to be with both their parents, who in this case are being  removed  and
    who do not have a right to be here.  The children in this case would be
    returning to a familiar culture.  Both of their parents are Indian  and
    the Judge made findings in relation to language and culture at [17].  I
    accept that lengthy residence can lead to the  development  of  social,
    cultural and educational ties here which are inappropriate to  disrupt.
    The length of residence is a weighty factor in the appellants'  favour.
    It is a fact here that there has been lengthy residence  in  excess  of
    the seven  years  recognised  by  the  Immigration  Rules  and  now  by
    Parliament in statute (Section 117B of  the  2002  Act  (at  least  the
    eldest child  is  a  qualifying  child)).  Seven  years  alone  is  not
    sufficient  to establish that it is in the child's  best  interests  to
    remain here but that period of time can  lead  to  the  development  of
    social and cultural ties that it would be inappropriate to  disrupt  in
    the absence of compelling reasons to the contrary.

20.  I have taken on board the lawful and sustainable findings of the First-
    tier Tribunal and on the evidence I do not  accept  that  the  children
    would experience serious difficulties should they return to  India.  Mr
    Harris submitted that the focus was on the children's private lives but
    outside education and their home there was very little evidence of  the
    extent of this.  There is no cogent evidence  in  this  case  that  the
    children have a significant private life outside the  family  home  and
    their education.  I accept that they must have friends  and  that  they
    are integrated  into  the  education  system  here  but  they  are  all
    relatively young.  There is no  persuasive  evidence  that  the  eldest
    child, who has spent in excess of seven years here from the  age  of  4
    (which I recognise to be of significance),  has  social,  cultural  and
    educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt.

21.  In my view, on the evidence in this case it would be in the  children's
    best interests to return to India with their parents and in my view  it
    follows that it would be reasonable pursuant to  paragraph  276ADE  and
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  It follows in my view that  in  light
    of these findings the appeal must fail under Article 8 outside  of  the
    Rules.  Mr Harris conceded that the success of the appeal  depended  on
    the children. I have made an anonymity direction in the  light  of  the
    child appellants.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  Human  Rights
grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 12 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

