
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09195/2014
                                                               IA/09196/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On  29th October 2014                           |On 6th November 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                          1) MRS ROMUALOA AMAEFULE
                     2) MR NAPOLEON AHAMAEFULE AMAEFULE

                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Williams, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is  an  appeal  against  a  decision  by  Judge  Hillis  who,  in  a
   determination promulgated on the 3rd July 2014,  dismissed  each  of  the
   appellant's appeals against the respondent's decision to (a) refuse their
   applications for an EEA Residence Card in recognition  of  their  claimed
   right to reside permanently in the United Kingdom  under  European  Union
   (EU) Treaties, and (b) revoke the EEA Residence Cards that had previously
   been issued to them.

2. The appellants are married to  each  other.  The  first  appellant  is  a
   citizen of Poland, who was born on the  2nd  May  1977,  and  the  second
   appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, who was  born  on  the  26th  November
   1980. They have two children. Their children were  born,  in  the  United
   Kingdom, on the 8th January 2010 and the 23rd March 2012, respectively.

3. The respondent refused to recognise that the appellants  had  acquired  a
   permanent right of residence in  the  United  Kingdom  because  they  had
   failed to prove that the first appellant had been  a  'qualified  person'
   under  Regulation  6  of  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
   Regulations 2006 - that is to say, that she had been exercising EU Treaty
   rights in the United Kingdom - for a continuous period of at  least  five
   years. Moreover,  as  the  evidence  submitted  with  their  applications
   revealed that the first appellant was not  currently  exercising  her  EU
   Treaty Rights, the  respondent  revoked  the  Residence  Cards  that  had
   previously been issued to them.

4. The application for permission to appeal contained  five  grounds.  These
   can however be distilled into three discrete arguments which, when placed
   in a logical order, are as follows -

           i) The judge erred in his analysis of what was required for  the
              appellants to acquire a permanent right of residence. Upon  a
              correct analysis of the law, their appeals against refusal to
              grant their applications for a Permanent Residence Card ought
              to have been allowed

          ii) The judge erred in failing to consider, either properly or at
              all, evidence that the first appellant was now  working.  Had
              this evidence been considered, the appeals against revocation
              of the appellants' existing Residence Cards would  have  been
              allowed.

         iii) The judge erred in his analysis of  whether  the  appellants'
              removal from the United Kingdom would  be  incompatible  with
              their right to respect for  private  and  family  life,  with
              particular reference to the best interests of the children.

5. In dismissing the appeals against refusal to  grant  Permanent  Residence
   Cards, the judge said this -

         13. I find on the evidence of the Appellants at  the  hearing  that
         the first app has failed to show that she was a worker  as  defined
         in Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations 2006 as she  was  unemployed
         by choice following her maternity leave in 2010 and her  successful
         application to the Employment Appeal Tribunal for unfair dismissal.
         The Appellants made the conscious decision for the first Appellant,
         the EEA national in these proceedings, to stay at home and care for
         her children who were not at that time in education as  defined  in
         the Regulations ... .

         14. The first Appellant chose to remain at home and  care  for  her
         pre-school age children while her non-EEA national husband went  to
         work when it was available. She was, therefore, not exercising  her
         Treaty Rights and was, in my judgement, voluntarily unemployed  for
         a period in excess of six  months  during  the  relevant  five-year
         period from October, 2008 to October 2013 required for the grant of
         a Permanent Residence Permit.

6. Mr Williams renewed his argument -  which  he  apparently  also  advanced
   before the First-tier Tribunal  -  that,  by  virtue  of  Article  16  of
   Directive 2004/58/EC, continuity of residence is unaffected by  a  single
   period of absence, not exceeding 12  consecutive  months,  for  important
   reasons such as pregnancy. It therefore followed that the first appellant
   should have been treated as having exercised her EU Treaty  rights  until
   the 1st January 2011, notwithstanding the fact that  her  employment  had
   ceased some 12 months earlier.

7. There are two problems with this argument.  The  first  problem  is  that
   Article 16  of  the  Directive  (which  is  transposed  into  UK  law  by
   Regulation 3) is concerned with  continuity  of  residence  in  the  host
   country rather than continuity of employment. The outcome of this  appeal
   was not dependent  upon  calculating  the  first  appellant's  period  of
   residence in the UK; rather, it was dependent upon calculating the period
   during which she had been exercising EU  Treaty  rights  whilst  she  was
   residing in the UK. The second problem, as Mr Jarvis pointed out, is that
   even if the appellant was treated  as  having  exercised  her  EU  Treaty
   rights from the moment of her arrival in the UK  until  the  1st  January
   2011, as Mr Williams contended should be the case, she  would  still  not
   have acquired a permanent right of residence. This is because she  claims
   only to have arrived in the UK on the 26th October 2006,  which  is  less
   than five years before the constructive period of her  employment  ended.
   It follows that the judge did not err in law in  dismissing  the  appeals
   against refusal to  grant  the  appellants'  applications  for  Permanent
   Residence  Cards.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  thus
   preserved to that extent.

8. There is evidence on the file that Mr Williams  faxed  documentary  proof
   of the first appellant's current employment in the United Kingdom to  the
   First-tier Tribunal in advance of the hearing. Moreover, Mr Williams says
   that  he  drew  the  judge's  attention  to  that  evidence.  The   judge
   nevertheless does not make any mention of it  is  in  his  determination.
   This is probably because he concluded (rightly) that the  evidence  could
   not have affected the outcome of the appeal against refusal to grant  the
   appellants' applications for Permanent Residence Cards (see  above).  The
   evidence was however potentially  relevant  to  the  appeal  against  the
   respondent's decision to revoke the appellants' existing Residence Cards.
   The judge does not appear to have appreciated that he was also seized  of
   an appeal against this discrete Immigration Decision,  for  he  makes  no
   mention of it. This was obviously an error of law. Moreover,  that  error
   was material to the outcome of the appeal for the following reasons.

9. By virtue of Section 85 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
   2002, the Tribunal is empowered  in  an  in-country  appeal  to  consider
   evidence of  circumstances  that  have  arisen  after  the  date  of  the
   Immigration Decision. It was clearly right to consider such  evidence  in
   this  appeal.  This  is  because  the  Notice  of  Immigration   Decision
   specifically gave the appellants the option of either  appealing  to  the
   Tribunal or making a fresh application in the event that they  considered
   that they had, "a right to reside in the United Kingdom as  a  matter  of
   European law, and are in a position to submit the  necessary  information
   to support [the] application for  a  residence  card".  The  Notice  thus
   clearly contemplated the possibility of a change in the first appellant's
   circumstances following the decision to revoke the  appellants'  existing
   Residence Cards. I therefore stood the matter down so  as  to  enable  Mr
   Jarvis to make appropriate enquiries concerning the documentary  evidence
   that had been submitted in  respect  of  the  first  appellant's  current
   employment. As a result of this, Mr Jarvis was able to tell me that  HMRC
   had confirmed that the employment in question was  registered  with  them
   for tax purposes. I therefore remake the First-tier Tribunal's  decision,
   by allowing the appeals  to  the  extent  and  on  the  ground  that  the
   revocation of the appellants' existing Residence  Cards  is  contrary  to
   their EU Treaty rights.

10. As I have decided to allow the appeals against  revocation,  it  follows
   that the threat  of  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  and  consequent
   potential engagement of the operation of Article 8 of the  1950  European
   Convention for the Protection of Human Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms
   have ceased to exist. It is thus no longer relevant to  consider  whether
   the judge's Article-8 analysis was flawed.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the  appeals  against
   the respondent's refusal to grant  the  appellants'  applications  for  a
   Permanent Residence Card is preserved.

12. To the  extent  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeals
   against the respondent's decision  to  revoke  the  appellants'  existing
   Residence Cards, its decision is  set  aside  and  is  substituted  by  a
   decision to allow  those  appeals  on  the  ground  that  the  revocation
   decision is contrary to the appellants' EU Treaty rights.

Anonymity is not directed.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal           5th November 2014


