

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/09482/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 29 October and 3 December 2013             |on 16 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                           BLANDINE NOELLE DAMTSE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Ms N Loughran, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    A note and further directions, dated 31 October 2013,  were  issued  to
    parties in terms of paragraphs 1 to 8 below:


   1. This case was listed before me for substantive hearing on  29  October
      2013.   Shortly  before  that   date   the   appellant   changed   her
      representatives to Loughran & Co,  Solicitors,  Glasgow,  although  no
      written notice of the change, which should be given in accordance with
      the Procedure Rules, is on the Upper Tribunal file.

   2. By letter faxed  at  9.34  am  on  29  October  2013  the  appellant's
      solicitor sought an adjournment, having been taken  ill  the  previous
      day.  Having heard from the Senior Presenting Officer,  Mr  Mullen,  I
      allowed the adjournment.

   3. The respondent refused the appellant's application for leave to remain
      as the spouse of a person settled in the UK for lack  of  evidence  of
      having passed the relevant English language test.  First-tier Tribunal
      Judge McGavin dismissed the appeal under the Rules for the same reason
      (paragraph 7 of her determination).  She dismissed  the  appeal  under
      the ECHR on the view that it was proportionate to require  the  return
      of the appellant and her child (if she had one, which  the  judge  did
      not accept) to Cameroon.

   4. In an inventory of productions  (wrongly  headed  "In  the  First-tier
      Tribunal") sent under cover of a letter  dated  28  October  2013  the
      appellant includes an English language certificate.  This  appears  to
      comply with the Rules, but  it  was  issued  after  the  date  of  the
      respondent's decision and after the date of the determination  by  the
      First-tier  Tribunal.   There  is  no  accompanying  application   for
      admission of further evidence, for any purpose, and no explanation  of
      how this item might be relevant to the outcome of this appeal.

   5. On the evidence available to the First-tier Tribunal, and  since,  the
      failure of the appeal under the  Rules  seems  inevitable.   It  does,
      however, appear that the  appellant  might  now  make  an  application
      meeting the requirements  of  the  Rules  (and,  presumably,  she  was
      previously in a position to obtain and produce the necessary  language
      certificate).

   6. In respect of Article 8, the properly decisive issue may not have been
      whether it is reasonable to expect the  appellant  and  her  child  to
      remove to Cameroon.  In any event, that is unlikely to be the issue if
      the decision did have to be remade, when the appellant has the  option
      of making an application which meets the requirements of the Rules.

   7. Subject to any argument and reference to authority which the appellant
      may wish to make, it is difficult to see that an appellant can  assert
      a right under article 8 to be granted leave without following a course
      open to her under the Rules.

   8. The appellant (if she elects to continue with this appeal) is directed
      to file with the Upper Tribunal and to copy to the respondent not less
      than 7 days prior to  the  next  hearing  a  note  of  argument,  with
      reference to any relevant case law, explaining why she says  that  her
      appeal should succeed in the UT.

   9. The appellant filed a note of argument under cover of a letter dated 2
      December  2013.   This  says  firstly  that   her   English   language
      certificate should be admitted "in the interests of  fair  and  proper
      disposal of the appeal"; that the date for admission  of  evidence  is
      "the date of the [UT] appeal hearing"; and that the appellant is  thus
      "clearly able to meet the Immigration Rules".   There is no  reference
      to authority for those propositions.

  10. The second argument is that whether or not she now  meets  the  Rules,
      and whether or not she has the  option  of  another  application,  she
      "still has separate Article 8 grounds" which require to  be  assessed.
      There follow lengthy extracts of case law applicable to the  issue  of
      removal to Cameroon.  The note does not discuss whether and  why  that
      is the relevant alternative.

  11. At the outset of the hearing,  Mr  Mullen  observed  that  the  SSHD's
      decision was unlawful  to  the  extent  that  it  included  a  removal
      decision, a point so far  overlooked  all  round.   He  withdrew  that
      aspect of the decision.

  12. Ms Loughran submitted, without directly referring to  the  case,  that
      "LS (Gambia)" is authority for the proposition that the Upper Tribunal
      should consider this  case  under  the  Rules  on  the  basis  of  the
      appellant's language certificate, although it had not been obtained by
      the date of the SSHD's decision or by the date of the FtT hearing; and
      that the FtT judge overlooked the best interests of the child, and the
      relevance of the child's UK citizenship.

  13.  Mr Mullen said that the language test certificate was not before  the
      SSHD or the FtT, and whether the appellant can now meet the  Rules  in
      that respect is irrelevant.  The grounds on which permission to appeal
      to the UT was granted relate to Article 8 only, not  to  the  decision
      under the Rules.  On Article 8, the judge was entitled to conclude  as
      she did.  In any event, as the appellant has the avenue of  a  further
      application open to her, and as she is not now faced  with  a  removal
      decision,  there   could   be   no   consequences   amounting   to   a
      disproportionate breach of Article 8 rights.

  14. In reply, Ms Loughran accepted that there were no  grounds  of  appeal
      going to the decision under the Rules, and that it could not be argued
      that the FtT judge erred in law in relation to the Rules on  the  case
      before her.  As to Article 8, she  raised  for  the  first  time,  and
      without  specific  explanation  of  the  appellant's   position,   the
      possibility that she might not now be in a position to apply under the
      Rules from within the UK.

  15. In response  to  that  new  point,  Mr  Mullen  said  that  a  further
      application by the  appellant,  even  if  it  were  out  of  the  time
      permitted for applying from within the UK, was likely to be considered
      on its merits without that being taken against her.  He could not give
      an undertaking to that effect, but he would endorse the case file with
      a note that if necessary the point should be considered,  and  he  was
      aware that not all out of time applications are refused on that issue.

  16. I indicated that the appeal to the Upper Tribunal would be dismissed.

  17.  LS Gambia [2005]  UKAIT  00085  is  no  authority  for  the  sweeping
      submission about admissibility and relevance of evidence which was not
      provided to the SSHD and which did not exist at the date of the SSHD's
      decision.  The submission ignores  the  wording  of  the  Rule,  which
      requires an applicant  to  provide  a  current  certificate  with  the
      application, as well as statutory amendments since 2005 (now 2002 Act,
      s. 85A) and case law following thereon.  Even if some  argument  could
      have been conjured up about that, there  was  no  relevant  ground  of
      appeal to the UT, and no error of law by the FtT on the case before it
      in relation to the Rules.

  18. There is only one matter in relation to Article 8 which might have had
      any eventual substance.  That is whether and when the appellant is  or
      was in a position to apply under the Rules from  within  the  UK,  and
      whether it would be proportionate to require her to apply from outside
      the UK.   There might have been an arguable  issue  on  the  basis  of
      Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40  (although  that  case  was  not  mentioned).
      However, (a) that was not put to the FtT; (b) it came very late in the
      UT; (c) there was no application to amend the grounds of  appeal;  (d)
      it came at a stage when removal directions no longer apply; and (e) it
      seems likely that any application will be  considered  on  its  merits
      without the appellant leaving the  UK.   At  this  stage,  before  any
      further application or decision is made, nothing emerges  which  might
      be held as contrary to Article 8.

  19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law, such as to require it to  be
      set aside, and it shall stand.  (The respondent's removal decision has
      been withdrawn.)

  20. No order for anonymity has been requested or made.


                               [pic]
                                4 December 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


