
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 09917 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 November 2013                           |On 9 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                            Naheed Ghulam Rasool
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gondal, (Legal Representative) Berkshire Law
Chamber
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a female citizen of Pakistan against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State refusing her application to  vary  her  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  The appellant has lived lawfully  in  the
    United Kingdom since June 2009 and during that time she has studied  and
    married and has had a child who was born on 3 June 2013 and  so  is  now
    roughly five months old.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge worked meticulously through the Rules  and
    found that the appellant satisfied all of the Rules except one.  He  was
    not satisfied that the appellant's circumstances came within one of  the
    exceptions to refusal which he  identified  as  EX(a)(ii).  He  was  not
    satisfied it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  It is a little surprising to read this conclusion in  a
    determination which is otherwise  meticulously  prepared  and  explained
    because, as is set out in the grounds that have  been  prepared  by  the
    appellant's representatives, there  is  very  clear  guidance  from  the
    tribunal and the higher  courts  that  it  will  be  unusual  to  decide
    properly that a British national child can  reasonably  be  expected  to
    leave the country of which he or she is a  national  to  make  his  home
    elsewhere.  Particular reference is made to the decisions of Sanade  and
    Others (British children - Zambrano - Derici) [2012] UKUT 48 where these
    points were considered.

 3. We do not see any need to explain the case in any greater  detail.   The
    authorities are perfectly clear and we are quite satisfied having  heard
    Mr Jack's very fair presentation of the case and the grounds prepared by
    the appellant's representatives that the decision was clearly wrong.

 4. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  substitute  a
    decision allowing the appeal under the Rules.

 5. The evidence proves that the exception applies.  We do not  award  costs
    in this case. As Mr Jack pointed out, the application could not  succeed
    when it was made but the subsequent birth of a British national child is
    a material change of circumstances.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 5 December 2013                |



