



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: IA/09588/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 June 2014                            |On 5 August 2014           |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between

                              MR NANA AGYEMANG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

   Representation:
   For the appellant:      In person
   For the Respondent: Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Ghana. He granted permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal by Judge Hemingway on 8  October  2013  following
    the dismissal of his appeal by Judge Bart- Stewart on 19 September 2013
    for reasons given in the determination.

 2. The appellant had appealed under  Section  82(i)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  against  a  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 11 March 2013 refusing him indefinite leave to remain  on
    the basis of his claimed long residence.

 3. In his application for grant of indefinite  leave,  the  appellant  had
    stated that he entered the United Kingdom  on  19  February  1993  with
    entry clearance as a visitor which was valid until 19 August 1993.  The
    respondent noted that she had been unable to ascertain the  appellant's
    claimed lawful entry. He was considered to be an  illegal  entrant  and
    when he applied for  settlement  on  the  basis  of  his  claimed  long
    residence on 6 June 2012, his application was refused with a  right  of
    appeal.

 4. In her letter of refusal the respondent acknowledged that the appellant
    had produced sufficient documentary evidence to satisfy the  respondent
    that he had resided in the UK continuously between  2007  and  present.
    The respondent listed  the  evidence  submitted  by  the  appellant  in
    support of  his  claim  but  for  reasons  stated  in  the  letter  the
    respondent was unable to accept any of the evidence as demonstrative of
    the appellant's claim that he had lived in the  UK  continuously  since
    1993. His claim was also considered under Article 8 of the ECHR but was
    found to be lacking in merit as he had no family life in the UK and had
    produced no evidence of private life too.

 5. In his appeal before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Bart  -  Stewart),
    the appellant gave oral evidence which the Judge recorded in paragraphs
    9, 10 and 11 of the determination. The appellant told the Judge that he
    had first come to the UK for business in 1985 and again in  1986,  1991
    and 1993. He told the Judge that the last time he came to  the  UK,  he
    lost his mother and he became desperate. He met a Ghanaian man who gave
    him money to eat. He then began  to  work  in  a  hotel.  In  1993  the
    Immigration Service caught him and told him not to work. He then  found
    a lawyer who told him to wait for a letter from  him.  The  Immigration
    Service, he said had taken his passport and ticket from him.  He  heard
    nothing more from the Immigration Service or the lawyer. When  he  went
    looking for the lawyer, he was told that he had gone  abroad.  He  said
    that his wife and five children live in Ghana and that he is in contact
    with them. His parents are deceased. Four of his children  are  working
    and all the children are doing well. His wife, he said,  used  to  help
    him in his shop and she was still running the shop. He said that he has
    no money or property in the UK and survives by  doing  petty  part-time
    work from time to time.

 6. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant produced some documentary
    evidence which included a letter from a Dr Prasad and a letter from Rev
    Henry Mensah-Bonsu and Asma Miah. Judge Bart-Stewart commenting on  the
    lack of evidence on the appellant's date of entry. The Judge went on to
    say in paragraph 18 of  the  determination  that  "I  accept  that  the
    appellant resided in the UK between 2006 and  1999.  However  there  is
    then very little evidence until 2002".  However  in  paragraph  19  the
    Judge said, "I am prepared to accept that he has lived continuously  in
    the UK from 2002 however I find that he has failed to show  that  on  a
    balance of probabilities he has been resident in the UK for a period of
    14 years as claimed and he therefore fails to meet the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules."

 7. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by
    Judge M Hemingway, Judge of the First Tier Tribunal.

 8. In granting permission the Judge said, "It is arguable  the  Judge  did
    not adequately deal with material evidence suggesting the Appellant had
    been in the UK prior to 2002. It is arguable the Judge  did  not  carry
    any evaluation of the Appellant's oral evidence as to his UK history."

 9. On  15  November  2013,  upon  hearing  Mr  Wilding,  representing  the
    respondent at the hearing on that day, I concluded that the grounds  of
    appeal  seeking  permission  to  appeal  were  made  out  in  that  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal was indeed in  material  error
    of law. Whilst the First Tier Judge had been free to  reject  the  oral
    evidence of the appellant, I concluded that he  had  not  given  proper
    reasoning for doing so. The Judge had concentrated on  the  absence  of
    corroborative documentary evidence to the  complete  exclusion  of  the
    oral evidence that he had heard from the appellant. The appellant  said
    that his old passport bearing his name as William  Okoh  Agyemang  with
    date of birth 4 May 1952 had been taken from him  in  1993  during  the
    immigration raid at his place of work and had never  been  returned  to
    him. After setting aside the decision of Judge Stewart Bart, I directed
    the respondent to produce the passport of the appellant  which  it  was
    claimed was in their possession since  1993  and  any  other  documents
    relating to  the  seizure  of  that  passport.  I  directed  that  such
    documents be produced ten days before the next date of hearing  and  be
    copied at the same time to the appellant and  the  court.  I  gave  the
    appellant  permission  to  produce  any  further  evidence,  oral   and
    documentary to establish that he has been living in the UK since 1993.

10. The case was relisted for hearing on 18 February  2014.  The  appellant
    was present and was accompanied by three persons,  two  males  and  one
    female. The appellant said that they  had  come  to  give  evidence  to
    support his appeal. The respondent's representative at this hearing, Mr
    S Whitwell filed a document titled Integrity Report and requested  that
    the hearing be adjourned as no witness statements had been filed and he
    was being taken by surprise.  I reminded  Mr  Whitwell  that  his  late
    filing of what was called Integrity Report  was  as  unhelpful  as  the
    appellant turning up with "witnesses"  whose  statements  had  to  been
    filed in advance. The hearing was adjourned nevertheless but not before
    I had explained the process and  requirements  of  the  appeal  to  the
    appellant as well as the three persons who were  present  in  Court.  I
    told the appellant and his "friends" that if they want to give evidence
    to support the appeal they will have to file their  witness  statements
    in ten days in advance of the next hearing and that they would have  to
    be present at the hearing. I repeated the requirement of statements and
    their attendance more  than  once  to  the  respondent  and  the  three
    persons. I made it clear to the appellant that no further  adjournments
    would be granted. He confirmed that he understood what I had said.  The
    hearing was adjourned to the first available date. However as the  case
    was part heard and I fell ill, the appeal could not be re-listed before
    24 June 2014.


11. On 24 June 2014, the appellant again appeared unrepresented and had not
    filed any further documentary statements such as witness statements  as
    he had been directed to do at the last hearing.  He  said  he  had  not
    realised that he had to  bring  with  him  his  friends  to  give  oral
    evidence and that their witness statements had to be filed  in  advance
    of the hearing. I read out the previous record of proceedings wherein I
    had recorded what had been said more than once  to  appellant  on  this
    matter. He did not say anything but went on to add that his friends had
    gone "travelling" and asked that I hear his evidence which I did.

12. In the absence of a representative, I assisted the  appellant  to  give
    evidence. The appellant mostly repeated what he had said at  the  First
    tier Tribunal. He described himself as a businessman and said  that  he
    has been coming and going from Ghana to the United Kingdom since  1986.
    He said he last entered the UK in 1993 as a visitor. He lost his money.
    He then needed to work and while he was working the Immigration Service
    people came and told him that he could not work in the  UK  as  he  had
    come as a visitor. They took his passport and told him  that  he  would
    hear from them. He said he engaged a lawyer who he  said  had  "bailed"
    him. He did not say that he was arrested. The appellant went on to  say
    that the lawyer had then fallen ill and he did not hear from him again.
    He then found another lawyer and he was told to report to Beckett House
    once a week which he did.

13. The appellant further said that he could not now return to Ghana as  he
    has no money and no papers. He said he is in touch with  his  wife  and
    children. He gave the ages of his five children as 40, 36, 33,  29  and
    24. He said that all his children were settled except the last one  who
    was still engaged in education. He said  that  his  wife  operates  his
    shop, selling car spare parts. He went on to say that he sends money to
    his wife but he has not kept "many receipts"

14. The appellant went on to say that if he is given a  passport  and  some
    money he would go back to Ghana. He said that his intention  to  return
    to Ghana had been defeated by the Immigration Service as they took  his
    passport.

15. In cross - examination the appellant said that his  passport  had  been
    taken away by the Immigration Service in June or July in 1993.  He  was
    "bailed" by assistance from a lawyer but he was not  given  any  papers
    and was told that he would hear from the Home Office directly.

16. He went on to say that he later on discovered that his lawyer had  gone
    to Ghana. He said that he kept looking for him for three years but  did
    not complain to anyone about this lawyer. He said he  did  not  at  the
    time have any money to engage another lawyer. He said  he  had  at  the
    time been working in a bread factory where he remained employed for two
    years. He did not give the name or address of the factory. He  said  he
    does casual work. On being asked about his passport,  he  said  he  had
    obtained it from the Ghana High Commission in 2004. He said it was easy
    to get it.

17. The appellant agreed that he had not been  in  contact  with  the  Home
    Office from 1993 to 2012. He said Poku and he go to Church together. He
    went on to say that he had not  been  sent  any  "Legacy  Papers".  The
    appellant then said that in 2013 he  was  living  with  his  sister  in
    London. His sister and brother had gone to Holland from where they  had
    come and it was about six months ago that they had gone. When asked  if
    he had asked them to attend the appeal hearings or provide  support  in
    some other way, the appellant said he had not.  That  was  the  end  of
    cross-examination. I asked the appellant if he had anything further  to
    say, he said he did not.

18. I then heard submissions from Mr Jarvis who described  the  appellant's
    evidence completely lacking in credibility. He said the story given  by
    the appellant was also totally implausible in that  for  years  he  had
    done nothing to raise the matter of passport with the Home  Office.  Mr
    Jarvis described  the  appellant's  evidence  as  "made  up"  and  drew
    attention to the total lack of any corroborative evidence to  back  any
    of it. He said the appellant had  wasted  the  further  opportunity  to
    prove his claim but had failed to do so.

19. Mr Jarvis commented on the letters from the appellant's friends Rev  Dr
    Lamasa Adams, Minister in charge at Elim Pentecostal  Church.  He  said
    the letter was not worthy of  much  weight  as  the  Reverend  had  not
    offered himself as  a  witness  to  give  oral  evidence.  Further  the
    contents of the letter did not say that the  Reverend  knows  that  the
    appellant has lived in the UK continuously since May 1996. Letter  from
    Mabel Agyeman, said Mr Jarvis does not confirm that as members  of  the
    same church she can confirm that he  has  been  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom continuously since 1997 when she first got to  know  him.  With
    regard to letter dated 3 March 2014 from Stephen Adubofuor,  Mr  Jarvis
    said that the same criticisms applied to the contents of this letter as
    the writer had not given oral evidence. Mr Jarvis drew my attention  to
    the "Integrity Search Detailed Report prepared by the respondent on  15
    January 2014. Mr Jarvis relied on the report. Mr Jarvis said  that  the
    appeal had remained stagnant for a long  time  and  asked  that  it  be
    dismissed.

20. I asked the appellant if he wanted to say  anything  in  reply  to  the
    arguments advanced by Mr Jarvis. He said there was nothing  further  to
    say.

21. At the conclusion of the hearing I formally reserved my decision  which
    I now give with reasons.

22. Reminding myself that the  standard  to  which  the  appellant  has  to
    discharge  the  burden  of  proof  is  no  higher  then  a  balance  of
    probabilities, I have concluded that the claim of  the  appellant  must
    fail. Besides his oral evidence, most of which has been  unsatisfactory
    anyway, the appellant has failed to  produce  any  cogent  evidence  to
    support his claim that he has lived in the United Kingdom  continuously
    since  1993.  At  the  two  hearings  before  me,  the   appellant   as
    unrepresented appellant received counselling from me as to what and how
    he could prove his claim. Whilst giving margin for his age and  perhaps
    weak power of understanding, I must not ignore  that  his  failure  has
    been total in producing credible evidence to advance his claim of  long
    residence to satisfy the requirements of the relevant rule. I note that
    the respondent accepts that the
    Appellant has been living in the UK continuously since 2007, I have  no
    hesitation in endorsing the respondent's reasons for not accepting that
    he has lived as such since 1993 as he has  claimed.  I  have  read  the
    reasons given by the respondent in support of her  decision  to  refuse
    the application under paragraph  276B  (i)  (a)  and  (i)  (B)  of  the
    Immigration Rules (b) and I find the reasons are fact based and correct
    in law.


20   In his evidence the appellant has failed to  engage  with  any  of  the
    valid points  made  by  the  respondent.  His  explanations  about  his
    passport having been taken by the Immigration Service in 1993  and  his
    lawyer then disappearing are more akin to fairy tales rather than  what
    happens in real life or  what  is  reasonable  to  have  happened.  The
    appellant claims that he was "bailed" at  the  time  his  passport  was
    seized or soon thereafter but there is not a single  paper  to  confirm
    his assertion. Although corroborative  evidence  is  not  required  but
    where it is reasonable to expect such evidence, its absence has  to  be
    noted. Similarly, claiming that he has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since 1996, it is not unreasonable to expect the appellant to have been
    more detailed in his history of the places that he stayed at during all
    these years.

21.  I watched the appellant with particular interest as he  gave  his  oral
    evidence.  I  am  afraid  I  noticed  that  he  was  evasive  and  most
    unimpressive as a witness. I did not find him credible.   I  found  the
    points made by Mr Jarvis in his submissions as valid  and  powerful.  I
    further find that the reasons given  by  the  respondent  in  rejecting
    evidence relating to the appellant's claimed  continuous  residence  in
    the United Kingdom before 2007 are perfectly sound.

22.  As there appears to be common ground that the appellant has lived  here
    continuously since 2007, I have given consideration to his claim  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR and I accept and endorse the reasons given by the
    respondent for rejecting the claim. He has no family life in the UK and
    his private  life  is  not  such  as  to  make  his  removal  to  Ghana
    disproportionate.

23.  In the circumstances and for the reasons given above,  I  dismiss  this
    appeal on all grounds.




FEE AWARD
Appeal having been dismissed there can be no award.

ANONYMITY DIRECTION
None has been sought and circumstances of the case do not warrant such
direction.



Judge Drabu
Judge of the First Tier Tribunal sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper
Tribunal.
22 July 2014

