
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09691/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 21st November 2016               |On: 22nd November 2016               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                Muhammad [N]
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Plowright, Counsel instructed by Paul John & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan date  of  birth  27th  February
    1979.  He appeals  with  permission  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Talbot) to dismiss his appeal  against  a  decision  to
    refuse to vary his leave and to remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to s47 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.



    Background and Matters in Issue

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in November 2011 with leave
    to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  His  leave  was  still
    valid when on the 31st December 2014 he made an application to vary his
    leave on human rights grounds. The basis of this  application  was  set
    out in a letter from his representatives dated 31st December  2014.  He
    faced a financial burden returning to Pakistan and it  would  interrupt
    his preparations for further studies. He  had  an  established  private
    life in the United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent unsurprisingly refused this application  which  entirely
    failed to identify what possible obstacles the Appellant might face  in
    returning to Pakistan, and indeed to  explain  what  protected  Article
    8(1) he had established in the three years he had spent in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. The Appellant appealed  and  requested  an  oral  hearing.  Notices  of
    hearing were sent out but on the appointed day, the  14th  March  2016,
    there was no appearance from the Appellant or his  representative.  The
    court clerk telephoned Paul John  &  Co  and  were  informed  that  the
    Appellant would like the matter resolved on the papers.

 5. Judge Talbot's written decision was promulgated on the 31st March 2016.
     The determination notes the case put in the solicitor's letter of  the
    31st  December  2014  (as  summarised  above).  At  paragraph   8   the
    determination reads "there is no evidence whatever before  me  to  show
    that he meets the requirements for leave to remain...". The appeal  was
    thereby dismissed.

 6. The Appellant now appeals on the grounds that the  Tribunal  failed  to
    take material evidence into account. The evidence in question  consists
    of two witness statements. One is from the  Appellant  himself  and  is
    dated the 29th September 2015. He asserts at paragraph 1 that he is the
    "legitimate spouse" of an EEA national. At paragraph 3 he explains that
    in fact he is not married, but intends to be so, and that  his  partner
    is Portuguese national Mr Rinkesh [T]. He asks the Tribunal to consider
    that his country of origin does not recognise same  sex  marriage.  The
    second statement is from Mr [T]. He writes that he  met  the  Appellant
    using an online dating app and that he found  him  to  be  dashing  and
    interesting and that he has fallen in love. They are intending  to  get
    married.   The Appellant submits  that  it  is  not  clear  from  Judge
    Talbot's determination whether he took those statements into account.

 7. The Respondent opposes the appeal a) as it was not clear whether or not
    those statements had in fact been served and b)  because  even  if  the
    Judge had taken them into account they could not possibly have  led  to
    the appeal being allowed.

    My Findings

 8. The file before me contains a Memorandum addressed to Judge Talbot from
    admin staff at Taylor House. It is dated the 21st March 2016 and  reads
    "please find attached correspondence for the above appeal. According to
    our records the file is in your possession. I would be grateful if  you
    could place  this  correspondence  on  file".   The  correspondence  in
    question is a letter from Paul John & Co Solicitors  dated  11th  March
    2016 marked 'urgent' requesting that the appeal is  determined  on  the
    papers; attached are the two witness statements.  It is not clear  from
    the file whether this Memorandum reached Judge Talbot before  he  wrote
    his determination, or whether it was placed on the file  after  it  was
    promulgated. What is  clear  is  that  Paul  John  &  Co  posted  those
    documents five days before the hearing, and that they are not reflected
    in the determination.  Be it an omission on the part of the  Judge,  or
    an administrative failing, that evidence was not addressed.

 9. I am entirely unsatisfied that this error is in any way  material.  The
    statements themselves were very brief and were drafted in inconsistent,
    and in places un-intelligible terms.   The Appellant is clearly not the
    "legitimate spouse" of an EEA  national  since  no  marriage  or  civil
    partnership has taken place.   They do not even  appear  to  be  living
    together. No  supporting  evidence  was  submitted,  and  I  reject  Mr
    Plowright's suggestion that the Judge should have  had  regard  to  the
    country background material in the public domain:  the  Judge  was  not
    referred to any of this material, nor was it put before  him.    It  is
    inconceivable that a properly directed Tribunal could have allowed  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds based on the bare assertions made in  these
    statements.  At their highest they showed  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    Portuguese boyfriend whom he had been seeing  for  less  than  a  year.
    There was no evidence that the Appellant's claimed relationship with Mr
    [T] would present him with any obstacles in returning to Pakistan,  nor
    that it would be a disproportionate interference with his private  life
    to remain

10. I note that the Appellant's solicitors have now seen fit, at this stage
    in the proceedings, to submit a large bundle of new  evidence  relating
    to the Appellant's sexuality, his private life in  the  United  Kingdom
    and the impact upon him of return to Pakistan. None of that evidence is
    relevant to whether Judge Talbot erred in law. If the Appellant  wishes
    to make a fresh claim to the Respondent on the basis of  this  evidence
    that is a matter for him.

    Decisions

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.

12. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and on the facts  I  see
    no reason to do so.




                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                 21st November 2016
