
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/09926/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On July 22, 2015                     |On July 23, 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                              MR MUHIBUR RAHMAN
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Islam, Counsel.
Respondent  Mr Walker (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Bangladesh.  On  January  21,  2014  the
    appellant applied for an extension of his discretionary leave that  had
    been granted to him on February 16, 2012  and  which  was  valid  until
    February 18, 2014.

 2. The respondent considered the  matter  under  the  amended  Immigration
    Rules and treated his application, lodged on January 21,  2014,  as  an
    application to remain in the United Kingdom on the grounds  of  private
    life.

 3. The respondent refused that application on February  13,  2014  on  the
    grounds he did not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE HC 395
    and there were  no  exceptional  circumstances  meriting  consideration
    outside of the Immigration Rules. A decision to  remove  him  was  also
    taken under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act
    2006.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision on February 20, 2014 under section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. The matter came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Newberry  on
    September 8, 2014 and in a decision promulgated on February 5, 2015 the
    Tribunal upheld the refusal and dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 6. The appellant applied for permission to appeal  on  February  16,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had erred. Permission to appeal  was  initially
    refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchinson  on  March
    26, 2015 but following renewed grounds,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede
    granted permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  it  was  arguable  the
    Tribunal had failed to  have  regard  to  the  appellant's  immigration
    history including his long residence and subsequent  grant  of  limited
    leave.

 7. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 8. At the commencement of the hearing Mr  Walker  and  Mr  Islam  drew  my
    attention to the appellant's bundle that have  been  submitted  to  the
    Tribunal when the matter was originally heard.  Contained  within  that
    bundle was a copy of the endorsement contained within  the  appellant's
    passport and this endorsement clearly referred to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had been given discretionary leave.

 9. My attention was also drawn to page 23 of the appellant's bundle  which
    set out the transitional arrangements that applied in  cases  where  an
    applicant had been  granted  discretionary  leave  before  the  amended
    Immigration Rules came into force on July 9, 2012.

10. The respondent's own  guidance  confirmed  that  anyone  who  had  been
    granted leave under the discretionary leave policy in force at the time
    (prior to July 9, 2012) would normally continue to be dealt with  under
    that policy. On the basis there was no adverse criminality finding  and
    the  circumstances  prevailing  at  the  time  of  the  original  grant
    continued to apply, a period of three years discretionary leave  should
    normally be granted.

11. The only reason a further period of three  years  leave  would  not  be
    granted is where there were circumstances that warranted departure.

12. Both Mr Walker and Mr Islam agreed there no such circumstances  existed
    and  both  further  agreed  that  this  application  should  have  been
    considered under the transitional provisions.

13. Mr Walker accepted that there had been an error made not  only  by  the
    respondent caseworker but also by the Tribunal.  The  appellant  should
    have been granted a further period of  discretionary  leave  under  the
    transitional arrangements and he did not object to the setting aside of
    the original decision.

    DECISION

14. There was a material error.  I set aside the original  decision  and  I
    remake the decision and allow the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and extend the appellant's discretionary leave.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I direct the respondent do refund the appellant's court fees.  The  relevant
evidence had been  placed  before  her  at  the  time  the  application  was
submitted.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
