

                                          [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/09230/2014


                                       THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination promulgated|
|On August 26, 2014              |On August 27, 2014       |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                                DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                     Between

                                    MR muhammad naeem

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not in attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr Deller (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, born September 26, 1991, is a citizen  of  Pakistan.  He
    entered the United Kingdom on January 11,  2011  with  leave  to  enter
    until April 30, 2012 as a student. On  June  27,  2012  his  leave  was
    extended as a Tier 4  General  student  until  November  30,  2013.  On
    November 25, 2013 he applied to vary his leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. The respondent refused his application and made a  decision  to  remove
    him under section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
    2006 on February 4, 2014.

 3. On February 17, 2014 the appellant appealed under Section 82(1) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and he argued:

     a. The respondent acted unfairly by failing to give him  a  chance  to
        submit a CAS statement when the fault for him not  having  one  was
        not his.


     b. The respondent failed to take into account the appellant's  private
        life based on the fact he had been studying here for sometime.

     c. He was a genuine student.

 4. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Hindson
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on May 15, 2014 as a paper case
    and in a determination promulgated on May 16,  2014  he  dismissed  the
    appeal finding the appellant had  failed  to  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules and there was nothing exceptional about the  facts  of  the  case
    that would lead to an unjustifiable harsh  result  that  justified  him
    considering the case outside of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The appellant appealed that decision on May  27,  2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Davies  on  June
    23, 2014 who found it arguable the FtTJ may have erred  by  failing  to
    mention either the burden or standard of proof.

 6. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response dated July 11,  2014  in  which
    she argued the decision was reasonable and open to the FtTJ.

 7. The appellant did not attend the hearing  although  he  had  asked  the
    Tribunal to deal with his appeal on the papers.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 8. The appellant argued:


     a. He was a law abiding student who had taken an English test but  was
        awaiting the result that was due to be announced in December 2013.


     b. He was advised  by  his  college  that  if  he  applied  without  a
        certificate the UKBA would request his CAS and at  that  stage  the
        college said they would issue one.

     c. He wanted the UKBA to allow him time to submit his CAS.

 9. Mr Deller opposed the application. He submitted that although the  FtTJ
    did not refer to the burden or standard of proof there was  nothing  in
    the determination that suggested the FtTJ had erred in his approach  to
    the appellant's appeal. He further argued that  evidential  flexibility
    did not apply because the appellant did not have a document. As regards
    common law duty of fairness it was not the respondent's  duty  to  tell
    the appellant to sort out  his  English  language  certificate  and  to
    obtain his CAS in good time. There  was  nothing  more  the  respondent
    could have done to assist the appellant. There was no error in law.


10. I reserved my decision on the error of law.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT


11. The FtTJ considered this appeal on the papers. This was a points  based
    application by the appellant to extend his stay as a Tier  4  (General)
    Student and in order to  succeed  the  appellant  had  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 245 ZX HC 395.

12. Importantly, as a  points  based  application  the  appeal  had  to  be
    considered having regard to Section  85A  of  the  2002  Act  and  this
    section restricted the appeal to the position as it was at the date  of
    application.

13. At that date the appellant did not have his CAS.  His  application  was
    doomed  to  failure  because  this  is  a  mandatory  requirement.  The
    respondent could not have resolved this issue because the document  was
    not in existence and therefore even if the respondent  had  written  to
    the appellant the position would have been the same.

14. Permission to appeal was given albeit not specifically on  the  grounds
    argued in the grounds of  appeal.  Judge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Davies gave permission because the FtTJ had made no  reference  to  the
    burden or standard of proof.

15. I am satisfied no error is shown on  this  issue.  The  FtTJ  correctly
    considered the Immigration Rules and rejected the  appeal  because  the
    appellant did not have a CAS. The burden of proof was on the  appellant
    and there is nothing in the determination that would suggest an error.

16. The grounds of appeal also raised the following:

     a. Whether the FtTJ treated the appellant fairly.
     b. If he did not how this impacted on his  proportionality  assessment
        for article 8.
     c. Did the FtTJ wrongly deal with the case in light of  the  decisions
        in Naved (Student-fairness-notice of points) [2012] UKUT 12  (IAC),
        Thakur (PBS decision-common law fairness)  Bangladesh  [2011]  UKUT
        00151 (IAC) and  Patel  (revocation  of  sponsor  licence-fairness)
        India [2011] UKUT 00211.


17. In assessing the appellant's original  appeal  the  FtTJ  recorded  the
    following:


     a. He noted the grounds of appeal including the section "issue  before
        the learned immigration judge".


     b. The appellant's submission that  fairness  demands  the  respondent
        should have approached the appellant or his sponsor to address  the
        reason for refusal.

     c. The respondent failed to consider his article 8 rights.

     d. The appellant did not provide the CAS and the position remained the
        same at the date of hearing.

     e. Evidential flexibility did not apply in this appeal.

     f. No evidence of private life outside of his studies was adduced.

     g. The decision of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) applied in any  event
        and there was no reason to consider  this  appeal  outside  of  the
        Rules.

18. Dealing with the case law raised before the FtTj I  am  satisfied  that
    none of these decisions would have assisted the appellant.

19. The decision of Thakur involved the application of a policy  which  was
    contained in the respondent's policy guidance. There was nothing in the
    guidance  or  any  other  document  that  required  the  respondent  to
    investigate why the appellant did not have a CAS.

20. The decision of Naved also  does  not  assist  the  appellant  as  this
    concerned Section 85A. The appellant  had  not  sought  to  adduce  any
    additional evidence so I fail to see how or  why  this  decision  would
    have assisted the appellant in his appeal.

21. The decision of Patel  also  concerned  common  law  fairness  but  the
    appellant how or why the respondent acted unfairly. The onus was on the
    appellant to pass his English test in good time to meet the  Rules.  He
    failed to do so and regardless of what the college may or may not  have
    told him the simple fact remains is the appellant  had  neither  passed
    his test nor obtained a CAS.  The  Immigration  Rules  applied  to  his
    application and he did not meet them.

22. There is no unfairness by the respondent and this ground of  appeal  is
    without merit.

23. In paragraph [57] of Patel the Supreme Court held-

        "It is important to remember  that  article  8  is  not  a  general
        dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the  Secretary  of
        State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
        which may be unrelated to any protected human right. The merits  of
        a decision not to depart from  the  rules  are  not  reviewable  on
        appeal: section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call  in
        Pankina for 'common sense' in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
        graduates who have been studying in  the  UK  for  some  years  ...
        However, such considerations do not by themselves  provide  grounds
        of appeal under article 8,  which  is  concerned  with  private  or
        family life, not education as such. The opportunity for a promising
        student to complete his course in this country,  however  desirable
        in general terms, is not in itself a right protected under  article
        8."

24. The decision of Nasim and others  (Article  8)  [2014]  UKUT  25  (IAC)
    considered a variety of possible article 8 scenarios including  article
    8 in the context of work and studies. At paragraph [12]  of  Nasim  the
    Court considered the above paragraph and stated-


         "...We regard the passage, however, as having a  wider  import,  in
         seeking to re-focus attention upon the core purposes of Article 8."









25. The Court continued at paragraph [20] in Nasim-


         "We therefore agree with Mr Jarvis that [57] of Patel and Others is
         a significant  exhortation  from  the  Supreme  Court  to  re-focus
         attention  on  the  nature  and  purpose  of  Article  8  and,   in
         particular, to recognise its limited utility to an individual where
         one has moved along the continuum, from that Article's core area of
         operation towards what might be described as  its  fuzzy  penumbra.
         The limitation arises, both from what will at that  point  normally
         be  the  tangential  effect  on  the  individual  of  the  proposed
         interference and from the fact that, unless  there  are  particular
         reasons to reduce the  public  interest  of  enforcing  immigration
         controls, that interest will consequently prevail in  striking  the
         proportionality balance (even assuming that stage is reached)."


26. Turning to the facts of this  appeal  whilst  I  accept  the  appellant
    wished to complete his studies he had not passed the relevant  test  or
    obtained a CAS. He had no right to apply for an extension when he did.

27. The court made clear in Patel that merely being  good  student  is  not
    sufficient and the appellant cannot actually even argue that as he  had
    not passed his test or obtained his CAS.

28. The appellant was also unable  to  satisfy  paragraph  276ADE  HC  395.
    Following the decision Shahzad [2014] UKUT 85 I am satisfied there  are
    no compelling reasons that would justify allowing this  appeal  outside
    of the Rules. In FK and OK (Botswana) [2013] EWCA  Civ  238  the  Court
    found in paragraph [11]-

         "That the individuals concerned in the present case are law-abiding
         (other than in respect of immigration controls)  does  not  detract
         from the fact  that  the  maintenance  of  a  generally  applicable
         immigration policy is, albeit indirectly, a legitimate aim for  the
         purposes of article 8.2."

29.  I am also satisfied there was no reason for the FtTJ to  consider  his
    application to remain  outside  of  the  Rules.  The  Rules  provide  a
    complete code for dealing with the Tier 4 PBS applications. If  he  met
    the Rules his stay would be extended. He did not so his application was
    refused. The fact he failed  to  pass  his  exam  in  time  is  not  an
    exceptional or compellable circumstance. The appellant  is  seeking  to
    use article 8, outside of the Rules, to address the fact he  failed  to
    meet them. The FtTJ properly reminded himself of the test and I find no
    fault in her approach.


    DECISION


30. There is no material error of law and I uphold the original decision.

31. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                                              Dated:







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as the appeal failed.


Signed:                                                       Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
