
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09291/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Oral determination given following Hearing    |On 15th Aug 2014             |
|On 12 August 2014                             |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             kelvin okyere darku

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Balroop, Counsel instructed by Shan & Co
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State, however I refer to the parties
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.  Thus the appellant  is  a
    citizen of Ghana born on 7 February 1979.  On 17 September 2013 he made
    an application for a residence card on  the  basis  of  marriage  to  a
    German  national,  Miss  Juliette  Koch-Manzan.  That  application  was
    refused in a decision dated 28 January 2014.  The appeal  against  that
    decision came before First-tier Tribunal Camp on 9 May 2014 whereby  he
    allowed the appeal.

 2. The decision in relation to the refusal to issue a residence  card  was
    on two bases being alternatives to each other.  The first is  that  the
    appellant had  failed  to  produce  a  valid  marriage  certificate  as
    evidence that he is related to the  EEA  national.   Secondly,  in  the
    alternative, it was said that in any case he had  failed  to  establish
    that he was in a durable relationship within the meaning of  Regulation
    8 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.   Being
    in a durable relationship would have allowed the appellant a  residence
    card provided he qualified, he being an extended family  member.   That
    would be subject to the residual discretion of the Secretary  of  State
    under the EEA Regulations.

 3. In allowing the appeal the  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  had
    contracted a valid proxy marriage with the sponsor.  The simple  ground
    of appeal before me today argues that the judge  was  not  entitled  to
    come to that view having  regard  to  the  decision  in  Kareem  (Proxy
    marriages - EU law)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  24.   The  effect  of  that
    decision is that in summary, in order to  establish  entitlement  to  a
    residence card on the basis of a proxy marriage, being marriage  to  an
    EEA national, the appellant must establish that the marriage  is  valid
    in the state from which the sponsor or spouse comes, in this case  that
    is Germany.

 4. Mr Balroop on behalf of the appellant told me that the case  of  Kareem
    was referred to before the First-tier Tribunal and Mr Avery agrees that
    that was so.   In  those  circumstances  it  does  seem  to  me  to  be
    surprising that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not refer  to  it  in
    the determination or indeed in the manuscript record of proceedings.  I
    am satisfied that the matter was canvassed before him and it  ought  to
    have been reflected in his determination.  In either  case  whether  by
    not referring to it or indeed having considered it  but  not  made  any
    conclusion in relation to it, it is plain that there was  an  error  of
    law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal.  The  case  of  Kareem  was
    explained in the decision in  TA  &  Others  (Kareem  explained)  Ghana
    [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC).  The essence of the decision in  TA  &  Others
    was that following the decision in Kareem the determination of  whether
    there is a martial relationship for the purposes of the EEA Regulations
    must always be examined in accordance with the laws of the member state
    from which the union citizen obtained nationality.

 5. Mr Balroop realistically was unable to make any persuasive  submissions
    in relation to the point raised on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State
    except to say that the matter was not raised in the refusal letter.  He
    was right to say that but that does not absolve the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge from considering a matter that was of significance in determining
    the validity of the marriage.  The fact that  the  case  was  canvassed
    before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  reinforces  that  point.   I  am
    satisfied in these circumstances that there was an error of law in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require the decision  to
    be set aside.  I canvassed with the parties the question  of  the  next
    steps in the progress of this appeal.

 6.  An  issue  that  was  left  unresolved  by  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    unsurprisingly in the light of  his  conclusions  was  the  alternative
    proposition that the parties are in a durable relationship  within  the
    meaning of the EEA Regulations.  Ultimately both parties agreed that it
    was and is appropriate for that matter to be determined by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, being a matter that  has  been  left  untouched  by  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  It seems  to  me  that
    that is a factual issue  which  is  best  resolved  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and in accordance with the Practice Statement at paragraph 6.2
    this appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the question  of
    durable relationship to be assessed.

 7. Mr Avery did not disagree with my tentative suggestion that if  in  the
    meantime the appellant is able to produce evidence that the marriage is
    valid in Germany that that evidence could be advanced before the First-
    tier Tribunal in the re-making of the decision.  To that  effect  there
    is a letter dated 6 August 2014 from the appellant's solicitors setting
    out in summary the steps that have been taken to confirm  the  validity
    of the marriage through the German Embassy in the first  instance.   Mr
    Balroop informs me as does the letter that there is an  appointment  in
    September, I think at the  German  Embassy  for  these  matters  to  be
    considered further.  It does seem to me  to  be  appropriate  in  those
    circumstances for the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal to take  place
    at a date which allows the formalities in that regard to be  completed.



                                 DIRECTIONS

(1)  This appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  consideration
    by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Camp.

(2)  The hearing is to consider the issue of whether the appellant  and  the
    sponsor are in a durable relationship.

(3)  Subject to any submissions by either  party  there  is  no  reason  why
    evidence of the validity of the marriage if it is obtained in time  for
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal cannot  be  put  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge sufficient to establish that the marriage  is
    valid within German law.







Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
