
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09862/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd June 2016                             |On 26 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                            Muhammad Usman Anjum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Hashmi, instructed by Mamoon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  19th  July  1984.   He
    appeals, with permission,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Nixon) who, in a determination promulgated on 30th November 2015
    dismissed his appeal under the EEA Regulations.  No request was made on
    behalf of the Appellant for anonymity nor are there  any  grounds  that
    would support such a direction.

 2. The Appellant's immigration history can be summarised as follows.   The
    Appellant entered the United Kingdom with valid entry  clearance  valid
    from 20th May 2010 expiring on 23rd September 2011.  On 6th  September
    of that year, he gave notice to the  Respondent  that  he  was  to  get
    married.  However it appears that he did not  marry  his  EEA  partner.
    There had been an  application  made  on  22nd  September  2011  for  a
    residence card as a partner of an EEA national.  This  was  refused  on
    12th December 2011.  The grounds for refusing the application was  that
    the Appellant had failed to prove that  his  partner  was  a  qualified
    person nor  was there satisfactory documentary  evidence  that  he  had
    been in a durable relationship with his  partner.   That  decision  was
    appealed by the Appellant and which resulted in  the  determination  of
    Judge O'Garro promulgated on 1st March 2012 by  which  his  application
    was dismissed.  The Appellant applied for  permission  to  appeal  that
    decision and permission was granted on 3rd April 2012.   This  resulted
    in a further hearing before the Upper Tribunal  on  15th  August  2012.
    The Upper Tribunal found errors of law in the decision of Judge O'Garro
    and set aside the decision but remade the decision  by  dismissing  the
    appeal of the Appellant and his partner.

 3. The present application was made on 19th September 2014 for a residence
    card as an unmarried partner of an EEA national who had been exercising
    her treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  The application  was  refused
    on 24th February 2015.  The reasons for refusing that  application  was
    summarised by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs  [8]  to  [10],  in
    essence, the Secretary of  State  considered  that  the  Appellant  had
    entered into a marriage of convenience in order to remain  in  the  UK.
    It was considered that there were  discrepancies  in  their  respective
    interviews and that the marriage was a Muslim  ceremony  and  therefore
    was not valid in English law.  The Secretary of State  also  considered
    that there had been insufficient evidence to demonstrate that they were
    in a durable relationship.  The Secretary of State also relied  on  the
    previous determination of Judge O'Garro referred to earlier.

 4. The Appellant appealed that decision and it came before the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 17th November 2015.  The conclusions are set  out  by  the
    judge at paragraphs [11] to [17].  The judge found that  the  Secretary
    of State had not satisfied the evidential burden to justify that  there
    was a reasonable suspicion that this was a  "marriage  of  convenience"
    applying Papajorgji (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of  convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).  The judge went on to find at  [13]  that  the
    marriage was not valid and at  paragraphs  [14]  to  [16]  reached  the
    conclusion that it had not been demonstrated that this  was  a  genuine
    relationship or that it was a "durable relationship".  Thus  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal.

 5. The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error on a point  of
    law.  Permission was granted by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  12th  May
    2016.

 6. I have heard submissions from both advocates, which have been noted  in
    my Record of Proceedings and where relevant are  incorporated  into  my
    findings.

 7. After having considered the Grounds of Appeal advanced on behalf of the
    Appellant and the oral arguments of the advocates, I am satisfied  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point law.  I shall set out my  reasons  for  reaching  that
    decision.

 8. The judge began the determination at [11] by stating that:-

         "There is only one issue for me to determine, whether  or  not  the
         marriage between the Appellant and the EEA national  is  a  genuine
         marriage of substance or one of convenience."

 9. The judge then went on to apply the decision of Papajorgji  (as  cited)
    and at [12] reached the conclusion as follows:-

         "12. I find that the Respondent  had  not  justified  a  reasonable
             suspicion in this case.  As stated in the refusal letter,  the
             only evidence relied upon by  the  Respondent  to  reach  that
             suspicion is the supposed discrepancies between the couple  in
             interview.  I have been provided with  a  transcript  of  that
             interview and I find that there  are  no  differences  of  any
             substance in lengthy interviews.  I find that there  are  some
             minor differences but nothing significant certainly nothing to
             justify a suspicion that the marriage is one  of  convenience.
             I find that these answers alone  go  nowhere  near  finding  a
             reasonable suspicion of a marriage of convenience."

10. However I observe that  the  parties  were  not  married  as  no  valid
    marriage had taken place as the parties had only undergone  an  Islamic
    marriage.  It must therefore follow that the  judge  in  reaching  that
    finding and by reference to the replies in their respective interviews,
    had found that there had been no real differences in the accounts given
    by each of them.  Whilst  the  grounds  make  reference  to  the  judge
    finding no discrepancies in the interview, the judge actually  referred
    to "minor  discrepancies".   However  it  is  plain  from  reading  the
    determination that the judge, having considered the  replies  given  by
    each of the parties after being subjected to  lengthy  interviews,  did
    not find there to be any or any significant or material differences  in
    the replies given by each of them to the questions asked.

11.  The questions  asked  by  the  interviewer  to  each  of  the  parties
    consisted of questions designed to test  whether  this  was  a  genuine
    relationship.  Those questions included how they met, their first date,
    how the proposal  of  marriage  was  made,  the  circumstances  of  the
    marriage, and where they  lived  and  other  relevant  questions.   The
    judge's findings at [12] were to the effect that those  questions  when
    analysed did not demonstrate that there was any significant or material
    differences in the replies given by each of them independently  of  the
    other.  However, the judge went on to make a contrary finding  at  [17]
    that they had not shown that they were in a "durable relationship"  and
    in particular that "there was very little evidence to  show  that  they
    had entered into a relationship ..." (see paragraph [13]).    Mr  Tufan
    submitted that  this appeared to be confusing and  perplexing  but  the
    issue was whether it was material.  He submitted that the finding  made
    by the judge as to whether it was a  marriage  of  convenience  was  in
    essence an irrelevant paragraph and could  be  ignored.   He  therefore
    submitted that the judge's findings thereafter as to the genuineness of
    the marriage was sufficient to address the issue of whether there was a
    durable relationship.  He referred to  the  findings  made  as  to  the
    documents and that the judge had considered what could be described  as
    a poor immigration history at [16] and that the conclusion to the judge
    was not an irrational one but was open to him to make.

12. I cannot accept the submission that the finding made at paragraph  [11]
    was  one  that  had  no  relevance  to  the  findings  that  were  made
    thereafter.  The findings that were made at paragraphs  [11]  and  [12]
    are relevant to the issue of the genuineness of  the  relationship  and
    thus the durability  of  the  relationship  as  the  questions  in  the
    interview were by their very nature relevant in establishing the nature
    of that relationship.  The  judge's  findings,  after  considering  the
    replies in the interview reached the  conclusion  that  there  were  no
    significant or material differences in  the  replies  relating  to  the
    important details of the  relationship.   However  the  judge  then  at
    paragraph [15] onwards went on to find the  opposite  by  reference  to
    answers in the interview.  Thus in  my  judgment,  those  findings  are
    contradictory and inconsistent.  Either the judge had found there  were
    significant discrepancies which went to the issue of the genuineness of
    the relationship as set out at paragraph [15] or that the Appellant and
    his  partner  had  given  consistent   evidence   relevant   to   their
    relationship at paragraph [12].

13. Furthermore, I accept the submission made by Miss Hashmi that the judge
    did not consider the oral evidence of the parties as to the genuineness
    or otherwise of their relationship.  There is no reference  within  the
    determination to the evidence given by either of the parties.  Whilst I
    would agree that it is not incumbent upon the judge to record  all  the
    evidence verbatim but the important and relevant aspects  of  the  oral
    evidence should be considered in any analysis in the findings of  fact.
    At paragraphs [14] to [16], there is no reference to the parties'  oral
    evidence concerning the relationship despite the finding made that  the
    judge had seen "no evidence of any affection"  and  at  paragraph  [15]
    that the judge made reference to the "absence of other evidence".

14. Furthermore whilst the judge considered  the  documentary  evidence  at
    paragraphs [14] and [15],  it  is  not  clear  from  the  determination
    whether the judge had considered all the documentary evidence that  was
    before the Tribunal.  The judge made reference  to  utility  bills  and
    council tax bills but Miss Hashmi made reference to a further  document
    (a water bill) which was in the joint names of the parties.  There  was
    also a TV licence in the Appellant's name [page 78] with  the  payments
    being made by the Appellant's partner from her own  bank  account  [see
    page 57].  I could find no copy document on the file  but  Miss  Hashmi
    submitted that the  document  was  on  her  file  and  was  a  relevant
    document.  It is not possible for me to determine whether or  not  that
    document was put before the Tribunal but there was  evidence  that  was
    capable  of  further  analysis  in  relation  to  the  genuineness   or
    durability of the relationship by way of  the  oral  evidence  and  the
    documentary evidence.

15. Furthermore Miss Hashmi made a further submission that  the  fact  that
    the parties live in a joint household with others did  not  necessarily
    preclude the Appellant and his partner being in a durable  relationship
    [see paragraph 5 of the grounds].  In this respect she  made  reference
    to the submission that the tenants have reached the decision  to  share
    the bills and that each party paid a separate bill and  are  such  that
    did not detract from the relationship.

16. In the light of the contradictory findings made by the judge as to  the
    core issue and there does not appear to be any assessment of  the  oral
    evidence given by the  parties  relating  to  the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship and the durability of it, I am satisfied that the  judge's
    decision involved the making of an error on a point of law.   I  cannot
    resolve the issue as to whether all the documents had  been  considered
    but for the reasons that I  have  set  out,  when  taken  together  the
    contradictory findings undermine the decision.   I  therefore  set  the
    decision aside with none of the findings of fact being preserved.

17. As to remaking the decision, Miss Hashmi submitted that as there was to
    be further evidence  to  be  relied  upon  including  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's partner's pregnancy that she invited the Tribunal to  remit
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. As this is a case which required an assessment of both the parties  and
    a consideration of all the documents, including  the  interview  notes,
    the Appellant's previous immigration history and the oral  evidence  of
    the parties, I was satisfied that the correct course is  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The decision is set aside with no findings of  fact
    being preserved.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a fresh hearing.

    Anonymity direction is not made.






Signed   Date 25/7/2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



