
IAC-AH-LR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09706/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated|
|On 16th December 2014                     |On 29th December 2014    |
|                                          |                         |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          Mr ishan pankajbhai patel
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Franco (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This was an appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge T R P Hollingworth promulgated on 18th September 2014,  following
    a hearing at Nottingham Magistrates' Court on 3rd September  2014.   In
    the determination, the judge dismissed the appeal of  Ishan  Pankajbhai
    Patel.  The  Appellant  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India, born on 28th July 1989, and  is  a
    male.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  5th
    February 2014 to curtail his leave to remain  in  the  UK  pursuant  to
    paragraph 323A(a)(ii)(1) of HC 395.  The reason was that the  Appellant
    had failed to commence studying with his Tier 4  educational  supplier.
    The purpose of the  Appellant's  residence  in  the  UK  as  a  student
    therefore failed (paragraph 4).

The Judge's Findings

 3. At the hearing before Judge T R P Hollingworth on 3rd  September  2014,
    "It was ultimately  conceded  that  there  was  no  need  to  call  the
    Appellant to give  evidence  and  I  could  simply  adopt  his  witness
    statement" (paragraph 7).  For the Respondent Home Office,  Mr  Brammal
    asked the judge to find that "because  the  Appellant  simply  did  not
    attend his course this justified the Respondent's decision pursuant  to
    paragraph 323" so that "there was no question of him being given  a  60
    day warning to obtain a new educational supplier" (paragraph  9).   For
    the Appellant himself, Mr Halligan, of Counsel, "helpfully conceded the
    Appellant could not comply with the appropriate Tier 4 Rules" but  that
    "he also conceded that the Appellant could have  done  more,"  although
    "he was anxious to continue as a student in  the  United  Kingdom  ..."
    (paragraph 10).  In the circumstances, the judge dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 4. The grounds of application state that inadequate reasons were given  by
    the judge for the dismissal of the appeal and the judge did not  assess
    the Appellant's evidence.

 5. On 7th November 2014 permission to appeal was granted on the basis that
    the judge made an arguable error of law in that there was a  discretion
    for the judge to exercise even if the Appellant did not meet  with  the
    Immigration Rules.

Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me on 16th December 2014, Mr Franco, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellant as his  Counsel,  submitted  that  it  was  the
    Appellant's case that  he  did  actually  start  his  course  with  his
    educational supplier.  This was clear from his witness  statement.   In
    this he states that,

         "I started attending classes and was regularly  attending  until  I
         requested the college orally and by letters to confirm  to  me  the
         status of the college as there were rumours among the students that
         the college's Tier 4 Sponsor Licence  was  either  revoked  or  was
         going to be revoked" (paragraph 3).

    He states that the college did  not  answer  his  enquiries.   He  also
    states that,

         "I also contacted the UK Border  Agency  on  the  enquiry  line  to
         confirm the status of the college but  unfortunately  I  could  not
         speak to the  person  on  the  general  enquiry  line.   I  started
         searching a  place  on  highly  trusted  institution  in  order  to
         continue my studies for  which  I  visited  various  colleges  ..."
         (paragraph 4).

 7. This statement, however, is unsigned and it is undated.  Mr Franco then
    referred me to the letters that the Appellant had written.

 8. There is a letter dated 25th February 2013 written  to  the  West  City
    College in Essex.  Here he writes,

         "I am hereby writing you to tell  me  the  exact  position  of  our
         college regarding UKBA Tier 4 sponsorship.  I would  like  to  know
         the status of Tier 4 sponsorship till I finish my course.  I  would
         not want to disturb my studies if  halfway  and  look  for  another
         college" (see page 10 of the bundle).

 9. This letter too is unsigned.

10. There is another letter dated 22nd April 2013 to the West City  College
    from the Appellant where he states,

         "I am writing regarding the letter I wrote  you  on  25th  February
         2013.  Till today I haven't  received  any  reply.   I  am  eagerly
         waiting for your reply to resume my studies, could you please  send
         me reply of my queries from the letter date mentioned  above"  (see
         page 11 of the bundle).

11. This letter also is unsigned.

12. There is no evidence, as I indicated to Mr Franco, that  these  letters
    were actually sent to the West City College.

13. Equally, there is no evidence that an enquiry was made on the telephone
    line with the Respondent Home Office as claimed.  Mr  Franco,  however,
    submitted that it was not clear how  the  Appellant's  Counsel  at  the
    hearing had at the time conceded that the Appellant could not meet  the
    requirements of the Rules.  The curtailment here was on the basis  that
    the Appellant did not start the course.  The evidence from the  witness
    statement appeared to show  that  he  had  begun  the  course  but  was
    concerned about the institution he was attending.

14. Mr Franco submitted that, "he was not attending because he  was  coming
    off, he thought, the highly trusted list".  Mr Franco submitted,  "here
    there are cogent reasons why he did not attend".

15. Hearing this, Mr Franco's submission was that  the  judge  should  have
    looked at the question of whether  the  Appellant  was  credible  as  a
    witness, as invited to do so by Counsel below at the hearing before the
    judge (see paragraph 14).  The failure of the judge to do so led to  an
    error of law.

16.  For his part, Mr Tarlow submitted that whilst it was  considered  that
    the Appellant could not meet the Rules, it was  difficult  to  see  how
    discretion  could  be  exercised  in  the  Appellant's  favour.   There
    actually was a  concession  by  the  Appellant's  Counsel,  rightly  or
    wrongly, and it was unnecessary for the judge to go any further.

17. In reply, Mr Franco submitted that there was a residual  discretion  to
    make a decision outside the Rules and not to enforce the  Rules,  which
    the judge could have exercised, and would have done so arguably, had he
    proceeded to consider whether the Appellant was credible or  not.   The
    failure to do so, was an error of law.

No Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law such that I should set
    aside the decision and remake the decision (see Section 12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007).  The starting point is what was the position before  the  judge.
    In this case, the judge gave ample time for matters to  be  ironed  out
    before the hearing began.  He is clear about this.  He states that, "at
    the hearing of the appeal after a  number  of  stand  downs  to  absorb
    appeal issues it was ultimately conceded that there was no need to call
    the Appellant ..." (paragraph 7).  Whether or not it was wise to do  so
    is not a matter that the judge was in a  position  to  entertain.   The
    Appellant was represented by his Counsel.  It is argued now  before  me
    that there was evidence in the Appellant's bundle showing that  he  had
    commenced his course, and was  having  cold  feet  for  fear  that  the
    trusted status of his college would be revoked by the  Respondent  Home
    Office.  Even if this is the case, this was not good a reason  for  him
    to stop attending the college for which he was given the Tier 4 status.
     The statements, such as they are, together with the letters, which are
    also unsigned and undated, could only be considered by  this  Tribunal,
    if there was a finding of error  of  law  in  the  first  place.   This
    Tribunal can not make that finding for the following reasons.

19. First, the judge records that, "it is formally conceded by  Counsel  on
    behalf of the Appellant that he can not meet the  requirements  of  the
    Tier 4 student based Rules on this occasion" (paragraph 12).   It  also
    appears to be conceded by  the  same  Counsel  that  "the  Respondent's
    decision to curtail leave on the basis the Appellant had not  commenced
    his course  or  attended  his  educational  supplier,  is  sustainable"
    (paragraph 13).  This is how the Appellant's  representative  chose  to
    put his case.  The judge can not be faulted for taking the case  as  it
    was put before him.  Second, and in any event, the argument that  there
    should be a finding that the Appellant was "nevertheless ... a credible
    witness" (paragraph 14) is to  no  avail  because  as  the  judge  also
    recorded at the end of his determination, "no human rights issues  were
    raised by either side", so that a discretion in the Appellant's favour,
    assuming that it existed at all, could not have  been  grafted  on  any
    particular right of the Appellant, which was not raised,  and  in  fact
    conceded before the judge.  All in all, therefore, the decision of  the
    judge in this case is careful, comprehensive, and  entirely  proper  in
    the circumstances of the case.

Decision

20. There is no error  of  law  in  the  original  judge's  decision.   The
    determination shall stand.

21. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        27th December 2014

