
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09937/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 January 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                rabia qayyum
                       (anonymity direction Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel instructed by JS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, who was  born  on  24  April  1986,  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan.  She is married to Aqueel Ahmed, who is  a  British  citizen.
    They initially met  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  March  2007  and  the
    Appellant returned here in 2009 to visit him.  She came into the United
    Kingdom again in August 2013, as a visitor, and  whilst  she  was  here
    they decided to marry.  This  marriage  was  not  approved  of  by  her
    parents but was by his parents.  They entered into an Islamic  marriage
    on 6 October 2013 and a civil marriage on 30 October  2013.   She  then
    applied on 21 November 2013 for leave to remain  as  the  spouse  of  a
    person settled in the United Kingdom. This application was  refused  on
    11 February  2014  as  she  had  been  a  visitor  when  she  made  the
    application and, therefore, did  not  have  the  necessary  immigration
    status to meet the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  to  the  Immigration
    Rules. In addition, she did not have evidence of a sufficient level  of
    English.  It was also asserted in the refusal that she did not meet the
    exceptions of EX.1 of Appendix FM.  She appealed on 25  February  2014.
    No grounds of appeal  were  submitted  at  that  point  but  they  were
    submitted subsequently.

2.   Her appeal was heard on 21  January  2015  but  the  decision  was  not
    promulgated until 24 July 2015.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hamilton
    dismissed her appeal and she appealed against this decision on 1 August
    2015.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer granted permission to appeal on
    2 November 2015 and the Secretary of State made a Rule 24 response on 2
    December 2015.

3.   The grounds of appeal are quite wide-ranging but today the  Appellant's
    Counsel has relied upon general assertions which you  can  derive  from
    the grounds.  She says that First-tier Tribunal Judge Hamilton erred in
    law by prioritising EX.1(b) of Appendix FM which relates to  a  genuine
    subsisting marriage with a spouse or partner over EX.1(a)  which  looks
    at genuine and subsisting relationships with a child.  In this case  at
    the date of decision the Appellant was the mother of a British child.

4.   The Home Office Presenting Officer argued that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had correctly directed himself to some of the law but  it  is  my
    view that it was the manner in which he addressed the totality  of  the
    evidence which was crucial. The fact that  he  firstly  looked  at  the
    Appellant's  situation  coloured  the  approach  when  considering  the
    situation of the  child  because  once  he  had  found  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant returning to Pakistan  for  a
    short period to apply to re-inter the United Kingdom, he presumed  that
    it was reasonable for the child  to  accompany  her.   Nowhere  in  the
    determination did she address herself in any detail to ZH (Tanzania)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 11 or to Section
    55 of the  2009  Act.  At  most  he  states  at  paragraph  69  of  his
    determination that "I am taking the best interests of  the  appellant's
    daughter as a primary consideration" and that he bore in mind that  she
    should not be punished because  her  parents  have  chosen  to  try  to
    circumvent the Immigration Rules.

5.   But then in paragraph 69 of his decision  he  notes  that  there  is  a
    danger, which was recognised  in  the  ECHR  case  of  Jeunesse  v  The
    Netherlands Application No. 12738/10, that some parents may  use  their
    children as a means  of  circumventing  immigration  control  and  that
    states are entitled to expect that individuals  will  comply  with  the
    Immigration Rules that apply to them.  However, I noted that  when  the
    Appellant applied for leave to remain as a spouse she did not have  any
    children.  She was pregnant at that time but there was no child who was
    a British child.  It is also clear from the rest of  the  determination
    that the fact that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had concluded that the
    Appellant had conspired to get round the Rules did colour how he looked
    at the rights of the daughter and nowhere does he consider the  child's
    rights as a British child.  The Home Office Presenting Officer referred
    to EV (Philippines)  &  Others  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 but much of this  case  related  to  the
    need for children to remain here to complete  their  education  and  no
    such argument was raised in the current  appeal.   The  key  case  that
    should have been considered in some detail was  ZH  (Tanzania)  because
    there was a British father and a British child and  a  mother  who  had
    applied for further leave when she was legally in the  United  Kingdom,
    albeit as a visitor.  She did not have a poor immigration history,  and
    following  ZH  (Tanzania),  the  starting  point  should  have  been  a
    consideration of the benefits which accrue to a British  citizen  which
    include access to a settled existence, to medical treatment  and  other
    services and this was not addressed by the Judge.

6.   I have also  been  referred  to  the  case  of  Treebhawon  and  others
    (section 117B(6) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC) in relation to Section 117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and I  find  that  the
    Judge had also not given sufficient weight to  sub-section  117B(6).  I
    note that in Treebhowan the Honourable Mr. Justice McCloskey found that
    "in Section 117B(6) public interest prevails over the  public  interest
    identified in Sections 117B(1) to (3)".  For those reasons I find  that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hamilton did make material errors of law  and
    I remit the case to be re-heard by a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Hamilton.

Notice of Decision

7.   I allow the Appellant's appeal.

8.   I remit her appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo by  a
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    Hamilton.


Signed   Date 2 February 2016

Nadine Finch
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

