
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:     IA/09461/2015
                                                               IA/09465/2015
                                                               IA/09468/2015
                                                               IA/09475/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                 Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On 21st  April  2016                                                      On
6th May 2016


Before:                                DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                           (1) MRS MEENAKSHI JOLLY
                             (2) MR SACHIN JOLLY
                           (3) MISS BHUSHITA JOLLY
                                  (4) [G J]
                                                                  (Anonymity
Direction not made)                                Appellants
                                     And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants: Ms B Jones (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Mr Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellants' appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC  which  was  promulgated  on  the  1st
      October 2015, in which he dismissed the Appellants' appeals under  the
      Immigration Rules and on Human Rights grounds.

   Background

   1. The First and Second Appellants are married.   The  Third  and  Fourth
      Appellants are their daughters, the Third Appellant being born on  the
      22nd August 1999 and the Fourth Appellant being born on the [ ]  2005.
      The Appellants are all citizens of India.

   2. The First Appellant was initially granted a student visa  between  the
      22nd July 2007 and the  22nd  November  2010.   The  other  Appellants
      entered the UK as her family and Dependents.  That visa  was  extended
      until the 11th February 2012 and thereafter leave was extended to  the
      First Appellant with the other Appellants being her family  dependents
      until the 22nd December 2014.

   3. On the 18th December 2014 the Appellants applied for leave  to  remain
      in the United Kingdom on the basis that their removal would amount  to
      breach of their right to  a  private  life  under  Article  8.   Those
      applications were considered by the Respondent, but  each  application
      was refused in refusal letters dated  the  23rd  February  2015.   Mrs
      Jolly's application was refused on the basis that it was not  accepted
      that there would be very significant obstacles to her integration into
      life back in India for the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the
      Immigration Rules, she having lived in India for  26  years  prior  to
      visiting the UK for the first time and she being able to speak Punjabi
      and Hindi.  It was  further  found  that  there  were  no  exceptional
      circumstances, outside of the Immigration Rules, bearing in  mind  the
      duty to promote and safeguard the welfare of children  in  the  United
      Kingdom in accordance with Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
      Immigration Act 2009, despite the fact that her children who were then
      aged 15 and 10 years old had been living in the United  Kingdom  since
      they were 8 and 2 years old respectively, that would merit leave being
      granted outside of the Immigration Rules.

   4. It was found by the Respondent originally  that  both  children  could
      communicate in English, Punjabi and Hindi and that both Mrs Jolly  and
      her husband were born in Delhi and  that  both  children  had  visited
      India and had maintained cultural and ethnic ties  to  India  and  had
      been brought up in a household consisting of Indian nationals.

   5. Mr Jolly's application was refused under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  on
      the  basis  that  it  was  not  accepted  that  there  would  be  very
      significant obstacles to his integration back into life in India given
      that he lived with his wife and children who were Indian nationals and
      had retained his ability to speak local languages and  had  maintained
      cultural ties to India.

   6. The two children's applications were  said  to  have  been  considered
      under Appendix FM and paragraph 276AD(1) but  it  was  found  that  as
      their parents' applications had been refused under Appendix FM,  their
      applications fell to be refused on the basis they  did  not  meet  the
      requirements of paragraph E-LTRC.1.6 of the Immigration Rules.

   7. The Appellants sought to appeal  those  decisions  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and that appeal was heard before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Geraint Jones QC at Richmond on the 25th September 2015.

   The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC

   8. In his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint  Jones  QC  did  not
      accept the evidence given by the First Appellant Mrs  Jolly  that  the
      two children did not speak Hindi to  any  significant  extent  and  he
      found that both the Third and Fourth Appellants speak  and  understand
      Hindi and use it at home [28].  He found that there was no  evidential
      basis to support the submission made by Miss Jones on  behalf  of  the
      Appellants that the children could not read or  write  Hindi  or  that
      they had failed a school entrance test in India.  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Geraint Jones QC found at [30] that the evidence  regarding  the
      children's limited ability in Hindi was "something of  an  exaggerated
      afterthought" and he was not satisfied on the evidence that the  Third
      and/or Fourth Appellant had actually taken school  entrance  tests  in
      India but failed.

   9. Judge Geraint Jones QC further found  at  [31]  that  the  Appellants'
      private life had been established during a time when their  leave  had
      been precarious in the sense that none of them had indefinite leave to
      remain.  Judge Geraint Jones QC went on to  consider  that  the  Third
      Appellant had just begun her "A" level courses at school and noted the
      submissions that had been made regarding the  fact  that  she  had  no
      desire to live in India and might face  linguistic  difficulties,  but
      found specifically that she could speak and understand Hindi  and  did
      not accept that she could not read or write Hindi. He found  that  she
      might not be as competent in reading  and  writing  Hindi  as  English
      (being the medium through which she had been taught  at  school).   He
      found  that  there  were  no  significant  linguistic  or  educational
      impediments to the Third Appellant residing and pursuing her education
      in India.

  10. He went on to consider the case of EV Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ  785
      in respect of whether or not it would be reasonable for  a  child  who
      had been resident in the United Kingdom for more than 7 years to leave
      the United Kingdom.  However Judge Geraint Jones QC found that it  was
      common ground that either the entire family would stay or  the  entire
      family would leave.  He bore in mind that the Third  Appellant  was  6
      weeks into the start of her 2 year "A" level course, but found that it
      would not be unreasonable to expect an Indian citizen who  lives  with
      her nuclear family to have a short break in her educational continuity
      and to resume her education back in India [43].

  11. In respect of the Fourth Appellant Judge Geraint Jones found that  she
      also had spent more than 7 years in the UK and was now aged  10  years
      old [45].  He noted that she also had attended school and plainly  had
      made good progress, but found that she was even younger and  therefore
      better able to adjust to life in the country of  her  citizenship  and
      that she would remain under the protection of her nuclear  family  and
      be able to continue her education in India.  He further found that the
      Second Appellant would be able to successfully engage  in  the  labour
      market, so as to earn a living for the  family.   He  therefore  found
      that it would not be unreasonable  to  expect  the  Third  and  Fourth
      Appellants to leave the United Kingdom for the purposes  of  paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iv).

  12. Judge Geraint Jones QC went on to note that the case for the First and
      Second Appellants was not put on the basis of  paragraph  276ADE,  but
      was put on the basis of reference to Section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act,
      which stated that the public  interest  did  not  require  a  person's
      removal where that  person  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to
      expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.  However the  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  found  that  "private  life  over  and  beyond   that
      associated with the nuclear family and, as a matter of  common  sense,
      engagement with a circle of friends and  acquaintances  has  not  been
      established" at [48].  He went on to consider that although the  First
      Appellant was pregnant the Respondent would defer the  departure  date
      or grant temporary admission until such  time  as  medical  conditions
      meant that travel could be undertaken by her.

  13. Judge Geraint Jones QC then  considered  the  claim  under  Article  8
      outside the  Immigration  Rules  and  found  that  there  was  nothing
      disproportionate in expecting a family of foreign nationals to  return
      the country of their nationality after they have been in this  country
      on the basis that they were  here  temporarily  throughout  the  first
      named Appellant's time  as  a  student  and  that  family  life  could
      continue in India as could their private life  and  that  friends  and
      acquaintances could be contacted through familiar electronic means  of
      communication, as well as being visited [52].  He therefore  dismissed
      the appeals of each of the Appellants under the Immigration Rules  and
      on Human Rights grounds.

  14. The Appellants have sought to appeal  against  that  decision  to  the
      Upper Tribunal.

   The Grounds of Appeal

  15. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued, inter alia, that there  was
      no clear reason for the First-tier Tribunal Judge not to  accept  that
      the solicitors had made a mistake in the application form  in  stating
      that the Third and Fourth Appellants spoke Hindi.  It is  argued  that
      the Judge had not commented that speaking some Hindi did not mean that
      the Third Appellant could read or write or use Hindi as  a  medium  of
      studies, if she were removed from the  United  Kingdom  and  that  the
      First Appellant in her evidence had mentioned that  the  children  had
      failed an entrance exam in India, as they did not understand Hindi  or
      read and write Hindi.  It is argued that the Judge had not  considered
      these issues in his determination and therefore erred in law.   It  is
      further argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was not clear in his
      reasoning as to why he had found  that  it  was  improbable  that  the
      Fourth Appellant was not conversant with Hindi, when she had  come  to
      the UK as a 3 year old and had lived in the UK for the  whole  of  her
      life there afterwards.  It is argued  that  it  is  not  practical  or
      probable that such a child would successfully converse in Hindi and be
      able to read and write Hindi and that the  Judge  had  neglected  such
      important  evidence  and  had  not  discussed  such  evidence  in  his
      determination.

  16. Next, it is argued that the Third Appellant had started her "A" levels
      and the Fourth Appellant receives primary education and that grave and
      irreparable disruption to their  studies  would  occur  if  they  were
      removed from the UK which would destruct their future when they become
      adults.  It is argued that the Judge has not discussed why it would be
      unreasonable to send the  children  to  India,  when  they  are  fully
      adopted to the educational and school life in the United Kingdom.   It
      is argued that the Judge has failed to assess the Appellants'  private
      lives and in particular that of the Third  and  Fourth  Appellants  if
      they are sent from the United Kingdom and that the children had  built
      up extensive private ties with their teachers and  friends  and  their
      society.

  17. Next it is argued that the Judge has not referred to the  requirements
      of Appendix FM under the Immigration Rules in respect of  family  life
      as a parent and that not considering the case  under  the  Immigration
      Rules in respect of the First and Second Appellants is  argued  to  be
      clear error of law. It is argued the Judge failed to refer to  various
      letters submitted by friends and family of  the  Appellants  including
      the friends of the Third and Fourth Appellants  when  considering  the
      private life that they had formed at [48].  This is said to be a clear
      error or law.

  18. It was further argued that the Fourth  Appellant  receives  continuous
      treatment for health issues related to her food allergy and  that  her
      welfare would be at risk if she were removed and that  the  Judge  had
      not made reference to these important issues.

   The Grant of Permission to Appeal

  19. Permission to appeal has been granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Hollingworth on the 25th February 2016 in which he found that:

      "1)  It is arguable that the  Judge  has  not  provided  a  sufficient
      analysis of the degree to which the Third and Fourth  Appellants  have
      become integrated into  United  Kingdom  society  across  the  social,
      educational and cultural spectrum, each having spent in  excess  of  7
      years in the United Kingdom.   It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  has
      attached disproportionate  weight  in  the  light  of  this  to  other
      factors.

      2)  Further, it is arguable that the construction placed by the  Judge
      on the provisions in Section 117B(6) as referred to at  paragraphs  47
      and 48 of the decision attaches insufficient weight to  the  rationale
      of the adoption of a period of 7 years or in  excess  of  7  years  in
      relation to an Appellant as a period of significance.".

   The Rule 24 Reply

  20. Within the Rule 24 Reply dated the 21st  March  2016,  the  Respondent
      argues  that  the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   directed   himself
      appropriately.  It is argued that the complaint  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge failed to consider paragraph EX1 for the partner  route
      is wholly without merit as the First and Second  Appellants  fail  the
      eligibility requirements on account of their status.  It is was argued
      that in any event the evidential test was considered  under  paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iv) by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and that the Judge  had
      reminded himself of the  factors  identified  in  EV  Philippines  and
      considered the education in the United Kingdom and India, citizenship,
      language, cultural norms, accommodation, welfare, age and interference
      with family life.  It is argued that 7 years plus is not determinative
      of a test under paragraph 276 or Section 117B(6)  and  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge fully engaged with the evidence before him and that the
      Appellants' Ground of Appeal amount to no more than disagreement  with
      the findings.

  21. It is argued that the Appellants' complaint that the  Judge  erred  in
      finding no private life at paragraph 40 misrepresented the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge's findings because at paragraph 50 the Judge found that
      private life was sufficient to engage Article 8, but it is  said  that
      in the light of Miah (section 177B NIAA 2002 - Children)  [2016]  UKUT
      00131 (IAC)  the  Judge's  findings  that  the  private  life  of  the
      Appellants was insufficient to outweigh the public interest could  not
      be criticised as pursuant to Section 5A, it carried little weight.

  22. It was on this basis that  the  case  came  before  me  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal.

   Concessions and my findings on error of law and materiality

  23. At the Oral Appeal Hearing, Mr Duffy on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
      State conceded that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Geraint
      Jones QC did in fact contain a material error  of  law.   He  conceded
      that although First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC had  at  [38]
      considered the case of EV Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ  785,  where  he
      said that the Court of Appeal had listed several factors that  may  be
      relevant when considering Section 55 of the 2009  Act  and  that  Lord
      Justice Clarke had referred to the "best interests" of the child, that
      Judge Geraint Jones QC had not actually  then  gone  on  to  make  any
      specific findings as to what were in the best interests of either  the
      Third or Fourth Appellant.

  24.  He conceded that a consideration of the 2 children's  best  interests
      for the purposes of Section 55 would  feed  into  the  proportionality
      assessment that the Judge had to make under paragraph 276ADE and  also
      when considering any private  or  family  life  for  the  purposes  of
      Article 8 outside of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  the  Judge's
      failure to make specific findings as to what was actually  within  the
      best interests of the children did amount to a material error of  law,
      such that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint  Jones  QC
      should be set aside in its entirety and remitted for a  re-hearing  de
      novo.

  25. In light of that concession, I do find that the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC does contain a material error  of  law
      in respect of his failure to actually  make  findings  regarding  what
      were the best interests of the 2 children, being the Third and  Fourth
      Appellants, for the purposes of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
      and Immigration Act 2009 and that  as  a  result  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Geraint Jones QC  has  not  properly  analysed  the  case  under
      paragraph 276ADE or in respect of Article 8 outside of the Immigration
      Rules.  I therefore do set aside the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Geraint Jones QC as it does contain a material error of law. The
      appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  hearing  de
      novo before  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC.

  26. Further, in light of those concessions, both parties agreed that I did
      not need to go on to make findings in respect  of  the  second  ground
      upon which permission to appeal had been granted in terms  of  whether
      or not the First-tier Tribunal Judge had attached sufficient weight to
      the rationale of the adoption of a period of 7 years or in excess of 7
      seven years as a period of significance under Section 117B(6)  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended.  Miss  Jones
      stated that this was especially the case given that  clarification  on
      this issue was likely to be provided by the Court of  Appeal  in  test
      cases currently before the Court of Appeal on  the  4th  and  5th  May
      2016.

  27. Notice of Decision

  28. The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Geraint  Jones  QC  does
      contain a material error of law and is set aside in its entirety;





The matter is remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  hearing  de
novo before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Geraint Jones QC.

Signed
[pic]
Judge        of        the        First-tier        Tribunal         McGinty
Dated 23rd April 2016
