
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/09421/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 December 2014                           |On 8 January 2015             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                            Mr ratan kumar barman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Rahman
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


          DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal by the respondent against the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's
    decision to refuse an application by the appellant for leave to  remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

2.   The  judge  granting  permission,  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Frankish, considered there were arguable errors made by the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In particular, the decision to allow the appeal on the basis
    that there should have been a postponement of the respondent's decision
    until the appellant was able to provide an English language certificate
    (a CAS) that the matter being remitted to the respondent.   It  was  at
    least arguable,  according  to  Judge  Frankish,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was wrong to refer to the case of Forrester [2008]  EWHC
    2307 (Admin).  That case was arguably inconsistent  with  later  cases.
    Accordingly permission was given.

Background

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 20 February 1986.   It
    appears that on 16 January 2008 the  appellant  was  granted  leave  to
    enter the UK as a student until 30 April 2011.  On 11 July 2011 he  was
    granted further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student until  22
    December 2013. Such points-based  migrants  were  required  to  satisfy
    various requirements, including achieving 30 points  under  Appendix  A
    (attributes).   However,  the  appellant  was  awarded  no  points  for
    "attributes - Confirmation of Studies (CAS)" and none  for  maintenance
    (funds).  In short the respondent was not satisfied that the  appellant
    met the necessary criteria for attributes and funds.

The Appeal Proceedings

4.   The Immigration Judge N M K Lawrence  (the  Immigration  Judge)  having
    considered the appellant's application for leave to remain as a Tier  4
    (General) Migrant and for a biometric residence card had regard to  the
    letter written by the appellant to the respondent requesting  that  the
    respondent did not make a decision until he  has  "passed  the  English
    language test".  In the absence of any response  to  that  request  the
    respondent was found to have acted unfairly in the way that he  treated
    the appellant.  The Immigration Judge  found  that  the  appellant  had
    acted properly and expeditiously so as to  satisfy  the  conditions  in
    place by the Sanjari International College well before the date of  the
    decision on 6 February 2014.  The appellant was making good progress on
    his course and the failure to exercise his discretion in favour of  the
    appellant constituted to  an  error  of  law.   The  Immigration  Judge
    referred to the case of Forrester where the respondent had a discretion
    but had not exercised it in favour of the  claimant,  in  circumstances
    that were described by the High Court as "perverse".   The  court  said
    that it ought to exercise this  discretion  with  intelligence,  common
    sense and humanity.  The respondent is alleged to have adopted a  "tick
    box approach having regard to the weight of the issues.  The matter was
    remitted to her for a lawful decision.  The  grounds  of  appeal  state
    that the appellant had obtained his  proficiency  in  English  language
    certificate on 24 January 2014  whereas  the  application  for  further
    leave to remain had been on 21 December 2013.  The application had been
    refused on 6 February 2014.  The grounds  state  that  the  Immigration
    Judge  had  characterised  the  failure  of  the  appellant  to  be  in
    possession of an English language qualification as not being her  fault
    but that of the Sanjari International College.   However,  this  was  a
    material misdirection of law because  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules
    confirm that  acceptance  on  the  course  of  studies  would  only  be
    considered valid if it was issued no more than six  months  before  the
    application is made Appendix A and paragraph  116  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  As the application was made on 21 December 2013, as defined  by
    Immigration Rule 34G(i), the material date for the appellant to have  a
    valid CAS would have been the six month period ending with  that  date.
    Accordingly, the application could not succeed.  The  approach  of  the
    judge was contrary as authority from the Upper Tribunal in the case  of
    Marghia [2014] UKUT 366 (IAC) where the  UT  had  to  characterise  the
    issue of fairness as essentially about procedural fairness.   There  is
    no  absolute  duty  at  common  law  to  make   decisions   which   are
    substantively fair the respondent was entitled to make decisions  which
    were within her discretion as long as they were not unreasonable in the
    Wednesbury sense.  The respondent sought an oral hearing of the appeal.

5.   As indicated above,  Judge  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Frankish  thought
    there were arguable merits in the grounds.  It was  at  least  arguable
    that the case of Forrester was inconsistent with the case of Marghia.

6.   At the hearing I heard representations by both  parties'  Counsel/legal
    representatives.  Mr Whitwell made two essential points:

    (1)  The Confirmation of Studies document (CAS) had to be supplied with
         the application.  The application was made on 21 December 2013.  It
         was lacking.  Therefore, the application had to fail.


    (2)  He relied on Marghia.  The college had changed the start  date  of
         the course.  He specifically relied on paragraph 9 in  Marghia  and
         pointed out that the procedural unfairness had to  be  such  as  to
         bring the case within the Wednesbury unreasonableness principle  if
         it was to succeed on an unfairness challenge.  This case fell  well
         short of that.  The Rules in that case as in  this  were  "crystal-
         clear".  Therefore, the  failure  to  meet  them  with  a  manifest
         failure such as to justify refusal.

7.   Here, the Immigration Judge appears to have accepted that there  was  a
    failure to comply with the Rules (see paragraph 5of the determination).
     The Immigration Judge plainly accepted that there  was  a  failure  to
    comply with the Rules but considered there was  some  general  fairness
    duty.  It was not unfair to require the appellant to  comply  with  the
    formalities  of  a  proper  application  and  Forrester   was   clearly
    distinguished from the present case.  The Tribunal was entitled  to  be
    more critical if the Secretary of State had failed  to  apply  her  own
    Rules in a procedurally fair manner but that was not the case here.

8.   The appellant on the other hand submitted that  fairness  was  a  "core
    value" and he relied on cases like Thakur (PBS) [2011]  UKUT  00151  as
    well as Forrester.  The appellant fulfilled the English  language  test
    and fact but the test result came in after the decision of  6  February
    2014.  I was advised to  apply  the  general  fairness  criteria  after
    judging the case.  Thakur was a case in which  a  Bangladeshi  national
    applied for further leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant.  The Immigration Judge proceeded to deal with  the  appeal  on
    the basis there were no factual matters in issue and having referred to
    the guidance decided that a consistent policy existed.  The failure  to
    follow that policy was sufficient to place the respondent in breach  of
    her legal obligations.  Therefore, the decision was not  in  accordance
    with the law as such and could not therefore be  lawful.   However,  it
    was pointed out  later  in  the  hearing,  Thakur  and  Forrester  were
    different types of cases.  In Forrester the appellant had come  to  the
    UK with lawful entry clearance.  Having been in this country  for  many
    years she made an application for leave to remain but due to a  failure
    of her bank to honour a cheque became an illegal overstayer.  The court
    pointed to the interference with the protected private or  family  life
    in that case and the pointlessness of requiring the  claimant  to  seek
    entry clearance in Jamaica when she had been lawfully in the UK  for  a
    number of years. There was an obvious lack of fairness in the Secretary
    of State's approach.

9.   Thakur was a case in which the guidance was referred to and the  rules.
     The  Upper  Tribunal  did  not  regard  it  as  straightforward.   The
    appellant appeared to have been deprived  of  an  opportunity  to  find
    another college due to  a  decision  which  appeared  contrary  to  the
    Secretary of State's own guidance.  This brought into play  the  common
    law duty of fairness.  The underlying principles were discussed in that
    case.  Again, there was a procedural problem in that the appellant  had
    not  been  given  an  opportunity  of  making  proper   representations
    following the closure of his college.  Therefore,  he  had  not  had  a
    reasonable period to  find  an  alternative  course.  The  respondent's
    decision had not been in accordance with the law because of  a  failure
    to comply with common law requirements  of  fairness,  as  far  as  the
    appellant was concerned.

10.  On the other  hand  Marghia  emphasised  that  unfairness  grounds  was
    limited by the Wednesbury test.   Provided  the  Rules  are  clear  and
    provided they are followed there would be no attack upon  the  legality
    of the decision.

Analysis and Conclusions

11.  Mr Whitwell is plainly right to  draw  a  distinction  between  a  case
    where the respondent acts capriciously or arbitrarily in his  treatment
    of an application and the case where the respondent complies fully with
    the  letter  of  the  Immigration  Rules  but  the  Immigration   Rules
    nevertheless work in a way which appears unfair towards  an  appellant.
    Thakur and Forrester are persuasive authorities  before  this  Tribunal
    but in relation to Thakur in particular I am not sure  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal went fully into the nature  of  the  "common  law  unfairness"
    relied upon.  This is not to say that the decision was wrong.  However,
    when the respondent acts in a manner which does not allow an  appellant
    sufficient opportunity to act in a particular way so as  to  bring  him
    within the Immigration Rules that may be said to be unlawful.

12.  In my judgment that is not the situation here.   The  appellant  simply
    submitted  his  application  at  a  time  before   he   satisfied   the
    requirements of the Rules.  In  particular  he  failed  to  fulfil  the
    requirement of having a CAS.  Had he  waited  until  he  obtained  that
    document he would have had no difficulty in qualifying.  The respondent
    did not  act  arbitrarily  or  unlawfully.   The  respondent  acted  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.  In the  circumstances,  it  was
    indeed a material misdirection in law  for  the  Immigration  Judge  to
    state that the Secretary of State should have awaited the obtaining  of
    an English language document (a CAS) before reaching a  decision.   The
    Secretary of State decided the case on the evidence  presented  to  her
    and her decision was correct based on that evidence.

13.  For these reasons the respondent has identified a clear  error  of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that it is required  to
    be set aside.

Notice of Decision

14.   The  respondent's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is allowed.  I find that there was a material error of law  in
    the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  such  that  decision
    requires to be set aside. The decision of this Tribunal is substituted,
    which is that the appeal against the refusal  of  the  application  for
    further leave to remain is dismissed.

15.  No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I set aside the fee award.






Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
