
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10529/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 March 2015                              |On 31 March 2015              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                               MR UMAIR ASRAR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell
For the Respondent:    Mr Saeed

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Asrar is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1991.  He appealed against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 10 February 2014  to  refuse
    Mr Asrar's application for a Residence Card pursuant to  Regulation  17
    of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.   He
    claimed to be the partner of Ms Catherine Tandu, a citizen  of  Germany
    and, as such, the "extended family member" of  an  EEA  national.   The
    Secretary  of  State,  however,  concluded  that  Mr  Asrar   had   not
    demonstrated that he was in a "durable  relationship"  with  Ms  Tandu,
    pursuant to Regulation 8(5) and/or  that  Ms  Tandu  was  a  "qualified
    person" pursuant to Regulation 6(2).

 2. He appealed.

 3. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 15 October  2014  Judge  of  the
    First-tier M Whalan allowed the appeal.

 4. His findings are at paragraphs [22-26] of the determination.  In brief,
    he found that Mr Asrar and Ms Tandu "both gave  clear,  consistent  and
    credible evidence".  He found that Mr Asrar had been in a  "continuing,
    durable relationship with Ms Tandu ... since Summer 2012" and that they
    had lived together since September 2012, 25 months by the date  of  the
    hearing.  They have a daughter who was conceived in December  2012  and
    was born in September 2013 [23].

 5. He also found that Ms Tandu had at date of hearing been engaged in part-
    time work continuously  for  over  a  year.   She  has  a  "modest  but
    established part-time job, in that she has worked at the  pharmacy  for
    over a  year"  [26].   The  judge  found  accordingly  that  she  is  a
    "qualified person" pursuant to Regulation 6(1).  He found that she  was
    a "self-sufficient person".

 6. The judge (at [27]) concluded by allowing Mr Asrar's appeal.

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which was granted on
    8 January 2015.

 8. At the error of law hearing Mr Whitwell made two brief points.   First,
    the judge should not have found that Ms Tandu was "self sufficient" for
    the purpose of Regulation 6(1).  He should have found  that  she  is  a
    "worker".

 9. More significantly, the issue of  a  residence  card  to  an  "extended
    family member" is at the discretion of the Secretary of  State  and  as
    such the matter should have been referred  back  to  the  Secretary  of
    State for reconsideration.

10. Mr Saeed did not demur from that submission.

11. I agreed and set aside the decision to be remade.

12. On the first point the judge erred in concluding on the evidence before
    him that Ms Tandu was "self-sufficient".  He should have found that she
    was a "worker".  However, that was not a material  error  as,  on  that
    evidence she was nonetheless a "qualified person".

13. On the other issue Regulation 17(4) provides.

         "The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to  an  extended
         family member not falling within Regulation 7(3) who is not an  EEA
         national on application if -

         (a)  the relevant EEA national in relation to the  extended  family
             member is a  qualified  person  or  an  EEA  national  with  a
             permanent right of residence under Regulation 15; and

         (b)  in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of  State
             appropriate to issue the residence card."

14. The headnote in  Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00340
    (IAC) clarifies this further:

         "iii)    Regulation 17(4) makes the issue of a residence card to an
             OFM/extended family member a matter of discretion.  Where  the
             Secretary of State has not yet exercised that  discretion  the
             most an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is  to  allow  the
             appeal as being not in accordance with  the  law  leaving  the
             matter  of  whether  to  exercise  this  discretion   in   the
             appellant's favour or not to the Secretary of State."

15. As the Secretary of State has  not  yet  considered  the  matter  under
    Regulation 17(4) the judge erred in allowing the appeal outright.   The
    decision  he  should  have  reached  on  the  facts  found,  which  are
    unchallenged, was that the Secretary of State's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's determination contains an error on a point of  law
and it is set aside.

It is remade as follows:

    The appeal is allowed to the extent that the  application  for  an  EEA
    residence card remains outstanding before the Secretary of State.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway



