


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:  IA/10124/2014
                                                               IA/10123/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2015                    |On 10 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                     SP
                                     AP
                         (Anonymity directions made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY Of STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Querton of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellants, who are  mother  and  daughter,  are  nationals  of
         Trinidad and Tobago born  on  8  February  1980  and  25  May  2008
         respectively and have been granted anonymity. They appealed against
         the decisions of the respondent dated 7  February  2014  to  refuse
         them leave to remain in United Kingdom and grant them discretionary
         leave based upon the first  appellant's  private  and  family  life
         pursuant to s 55 of the Boarders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
         2009 and pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
         Rights. Judge AW Khan dismissed both appellants' appeals.

      2. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         P.JG.J White on 24 November 2014 stating that it is  arguable  that
         the Judge  made  a  material  error  of  law  because  the  Judge's
         reasoning and conclusions in regard to Article 8 are  difficult  to
         follow and the Judge found  at  paragraph  19  that  there  was  no
         arguable or realistic claim in respect of an Article  8  claim  but
         subsequently returned to the issue to consider, finally  concluding
         the removal would not be disproportionate interference.  The  Judge
         at paragraph 21 of his determination  appears  to  have  considered
         section 55 of the 2009 Act in its own right, rather than within the
         context of Article 8.

    The First-Tier Tribunal Judges Findings

      3.  The  Judge  considered  that  the  appellants  did  not  meet  the
         requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276  ADE   of   the
         Immigration Rules because the appellant has not  demonstrated  that
         she has no ties including social, cultural family with the  country
         to which she would have to go if required when she has to leave the
         United Kingdom.

      4. The Judge then went on to consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules in  order
         for him to consider the Article 8 claim. The judge noted  that  the
         appellant has been an over stayer in the United  Kingdom  for  over
         three years. Her immigration  status  was  precarious.  The  second
         appellant goes to school and her school reports show she is  making
         progress. There is no reason why the appellant's child who  is  six
         years of age cannot return to Trinidad which is an English-speaking
         country with her mother.

      5. The Judge stated "In reality, there is  no  arguable  or  realistic
         claim that under Article 8 in respect of private life either of the
         first appellant of the second appellant outside the  Rules.  As  to
         family life there would be no breach of family  life  because  both
         the first appellant and the second appellant would  be  removed  to
         Trinidad as one family unit and family life  can  continue  between
         mother and daughter as it has done in  the  United  Kingdom.  There
         would be no change in family life albeit it would be exercised in a
         different country".

      6. In respect of section 55 of the 2009 Act the  Judge  was  satisfied
         that the best interests of the second appellant lie in continue  to
         live with  her  mother  and  her  removal  to  Trinidad  would  not
         prejudice this. He considered the case of ZH  (Tanzania)  and  took
         the second appellant's interest as a primary consideration and said
         it was not unreasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom with her mother. He stated that this is not the case  where
         the second appellant has spent many  years  living  in  the  United
         Kingdom and has established strong  connections  here.  The  second
         appellant was born on 25 May 2008 and at such a young age cannot be
         said to have really integrated into the life in the UK. He accepted
         that while the appellant is well  settled  in  her  school  and  is
         making good progress, the disruption in  education  by  removal  to
         Trinidad would not be sufficient to outweigh the public interest in
         removal.

      7. The Judge took into account the new primary legislation of 28  July
         2014 section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 part five section 117 A
         BNC which states that the Tribunal  is  required  to  carry  out  a
         balancing exercise as to  whether  a  person  circumstances  engage
         Article  81  to   decide   whether   the   proposed   interferences
         proportionate and all the circumstances. Particular regard was paid
         to section 117B that little weight should be  given  to  a  private
         life  established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when  the   person's
         immigration  status  is  precarious.  The  appellants'  immigration
         status was precarious since June 2010 because the  first  appellant
         did not leave the United Kingdom upon the expiry of a  visit  visa.
         Her daughter at that time was only two years of age and any private
         life established in the knowledge that the first appellant  had  no
         right to remain in the United Kingdom  and  this  would  have  also
         apply to her daughter as a dependent.

      8. The child is not a British citizen and therefore not  a  qualifying
         child under section 117B(a). She is also not lived continuously  in
         the United Kingdom for a continuous period of  seven  years  or  by
         virtue of the definition of a qualifying child  under  the  section
         117D therefore section 117B(6)  does  not  apply.  The  appellant's
         removal to Trinidad and Tobago  would  not  be  a  disproportionate
         interference with both appellants' rights under Article 8.

    Appellant's Grounds of Appeal

      9. The appellants' grounds of appeal state the  following.  The  first
         ground of appeal is that the Judge failed to apply the correct test
         in relation to ties to the home country  under  paragraph  276  ADE
         (vi) because  the  Judge  did  not  accept  the  first  appellant's
         evidence that she had severed all ties with Trinidad and  knows  no
         one in that country.

     10. The Judge as a starting  point  did  not  believe  the  appellant's
         evidence in relation to the breakdown of the  relationship  between
         herself and her family and this should have been further assessment
         of the nature of the remaining ties  in  accordance  with  Ogundimu
         (article 8-new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT  60  (IAC).  When  it  is
         stated that the natural and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  ties
         imports with the  concept  involving  something  more  than  merely
         remote and abstract links to the country of proposed deportation or
         removal. It involves there being a continued connection to life  in
         that country; something that  ties  the  claimant  to  his  or  her
         country of origin. If this were not the case then it  would  appear
         that  a  persons  the  nationality  of  the  country  of   proposed
         deportation  could  of  itself  lead  to  a  failure  to  meet  the
         requirements of the Rule. This would render the application of  the
         Rule,  given  the  context  within  which  it  operates,   entirely
         meaningless.

     11. There was also factors that the Judge should have considered as  to
         whether the appellant had ties to her country of origin. There  was
         no consideration by the Judge of  the  extent  of  the  family  and
         friends that the first appellant has in Trinidad and the nature and
         quality of the relationships that  the  first  appellant  has  with
         those friends and family. At paragraph 15 of the determination, the
         Judge simply makes finding that  evidence  in  relation  to  losing
         contact and support of her family further to her marriage  and  the
         birth of a daughter is disbelieved but fails to go on  to  consider
         the quality of those relationships.

     12. The second ground  of  appeal  states  that  the  Judge  failed  to
         consider the claim substantively under Article 8  of  the  European
         Convention on Human Rights. The Judge first stated that  there  was
         no arguable or realistic claim under Article 8 in respect of family
         life for the appellant or her daughter. He said this even before he
         considered the five states test under Razgar. The Court  of  Appeal
         has stated in MM and others this is the Secretary of State for  the
         home Department [2014] EWCA Civ  985  that  additional  preliminary
         consideration of  whether  there  is  an  arguable  case  prior  to
         proceeding to determine an Article 8 claim was unlawful.  Therefore
         the Judge might not give full consideration under  Article  8  fell
         into material error.

     13. In the Supreme Court in the case of Patel and others v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department [2013] UK SC  72  recalled  that  the
         most authoritative guidance on Article 8 was given in the  case  of
         Huang [2007] and it  remains  the  case  that  the  Rules  are  the
         starting point for the consideration of Article  8.  The  Court  of
         Appeal in MF (Nigeria) came to the same conclusion in  a  different
         context which was in cases of deportation. There is no  requirement
         for the appellant to show exceptional circumstances if she does not
         meet the Immigration Rules in order to have her and  her  daughters
         claim considered under Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
         human rights.

     14. The test of exceptionality was explicitly rejected by the House  of
         Lords in Huang. The term exceptional circumstances means  that  the
         scales are heavily weighted in favour of deportation and  something
         very compelling which could also  be  exceptional  is  required  to
         outweigh the public interest in removal. This is a factor that must
         be considered in the balance and not an  exceptionality  test.  The
         Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) stated that the term  circumstances
         those which are "sufficiently compelling". Huang  established  that
         the ultimate  test  under  Article  8  is  one  of  reasonableness.
         Accordingly the terminology of exceptional  circumstances  used  by
         the respondent and compelling circumstances in the case law of  the
         Upper Tribunal and the High Court must be  read  consequently  with
         the Supreme Court's judgement in Patel and the  Court  of  Appeal's
         judgement in MF (Nigeria) as a byword for reasonableness.

     15. The appellant's daughter was born and lived in the  United  Kingdom
         for six years. She falls just short of the  Immigration  Rules  but
         this forms the basis for the starting point of an Article 8  claim.
         Lord Carnworth in Patel noted that the balance drawn by  the  rules
         may be relevant to the consideration proportionality. The practical
         or compassionate considerations which underline the rules are  also
         likely to be relevant to those cases fall just outside them and  to
         that extent may add weight to the argument for the grant  of  leave
         outside the rules. The Judge's failure to consider  the  appellants
         Article  8  rights  amounts  to  an  error  of  law  rendering  the
         determination unsustainable.

    Submissions of the Parties at the Hearing

     16. I heard submissions from both parties as to  whether  there  is  an
         error of law in the determination, the full notes of which  are  in
         my Record of Proceedings.

    Findings on Error of Law

     17. The appellants' main argument is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Khan failed to consider the  appellant's  appeal  separately  under
         Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   The
         allegation against the Judge is that he became confused  about  his
         consideration of the Immigration Rules  and  his  consideration  of
         Article 8.

     18. The question I have to ask is whether this is a material  error  of
         law in the circumstances of the appellant's  appeal.  I  have  paid
         anxious scrutiny to the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge. The Judge did not take a systematic approach in  considering
         the appellant's appeal both under the Immigration Rules  and  under
         Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. Therefore  it
         is not easy to understand the Judge's reasoning in  dismissing  the
         appellant's appeal.

     19. At paragraph 19 the Judge found  that  there  was  no  arguable  or
         realistic claim in respect of Article 8 which  falls  foul  of  the
         guidance in MM. However  he  then  considered  further  factors  at
         paragraphs 20, 22 and 24 and concluded at  paragraph  25  that  the
         appellant's removal would not be a disproportionate interference.

     20. I  conclude  for  the  above  reasons  that  the  First-tier  Judge
         materially erred in law  and  I  set  aside  the  decision  in  its
         entirety and direct that the appeal be remitted to the First-  tier
         Tribunal to be head afresh as findings of fact have to be made.

     21. I direct that the appeal be placed before any First-tier Judge  for
         a full hearing with the exception of First-tier Judge Khan.

Signed by,



.............................................
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana Dated this 5th day of March 2015

