
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10141/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 17 March 2016                    |On: 20 April 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                               MR FARHAN AZAM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Bajwa, Legal Representative
For the respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistani born on 21 November 1987.   He
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal against the determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Robison dated 26 August 2015 refusing his appeal against
    the decision of the respondent cancelling his leave on the ground  that
    either false representations were employed or material facts  were  not
    disclosed for the purposes of  obtaining  a  visa/entry  clearance,  or
    there had been a change of circumstances  since  it  had  been  granted
    pursuant to paragraph 321A of the Immigration Rules.

 2. Permission to appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Garratt on 18 December 2015 but subsequently granted  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Mahmood on 27 January 2016. He was of the view  that  it
    was arguable that the Judge misdirected himself at paragraph 15 of  his
    decision whereby  he  concluded  that  no  proof  of  income  into  the
    appellant's bank account did not actually mean that the  appellant  did
    not work at Mamma Mia and placing too much importance on the fact  that
    the appellant had  a  national  insurance  number  when  initially  the
    appellant did have permission to work.

 3.  The  Judge  in  his  determination  made  the  following  findings  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal pursuant to  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The provisions of paragraph 321a contain mandatory grounds for refusal.
    If all representations were made of false documents were  submitted  or
    material facts not disclosed  or  that  there  has  been  a  change  of
    circumstances, then I must refuse this appeal. The judge stated that he
    has  given  careful  consideration  to  the  evidence.  The  respondent
    produced a witness  statement  informing  that  the  HMRC  have  record
    stating that the appellant was earning during 2012/2013 and  2013/2014.
    The appellant's position was that his  national  insurance  number  had
    been stolen and that someone else must be using his national  insurance
    number.

 4. At paragraph 15 the judge stated "I did not consider that the fact that
    there was no income from Mamma Mia recorded as  coming  into  his  bank
    accounts was proof that he did not work there.  I  do  not  accept  the
    appellant's evidence someone had stolen his wallet and  was  using  his
    national insurance number to work illegally. His evidence regarding why
    he had a national insurance number at all was unclear, and I considered
    it significant that the immigration officer noted that he had said that
    he could not remember what he had  done  with  his  national  insurance
    number. I noted that there was no reference in the grounds of appeal to
    his national insurance number having been stolen. In the  circumstances
    the Judge concluded that false representations were made and  therefore
    the Rules  were  correctly  applied  and  dismissed  his  appeal  under
    paragraph 321A.

 5. The appellant grounds of appeal state the following which I  summarise.
    On his return to the United Kingdom on 18 February 2014, the  appellant
    was stopped by immigration officials at Heathrow airport  and  informed
    that his visa was being revoked as he had been working contrary to  the
    conditions attached to his visa. The appellant sent evidence from Mamma
    Mia stated that the appellant had never worked for them. The  appellant
    submitted his bank statements to show that no money had been  deposited
    from Mamma Mia into his  account.  The  Judge  misdirected  himself  at
    paragraph 15 when he stated that the fact that there was  no  proof  of
    income into his account was not proof that he did not work  there.  The
    judge did  not  refer  to  the  letter  from  Mamma  Mia  which  stated
    categorically that the appellant did  not  work  with  them.  Appellant
    stated that his wallet with his  national  insurance  number  had  been
    stolen and the judge placed too much importance on the  fact  that  the
    appellant had a national insurance  number  at  all  as  proof  he  had
    breached his visa conditions. The appellant in his previous  conditions
    for his visa had been permitted to work.

 6. The respondent in her Rule 24 response stated  the  following  which  I
    summarise. The respondent will argue that the  Judge  directed  himself
    appropriately. The grounds contend that the appellant did not work  for
    money and that the judge placed too much weight on the  fact  that  the
    appellant has a national insurance number. It is open to the  Judge  on
    the evidence to consider the fact that the appellant had  a  NI  number
    and the HMRC documents coupled with the finding that the alleged  theft
    was fabricated. These findings were open to the Judge. The grounds have
    no merit and are merely a disagreement with the outcome of the  appeal.
    The  Judge  considered  all  the  evidence  available  and  came  to  a
    conclusion open to him based on the evidence and the Rules. There is no
    material error of law.

 7. At the hearing, Mr Bajwa adopted his grounds of appeal  and  emphasised
    that there was a letter from the employment that the appellant had  not
    worked. Mr Walker relied on the Rule 24  response  and  said  that  the
    Judge considered the evidence of  the  HMRC  which  the  judge  had  to
    consider. He said that the appellant  told  the  officers  at  Heathrow
    airport that his national insurance had been stolen.

    The error of law decision

 8. This appeal was dismissed under paragraph 321 (1A) of  the  Immigration
    Rules. The complaint made against the Judge is that he did not consider
    the letter from Mamma Mia, which stated that they have  never  employed
    the appellant. The judge did not  consider  his  explanation  that  his
    national insurance number had been stolen implying that  somebody  else
    was working with his  national  insurance  number  at  mamma  Mia.  The
    appellant relied on the letter  from  this  company  stating  that  the
    appellant has not worked for them.

 9. The judge made it very clear that he did not  believe  the  appellant's
    explanation  that  his  national  insurance  number  was  stolen.   The
    appellant claims that he told immigration officials at the airport that
    his national insurance  number  was  stolen.  This  was  after  he  was
    detained on the bases that he was in employment. It was put to  him  by
    immigration officials that Home Office records confirm that he has been
    in continuous employment since 1 May 2012 and he was last in receipt of
    payment  on  31  January  2014.  If  indeed  the  appellant's  national
    insurance number had been stolen, there was nothing in the evidence  to
    show that the appellant reported this to the authorities before he  was
    apprehended at the airport. It is implicit that  his  explanation  that
    national insurance number had been stolen was an afterthought after  he
    was caught at the airport.

10. The respondent also provided HMRC records to show  that  the  appellant
    had worked. The judge was entitled to rely on the evidence provided  by
    the respondent who had proved in the balance of probabilities that  the
    appellant had worked in the United Kingdom.

11. In  order  to  have  made  false  representations  or  submitted  false
    documents so as to attract a mandatory refusal  under  Part  9  of  the
    Immigration  Rules,  an  applicant  must  have  deliberately  practised
    'deception', as defined at para 6. It follows that  such  failure  also
    requires dishonesty on the part of the applicant, or by someone  acting
    on his behalf.

12. The judge did not accept the  appellant's  evidence  that  he  had  not
    worked and was entitled to find that the appellant was  dishonest  when
    he said that he has not worked in this country. On the evidence  before
    him the judge was entitled to so find. I find that the  Judge  has  not
    made a material error of law and I uphold the determination.

13. Even if the Judge did not specifically consider the letter  from  Mamma
    Mia, in his decision I consider the letter. The letter does not clarify
    who exactly worked for them with the particular insurance number, which
    the appellant claims was  his  and  stolen.  In  the  absence  of  such
    clarification, no reliance can be placed on the letter from  Mamma  Mia
    that the appellant did not work with them. Given that the  person  with
    the appellant's national insurance number worked for Mamma Mia  and  to
    whom they paid a wage and HMRC records show that  a  person  with  that
    national insurance number worked for them, the company would have  made
    a report to the police, if indeed the  national  insurance  number  had
    been stolen by somebody else. There is no such evidence. In that  event
    I would remake the decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal.

DECISION

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made

I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee order


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal    Dated this 18th day of April 2016

.............................................
Mrs S Chana
