

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10819/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  10 February 2015                          |On 12 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL G A BLACK

                                   Between

                             mr amandeep pathak
                       (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Parkinson, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   This matter comes before me for consideration as to whether  or  not
      there is a material error of law in the determination  promulgated  by
      the First Tier Tribunal (Judge D Ross) on 17th October 2014  in  which
      he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a curtailment of his leave
      to remain as a spouse under paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules and
      with reference to paragraph 323(ii) of the Rules. A decision  made  to
      vary leave so that non remains and directions made  under  section  47
      Immigration, Asylum & Nationality Act 2006.


   2.    There was no appearance by or on behalf of  the  Appellant  at  the
      hearing before me.  I was satisfied that he had been  properly  served
      with the Notice of the date and time of the hearing and that there had
      been  no  request  for  an  adjournment  nor  communication  from  the
      Appellant giving reasons for his failure to attend.   I  proceeded  to
      hear submissions from the Respondent's representative.

Background



   3.   The Appellant is a citizen of India.  He  married  on  25.6.2012  in
      Delhi and had been granted leave to  enter  the  UK  as  a  spouse  to
      21.12.2014.  On 12.2.2014 the Respondent made  a  decision  curtailing
      his  leave  having  received  a  letter  dated  18.12.2013  from   the
      Appellant's wife.  In the letter she stated that the marriage was  not
      subsisting and the marriage had  been  dissolved  on  4.10.2013.   She
      claimed that the Appellant was violent towards her and that he married
      her in order to secure entry to the UK.  She provided a  letter  dated
      31.1.2014 to the Respondent consenting to the information being  used.
      The Appellant's evidence was that it was his wife  who  had  assaulted
      him and gave an account of past incidents.  He  produced  two  witness
      statements as corroborative evidence and  called  his  friend  at  the
      Tribunal hearing.


   4.   In his grounds of appeal the Appellant claimed that it was his  wife
      who had been violent towards him and that was the reason for the break
      down of the marriage.


   5.   In a decision and reasons the Tribunal found that the Appellant  was
      not credible and preferred the account given by his  wife.   It  heard
      evidence from  a  friend  of  the  Appellant  who  it  considered  had
      exaggerated his account of  having  witnessed  violence  by  the  wife
      towards the Appellant.  The Tribunal found the  Appellant's  demeanour
      to be aggressive and blustering which it took into  account.  It  also
      had regard to the Appellant's immigration history showing that he used
      deception in a previous application for leave as a student [19].   The
      findings are set out at [16-24].   The  Tribunal  concluded  that  the
      Appellant failed to discharge the burden on him to show that  marriage
      had come to an end because of violence by the wife.  It  accepted  her
      account of having attended hospital in  December  2012  for  treatment
      following an attack upon her by  the  Appellant,  the  fact  that  she
      reported the matter to the police on two occasions, instituted divorce
      proceedings and thereafter informed the Respondent of the position.

   6.   In grounds of appeal the  Appellant  complained  that  the  Tribunal
      failed to  give  reasons  for  its  findings  as  to  the  Appellant's
      demeanour, why it rejected the evidence from  the  Appellant's  friend
      and further had misstated the evidence of violent incidents.

   7.  Permission was granted by  UTJ  Renton  who  considered  all  of  the
      grounds to be arguable.

   8.   The Respondent opposed the appeal in a Rule 24 response stating that
      the findings made were open to the Tribunal.


   Submisssions

   9.   I heard submissions from Mr Parkinson.  His starting point was  that
      the parties had never been married and therefore the  Appellant  could
      not rely in paragraph 281.  He cited the divorce petition as evidence,
      which showed that the marriage was  never  consummated  and  had  been
      annulled.

  10.  In the alternative Mr Parkinson submitted that the Tribunal  had  not
      made a factual  error  as  to  the  number  of  claimed  incidents  of
      violence.  Rather the Tribunal had  summarised  the  evidence  at  its
      highest.  The  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  draw  inference  from  the
      Appellant's demeanour and infer that he would not be intimidated.  The
      Tribunal did not find his account credible and placed little weight on
      the account from the friend. The Tribunal did not specify any required
      definition of or level  of  domestic  violence.   The  Appellants  own
      evidence was inconsistent as to  the  nature  of  and  length  of  the
      relationship; he claimed that the parties were still seeing each other
      in October 2013 [7].

Discussion and conclusion
  11.  I am satisfied that there  was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
      decision made by the Tribunal.  The Tribunal gives clear reasons as to
      why the appeal failed. The Tribunal concluded that  the  marriage  had
      come to an end,  which  was  not  disputed,  and  the  Respondent  was
      therefore entitled to curtail the  leave  under  paragraph  323  [16].
      This was the immigration decision under appeal.

  12.  The Tribunal went on to  consider  the  issue  of  the  marriage  and
      whether or not the Appellant could  rely  on  paragraph  289A  of  the
      Immigration Rules. It does not appear that any  such  application  was
      made by the Appellant and no decision made by the respondent.

  13. Nevertheless I deal  with  the  issues  raised  in  the  grounds.  The
      Tribunal found that the Appellant did not discharge the burden on  him
      to show that the marriage came to an  end  as  a  result  of  violence
      towards him and that was not his evidence in any event [20 & 24].  The
      Tribunal preferred the account given by  his  wife  in  findings  [18]
      which have not been challenged. Reliance was placed on the information
      included in the letter from his wife sent to the Home Office  and  the
      divorce.

  14. The Tribunal took into account that the Appellant did not  inform  the
      Respondent  of  any  breakdown  and   had   not   instigated   divorce
      proceedings.

  15. Whilst the Tribunal made reference to the  Appellant's  demeanour  and
      observed that he was unlikely to be intimidated, such observations  do
      not amount to any error of law, having  regard  to  the  decision  and
      reasons as a whole.  Further there was no finding that there was  only
      one incident of violence; the Tribunal was setting out its view of the
      evidence at its highest based on the witness' account [23].

  16. Although the point raised by Mr Parkinson  there  could  be  no  valid
      marriage because it had been annulled, has some  merit,  however  this
      was not an issue raised before the Tribunal.


   Decision


  17. There is no material error of law  disclosed  in  the  decision  which
      shall stand.

  18.   The appeal is dismissed on immigration grounds.


NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE


                               Signed                 Date: 12.2.2015




                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal GA Black


TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD - As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.




                               Signed                 Date: 12.2.2015




                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal GA Black


