
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10751/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  30th January 2015                         |On 4th February 2015         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR ALI HOSSEN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shilladay, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Biggs, Counsel, instructed by Universal
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I  will  refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 2nd January  1991.  He
    married Ms Susana Rahman, a citizen of Germany on 26th  July  2013.  On
    1st October 2013 he applied for a residence card as the  family  member
    (husband) of Ms Rahman who he said was a jobseeker in the UK. This  was
    refused on 13th February 2014 because  it  was  not  accepted  that  Ms
    Rahman was actively seeking work and had genuine  chances  of  becoming
    employed  in  the  foreseeable  future.  The  appellant  appealed  this
    decision on 27th February 2014.  His appeal against  the  decision  was
    allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Traynor  in  a  determination
    promulgated on the 4th November 2014. It was accepted by Judge  Traynor
    that Ms Rahman was a job-seeker but not that she was (as  she  and  the
    appellant claimed) employed at the date of hearing.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cruthers on 15th December 2014 on the basis that it was  arguable  that
    the First-tier judge had erred in law in not making findings as to  how
    long Ms Rahman had been seeking work and in  explaining  why  he  found
    that she  had  genuine  chances  of  being  engaged  in  employment  in
    accordance with Antonissen C-292/89 ECJ.

 4. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

The Hearing

 5. At the hearing it was agreed that there should be a  short  adjournment
    so Mr Shilladay could check the new evidence produced by the  appellant
    (said to show that Ms Rahman was indeed working in  the  UK)  with  the
    Department of Work and Pensions.

 6. Mr Shilladay confirmed that that it was accepted following  his  checks
    with the Department of Work  and  Pensions  that  Ms  Rahman  had  been
    working since 1st October 2014.

 7. Mr Biggs applied to admit the new evidence regarding Ms  Rahman's  work
    under Rule 15 (2)(a) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, as I am entitled to do under Rule 5 despite procedures  not  have
    been complied with for the submission of new evidence. Mr Shilladay did
    not oppose this application and I admitted this evidence.

 8. I told the parties I would dismiss the appeal as there was no  material
    error of law in the determination of Judge Traynor in the light of  the
    new evidence and Mr Shilladay's checks.

Conclusions

 9. I find that as Ms Rahman is clearly a German citizen working in the  UK
    and as it is accepted by  all  parties  that  she  is  married  to  the
    appellant there could be no material error of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowing the appeal under the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006 on the basis the appellant was entitled to a residence card.

Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error on a point of law.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

30th January 2015

