
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10693/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 March 2016                     |On 20 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                NURAY OZGIRAY
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                              Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms. N. Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Andrew promulgated on 16 July 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Turkey born 26 October  1976.  She
    made an application for leave to remain in the UK which was refused  by
    the Respondent on 27 February 2015. The Appellant's appeal against that
    refusal came before Judge Andrew on  9  July  2015  for  oral  hearing.
    Before Judge Andrew the Respondent was represented  but  the  Appellant
    and her representatives failed to attend. Judge  Andrew  observed  that
    proper notice of the time, date and place of hearing had been given  to
    both the Appellant and her representatives and there was no explanation
    for their absence. The Judge took account of the  overriding  objective
    and proceeded in the circumstances to hear the appeal. The  Judge  took
    into account the Appellant's claim that she should be allowed to remain
    in the UK as a victim of domestic violence. The  Judge  concluded  that
    the Appellant could not meet the requirements for leave on  that  basis
    because she had not been admitted to the UK as a spouse, and found that
    the Appellant was not entitled to remain here on any other basis  under
    the Rules - the Appellant was separated from her partner and her  child
    was not a qualifying child. Further, the Judge did not accept that  the
    Appellant was at real risk of Article 3  ill-treatment  on  account  of
    being ostracised by her family or society in Turkey.  The  Judge  found
    that there were no significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration
    in Turkey and proceeded to consider the claim contrary to Article 8  of
    the ECHR. The Judge considered all competing factors and concluded that
    removal was proportionate. Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed on all
    grounds.

 3. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal on the  basis  that  she
    had not received a fair hearing as her  representatives  had  not  been
    notified of the hearing date. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Shimmin
    granted permission on this ground.

 4. Following the grant of permission, the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, opposing the appeal on the basis that  no  unfairness  arose  and
    that the grounds amounted to a disagreement with the  Judge's  findings
    that were otherwise open to her on the evidence.

 5. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 6. Before the Tribunal the Appellant is unrepresented. On the  morning  of
    the hearing she failed to attend. She  was  properly  served  with  the
    notice of the date, time and place of hearing. During the course of the
    morning a telephone  communication  was  received  from  the  Appellant
    stating that she would not be attending the hearing and  would  in  due
    course be embarking upon a voluntary return to  Turkey.  The  Appellant
    had indicated that a written communication  to  this  effect  would  be
    forwarded to the Tribunal. Such communication has not been received. As
    the Appellant had been notified of the hearing and  had  not  expressly
    made a request to withdraw her appeal, I exercised  my  discretion  and
    proceeded to hear the appeal in the Appellant's absence because it  was
    in the interests of justice to  do  so  contrary  to  rule  38  of  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.  I  heard  submissions
    from Ms Willocks-Briscoe and reserved my decision.

Decision on Error of Law

 7. I am satisfied that the Judge did not materially err in law.

 8. It is argued by the Appellant that she did not receive a  fair  hearing
    because her representatives were not notified of the hearing. A perusal
    of the Tribunal's file shows that the Appellant's representatives  were
    not effectively notified of the hearing as the notice  of  hearing  was
    sent to the wrong address. Whilst the Judge failed to notice this error
    and was thus incorrect in stating that the Appellant's  representatives
    had been duly notified, I am not satisfied that the error  is  material
    and caused any  unfairness  to  the  Appellant.  This  is  because  the
    Appellant was effectively  served  with  the  Notice  of  Hearing.  She
    appears to have not acted on  that  notice  or  communicated  with  her
    representatives prior to the date of hearing. She failed to  attend  to
    the hearing notwithstanding that she had every opportunity to do so. As
    Ms Willocks-Briscoe pointed out there was  no  explanation  before  the
    Judge for her absence and it was open to the Appellant to have attended
    if only to have requested an adjournment  given  the  circumstances.  I
    thus cannot see that there was any unfairness. In light of  the  above,
    even if the Judge been aware of the error, I am not satisfied that  she
    would have reached a different conclusion. I am thus satisfied that  it
    remained open to the Judge to proceed with the hearing in view  of  the
    overriding objective which she took into account.

 9. It is apparent that in reaching her conclusions  the  Judge  considered
    all the evidence that was available to her;  reached  conclusions  that
    were open to her based on  the  evidence  and  her  approach  does  not
    disclose any error on her part.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a  point  of  law.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal shall stand.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal, and I see no  need  to  make
an anonymity order.


Signed      Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

