
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10408/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 December 2014                         |On 19 December 2014        |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR QUANG DUNG PHAM
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Mr M Shilliday a Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer
    For the Respondent: Ms S Iqbal of counsel instructed by FLK Solicitors




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  ("the
    Secretary of State). The respondent is a citizen  of  Vietnam  who  was
    born on 4 November 1984 ("the claimant"). The Secretary  of  State  has
    been  given  permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of  First-Tier
    Tribunal Judge Lobo ("the FTTJ")  who  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 6 February 2014 to  refuse
    to grant him indefinite leave to remain in the UK.


 2. The claimant arrived in the UK on 2 July 2006 on a student  visa  valid
    until 31 July 2010. He was granted further leave as a  Tier  4  Student
    until 31 May 2011. He was then granted leave as a spouse from  29  June
    2011 until 29 June 2013.


 3. On 28 June 2013 the appellant informed the Secretary of State that  his
    marriage had  broken  down  and  on  16  August  2013  he  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain. This was followed by the  refusal  decision
    of 6 February 2014.


 4. The claimant appealed on Article 8 human rights grounds. The FTTJ heard
    his appeal on 4 September 2014.  Both  parties  were  represented,  the
    claimant by Ms Iqbal who appears before me. The claimant and his mother
    gave evidence.


 5. The FTTJ found that the claimant's mother suffered from ill-health  but
    the evidence did not indicate that she could not live in  this  country
    without him or that he was needed as her carer. When he was  eight  the
    claimant's parents' marriage broke down. His mother  suffered  domestic
    violence. He went to live with his paternal  grandparents.  His  mother
    came to the UK but the claimant was not allowed to come with her.


 6. The claimant came to the UK legally as a student in 2006 when he was 22
    and his leave was extended until 2011. He then obtained  further  leave
    to remain as a spouse but subsequently his marriage to a person settled
    here broke down and he informed the Secretary of State.


 7. The claimant had lived in the UK for eight years between the ages of 22
    and 30, studied and been employed. Whilst employed he paid  income  tax
    and national insurance contributions. Whilst his formative  years  were
    spent in Vietnam he had spent a substantial part of his adult  life  in
    the UK, a country to which he had become  accustomed.  The  FTTJ  found
    that "he had lost connection with life in Vietnam".


 8. The claimant's relationship with his mother was  severed  when  he  was
    eight and they lost touch with each other.  After  she  came  here  and
    acquired British citizenship she went back to Vietnam in 2012 and tried
    to find him. She discovered that he was studying in the UK and  on  her
    return they were reunited.


 9. The claimant and  his  mother  had  developed  a  stronger  and  deeper
    relationship than that which  would  normally  be  expected  between  a
    mother and son because of the circumstances  of  their  separation  and
    being reunited.


10. The FTTJ set out the requirements which the claimant needed to meet  if
    he was to obtain leave to remain on the basis of his private life under
    Paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  He  found  that  under
    paragraph 276ADE (vi) the claimant was over the age of 18, had lived in
    the United Kingdom for less than 20 years but had  no  ties  (including
    social, cultural or family) with Vietnam.  He  made  reference  to  the
    principles set out in Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria  [2013]
    UKUT 60 (IAC) as to the meaning of "ties".


11. In the alternative the FTTJ found that if the claimant did not meet the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE there  were  compelling  circumstances
    not sufficiently recognised under the  Rules  which  provided  arguably
    good grounds to consider the claimant's position outside the Rules.  He
    was in an unusually strong and compelling relationship with his mother,
    had strong connections through family and business established  in  the
    United Kingdom "giving the expectation that  he  will  be  entitled  to
    settle at the end of the probationary period as a spouse."  He  had  no
    connections to his home country  and  had  clearly  integrated  himself
    within the UK. He had no criminal convictions  and  had  never  claimed
    public funds. He did not have a bad immigration history and the refusal
    by the Secretary of State did not arise out of any criminal offending.


12. The FTTJ went on to find that the claimant  had  established  a  family
    life with his mother and a private life in the  UK  over  a  period  of
    eight years. Removal would be an  interference  with  his  private  and
    family life of sufficient severity to engage Article 8. It is would  be
    within  the  law  and  have  as  its  objective  the  preservation   of
    immigration control. Consideration of proportionality required striking
    a fair balance between the rights of the claimant on the one  hand  and
    the interests of the community on the other.


13. The FTTJ concluded that it would  be  a  disproportionate  interference
    with the claimant's Article 8 human rights not to grant  him  leave  to
    remain in the UK. The appeal was allowed on human rights grounds  under
    the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds outside the Rules.


14. The Secretary of State  applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal. There are two grounds of appeal both of which submit  that  the
    FTTJ erred in law. Firstly, there was a misdirection as to the test  of
    "no ties" in the light of Ogundimu. The conclusion that there  were  no
    ties was either not open to the FTTJ on his findings of fact or, in the
    alternative, irrational. Secondly, the FTTJ misdirected himself in  the
    balancing  exercise  which  was  part  of  the  proportionality   test.
    Furthermore, the FTTJ failed to take into  account  the  provisions  of
    section 117B (5) of the Immigration Act 2014 given that the  claimant's
    presence in the UK had always been "precarious".


15. I have a Rule 24 response from the claimant's representatives.


16. Mr Shilliday submitted that the correct "no ties" test was set  out  in
    paragraphs 122 to 125 of Ogundimu. It was an exacting  test.  Paragraph
    276ADE was Article 8 compliant and on the facts of this  case  did  not
    lead to an unjustifiably harsh outcome. However, he  accepted  that  it
    might  now  be  the  case  that  if  it  was  necessary  to  go  beyond
    consideration of Article 8 human rights grounds under  the  Rules  then
    there was a single stage rather than the two-stage test.  Little  could
    be said in favour of the claimant except for a period of not very  long
    residence and his relationship with his mother. He had not  shown  that
    if he had to leave the country  he  would  suffer  more  than  what  Mr
    Shilliday described as "mere hardship or inconvenience". I was asked to
    find that there were errors of law, set aside the decision and then re-
    make it without the need for further evidence or submissions.


17. Ms Iqbal relied on her Rule 24 response. The claimant's status in  this
    country was never precarious. He was always here legally. He came as  a
    student, remained as a spouse and, when his marriage came  to  an  end,
    informed the Secretary of State.


18. Ms Iqbal took me to what was said in paragraphs 122 to 125 of  Ogundimu
    and submitted that the FTTJ dealt with all criteria except possibly for
    the question whether Vietnamese was his first language as  he  used  an
    interpreter at the hearing. The FTTJ had properly  taken  into  account
    all relevant factors and in particular the special relationship between
    the claimant and his mother. She relied on MM, (Lebanon) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 382 at paragraph 128.  It
    was a one stage rather than a two-stage test which had  to  be  applied
    when moving from Article 8 human rights  grounds  under  the  Rules  to
    consideration of them outside the Rules.


19. Ms Iqbal submitted that  the  FTTJ  did  not  refer  to  a  "legitimate
    expectation" but only  an  "expectation".  He  made  a  proper  rounded
    assessment and there was no error of law. If, on the other hand, I  was
    against her and found that there was an error of law and set aside  the
    decision she accepted that I could remake the decision without  hearing
    further evidence or submissions.


20. I reserved my determination.


21. Paragraphs 122 to 125 of Ogundimu state;


        "122.     We take note of the fact that the use of  the  phrase  "no
        ties (including social, cultural or  family)  with  the  country  to
        which he would have to go if  required  to  leave  the  UK"  is  not
        exclusive to paragraph 399A  of  the  Rules;  it  is  also  used  in
        paragraph 276 ADE, in the context of the requirements to be  met  by
        an applicant for leave to remain based on private life in the United
        Kingdom  when  such  person  has  lived  in   the   United   Kingdom
        for less than 20 years.


        123.      The natural  and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  'ties'
        imports, we think, a concept involving something  more  than  merely
        remote and abstract links to the country of proposed deportation  or
        removal. It involves there being a continued connection to  life  in
        that country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country
        of origin. If this were not the case then it  would  appear  that  a
        person's nationality of the country of proposed deportation could of
        itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of the rule.  This
        would render the application of the rule, given the  context  within
        which it operates, entirely meaningless.


        124.      We recognise that the test under the rules is an  exacting
        one. Consideration of whether a person has 'no ties' to such country
        must involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant  circumstances
        and  is  not  to  be  limited  to  'social,  cultural  and   family'
        circumstances. Nevertheless, we are satisfied that the appellant has
        no ties with Nigeria. He is a stranger to the country,  the  people,
        and the way of life. His father may have ties but they are not  ties
        of the appellant or any ties that could result  in  support  to  the
        appellant in the event of his return  there.  Unsurprisingly,  given
        the length of the appellant's residence here, all of  his  ties  are
        with the United Kingdom. Consequently the appellant has  so  little
        connection with Nigeria so as to mean that the consequences for  him
        in establishing private life there at the age of 28, after 22  years
        residence in the United Kingdom, would be 'unjustifiably harsh'.


        125.      Whilst each case turns on  its  own  facts,  circumstances
        relevant to the assessment of whether  a  person  has  ties  to  the
        country to which they would have to go  if  they  were  required  to
        leave the United Kingdom must include, but are not limited  to:  the
        length of time a person has spent in the country to which  he  would
        have to go if he were required to leave the United Kingdom, the  age
        that the person left that country, the exposure that person has  had
        to the cultural norms of that country, whether  that  person  speaks
        the language of the country, the extent of the  family  and  friends
        that person has in the country to which  he  is  being  deported  or
        removed and the quality of the relationships that  person  has  with
        those friends and family members."


22.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ  properly  applied  Ogundimu  principles   in
    considering whether the claimant had no ties to Vietnam.  There  is  an
    appropriate self-direction and reference to Ogundimu in  paragraph  26.
    In paragraph 25 (e) the words "the consequence  is  that  he  has  lost
    connection with  life  in  Vietnam"  are  a  finding  of  fact  not  an
    application of the  test.  This  comes  later,  in  paragraph  26.  The
    claimant came to  the  UK  when  he  was  22  and  has  been  here  for
    approximately 8 years. He has studied and been employed  here.  He  has
    paid tax and National Insurance. The FTTJ accepted that  he  had  spent
    his formative years in Vietnam but most of his adult life in the UK. He
    had become accustomed to life here especially because of  his  marriage
    to a person settled in the UK. His only close relative in  Vietnam  was
    his father but the appellant had no contact  with  him  except  at  the
    Chinese New Year. His mother is living here and is a  British  citizen.
    The  circumstances  of  their  separation  and   being   reunited   are
    significant. At paragraph 22 the FTTJ stated that the claimant and  his
    mother gave evidence through a Vietnamese speaking interpreter.  Whilst
    there is no further mention  of  this  in  the  conclusions  I  am  not
    persuaded that the FTTJ would have failed to take  this  into  account.
    There are a number of reasons why the claimant might have preferred  to
    give evidence through an interpreter although  I  accept  that  at  the
    least it indicates that the claimant still speaks Vietnamese.


23. I  find  that  the  conclusion  that  there  were  "no  ties"  was  not
    irrational.  Irrationality  is  a  test  with  a  high  threshold.  The
    conclusion is arguably generous but, I find,  within  the  spectrum  of
    what was open to the FTTJ on all the evidence. In this respect there is
    no error of law.


24. The second ground of appeal is based on a misconception arising from  a
    misquotation. The FTTJ did not say that the claimant had  a  legitimate
    expectation that he would be entitled to settle in the UK at the end of
    his probationary period as a spouse. In paragraph 26 (c) (ii)  he  said
    that the claimant had an expectation  that  he  would  be  entitled  to
    settle at the end of the probationary period as a  spouse.  "Legitimate
    expectation" is a legal test. The FTTJ was not applying  a  legal  test
    but an assessment of what the claimant would  reasonably  have  thought
    after he obtained probationary leave as a spouse.  Whilst  leave  as  a
    student would not normally lead  to  an  expectation  of  long-term  or
    indefinite stay the claimant would have been entitled  to  expect  that
    his marriage would continue and that probationary leave would grow into
    indefinite leave.


25. The FTTJ was entitled to take into account the  lack  of  any  criminal
    offending, that the claimant had paid tax and  national  insurance  and
    had  never  claimed  public  funds.  He  did  not  give  these  factors
    inappropriate weight.


26. It was not necessary for the FTTJ to consider the provisions of section
    117B (5) of the Immigration Act 2014. The claimant's status in  the  UK
    was always legal and not "precarious".


27. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction  and  can  see  no
    good reason to do so.


28. I find that the FTTJ  reached  conclusions  open  to  him  on  all  the
    evidence. There is no error of law. I dismiss the Secretary of  State's
    appeal and uphold the determination of the FTTJ.






 .............................................
 Signed  Date 13 December 2014


 Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden


