
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10688/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10th April 2015                       |On 15th April 2015                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                           Ms Lea junio belandres
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs White, Counsel instructed by Blakeells
For the Respondent:    Ms Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Ms Lea Junio Belandres date of birth 31st January  1977,
    is  a  citizen  of  the  Philippines.   Having   considered   all   the
    circumstances I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Wiseman promulgated on  30th October 2014,  whereby
    the judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decisions of the
    Respondent dated 29th January 2014. The  decisions  by  the  Respondent
    were to refuse the Appellant further leave to remain in  the  UK  as  a
    student and to remove the Appellant from the UK to the Philippines.

 3. By decision made on the 16th February 2015 leave to appeal against  the
    judgment of Judge Wiseman was granted. Thus the matter  appears  before
    me to determine in the first instance whether or not there is an  error
    of law in the original determination.

 4. The Appellant had entered the UK in August 2008 as a student. Her leave
    as a student had been extended at various times and in August 2013  the
    Appellant had made application for further leave  supported  by  a  CAS
    from the Overseas Nurses Training Organisation Ltd [ONTOL].

 5. At the time, when the application was made, ONTOL were on the  register
    of approved sponsors. However prior to a  decision  being  taken  ONTOL
    were removed from the list of approved  sponsors.  Without  giving  the
    Appellant an opportunity to find an alternative sponsor the immigration
    decisions  were  taken  by  the  Respondent  refusing  the  Appellant's
    application.

 6. I draw attention to the cases  of  Patel  (Revocation  of  a  Sponsor's
    Licence- fairness) India [2011] UKUT 211 (IAC) and Kaur (Patel-fairness
    -respondent's policy) [2013] UKUT 344 (IAC). The cases make clear that,
    where through no fault or involvement of an applicant a  college  loses
    its licence to act  as  a  sponsor,  under  common  law  principles  of
    fairness, an applicant should be given the opportunity to  find  a  new
    sponsor and obtain a fresh CAS to  support  the  application,  provided
    that is the only ground for refusing an application.

 7. In assessing what is fair in the circumstances all of the facts have to
    be looked at.

 8. Before me there is a skeleton argument setting out that  the  Appellant
    could not apply for  a  fresh  CAS  without  her  passport,  which,  it
    appears, had been submitted in support  of  the  original  application.
    Likewise with a refusal decision made against her she would not be able
    to get a fresh CAS.

 9. I have a great deal of sympathy with the judge dealing with this matter
    at first instance. The Appellant did  not  attend  and  the  judge  had
    limited  evidence  before  him  about  the  passport  and  no  reasoned
    explanation as to why the Appellant had not applied for a fresh CAS. In
    the absence of the Appellant it may be  understandable  why  the  judge
    made the decision that he did.

10. However given the case law identified above  this  is  clearly  a  case
    caught by the principles set out.

11. At the outset of the hearing  before  me  the  representative  for  the
    respondent conceded that there was an error of  law.  It  was  accepted
    that in line with the case law the Appeal  should  be  allowed  as  the
    decision is not in accordance with the case law set  out  and  breaches
    the Common law duty of fairness. It was accepted that in line with  the
    case law there was an application  before  the  respondent  awaiting  a
    lawful decision. Whilst that application is outstanding  the  Appellant
    should have 60 days to submit all necessary documents  to  support  the
    application including a valid CAS from a registered sponsor.

12. I have considered whether it is appropriate to make a fee award. Having
    regard to all the circumstances I do not make a fee award.

Decision

13. I find that there is a material error of law in the  determination  and
    substitute the following decision:-

         The appeal is allowed to the extent that there  is  an  application
         outstanding before the respondent which requires a lawful decision.

14. I make no fee award



Signed        Date 15th April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
