
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10918/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25th February 2016                     |On 24th March 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                IMRAN HOSSAIN
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against the decision  of  Judge  Widdup  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 19th June 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Bangladesh born 8th July 1989 who on
    2nd October 2014 applied for  an  EEA  residence  card  as  he  is  the
    unmarried partner of a Romanian citizen Maria-Christina  Corlaciu  (the
    Sponsor) who is exercising treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    application was made on the basis that the Appellant and Sponsor are in
    a durable relationship and  therefore  the  Appellant  is  an  extended
    family member of the Sponsor, and entitled to a residence card pursuant
    to  regulation  8(5)  of  The  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).

 3. The application was  refused  on  3rd  March  2015  with  reference  to
    regulations 2  and  8(5)  of  the  2006  Regulations.   The  Respondent
    contended that the  relationship  was  one  of  convenience,  and  this
    conclusion was reached because of inconsistent  answers  given  by  the
    Appellant and Sponsor when they were separately  interviewed.   It  was
    also contended that insufficient documentation had  been  submitted  to
    suggest that the couple are in a durable relationship.

 4. The appeal was heard by the  FTT  on  3rd  June  2015.   After  hearing
    evidence, the FTT decided that no importance should  be  given  to  the
    answers in interview which were inconsistent, and the interviews  alone
    did not prove that the relationship was one  of  convenience.   However
    the FTT found that there were other factors which did indicate that the
    relationship was one of  convenience,  and  the  appeal  was  therefore
    dismissed.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was submitted that the FTT erred by dismissing the appeal
    on grounds not raised  by  the  Respondent.   It  was  noted  that  the
    Respondent was not represented before the FTT, and the FTT did not have
    a copy of the Respondent's bundle at the  hearing,  but  only  received
    this after the hearing had concluded.  The FTT found that the Appellant
    had given  oral  evidence  about  his  immigration  history  which  was
    inconsistent with evidence contained in a letter  from  his  solicitors
    dated 2nd October 2014.  It was contended that it was wrong in law  for
    the FTT to draw an adverse inference from this, as the FTT should  have
    reconvened the hearing in order to allow the Appellant to  clarify  his
    evidence or submissions to be made on that point.

 6. The FTT in dismissing the appeal relied upon other grounds  not  raised
    by the Respondent, and which were not raised at the  hearing.   It  was
    contended that the FTT should not have made the findings  contained  in
    paragraphs 49-53 of the decision,  without  giving  the  Appellant  the
    opportunity to address issues, which had not been raised either by  the
    Respondent in the refusal letter or at the hearing before the FTT.

 7. It was contended that the FTT erred in law in considering regulation  8
    of the 2006 Regulations by considering whether the relationship was one
    of convenience, rather  than  considering  whether  the  Appellant  had
    proved that he is in a durable relationship.

 8. It was contended that the FTT  erred  by  failing  to  have  regard  to
    relevant factors such as the evidence of the Sponsor who  was  accepted
    by the FTT to be credible, and in failing to  make  clear  findings  on
    evidence given by a witness, Mr Huda.

 9. Permission to appeal was  granted  and  directions  issued  that  there
    should be an oral  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain
    whether the FTT had erred in law such that the decision should  be  set
    aside.

Error Of Law

10. At a hearing before me on 15th January 2016 I  heard  submissions  from
    both parties regarding error of law.  On behalf of the Appellant it was
    contended that the FTT decision was  materially  flawed  by  reason  of
    procedural unfairness.  The FTT had rejected the reasons given  by  the
    Respondent for refusing the  Appellant's  application,  and  thereafter
    substituted reasons for dismissing the appeal, which had not  been  put
    to  the  Appellant,  and  therefore  the  Appellant  had  not  had   an
    opportunity to address those issues.

11. On behalf of the Respondent reliance was placed upon a  response  dated
    6th November 2015  submitted  pursuant  to  rule  24  of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and no further  oral  submissions
    were made.  In summary the rule 24 response contended that the FTT  had
    directed  itself  appropriately,  considered  all  the  evidence,   and
    provided adequate reasons.

12. I set aside the FTT decision, concluding that the  FTT  had  materially
    erred in law for the following reasons.

13. The Respondent had refused the application because  of  inconsistencies
    displayed in interviews, but  the  FTT  attached  no  weight  to  those
    reasons explaining in paragraph 42:

         "42  Unlike the Respondent I attach no importance to the answers in
             interview which were inconsistent.  Even  couples  in  a  long
             marriage can give differing answers to the same question about
             their   relationship   without   that   meaning   that   their
             relationship is not genuine and long-standing."

14. The FTT then went on to find in paragraph 49;

         "49  However, I find that there are other factors of greater weight
             which do show that this relationship  is  or  may  be  one  of
             convenience."

15. The FTT then went on in paragraphs 50-56 to set out other  reasons  for
    dismissing the appeal.  In summary  the  FTT  found  that  this  was  a
    relationship initiated on line between a Bangladeshi Muslim  attempting
    to prolong his right to remain in the UK and a Romanian  woman  from  a
    Christian background.  The FTT found that the Appellant had it in  mind
    at that time to prolong his stay in the UK  by  making  an  application
    pursuant to Article 8, and thereafter by entering into  a  relationship
    with the Sponsor was later able to claim that he had family life in the
    UK.

16. The FTT did not find the Appellant to be credible or  reliable,  noting
    that he had given oral evidence that no decision had been made  on  his
    Article 8 claim that he had made earlier, whereas the letter  from  his
    solicitors which the FTT discovered after the hearing,  indicated  that
    there had been an appeal to the FTT which was unsuccessful,  and  there
    had been a further application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and a decision was awaited on that.

17. In addition the Appellant's evidence that a relationship  such  as  his
    with the Sponsor would present no problems  in  Bangladesh  was  wholly
    unsupported by background evidence, which caused the FTT to  find  that
    the Appellant was minimising difficulties  such  a  relationship  would
    attract in Bangladesh, which damaged his credibility.

18. The FTT was satisfied that the Sponsor embarked on the relationship  in
    the belief that the Appellant intended a long-term relationship, but it
    was not accepted that the Appellant had the  same  intention,  the  FTT
    finding that his intention was to present the Respondent with  evidence
    of a relationship in support of an application to prolong his  time  in
    the UK.

19. The FTT found that the evidence  given  by  the  witness  Mr  Huda  was
    outweighed by the other  factors  referred  to  paragraphs  50-55,  and
    therefore concluded that the relationship  between  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor was not a durable one.

20. I decided that the FTT should have reconvened the hearing.  It appeared
    that the letter from the Appellant's solicitors dated 2nd October  2014
    contradicted the oral evidence given by the Appellant.  This  was  only
    discovered after the hearing.  The Appellant should have been given  an
    opportunity to comment upon this.  This apparent conflict  in  evidence
    influenced the FTT into making an adverse credibility finding.

21. The Appellant was  not  put  on  notice  of  the  factors  set  out  in
    paragraphs 50-55 of the FTT decision, as his appeal was based upon  the
    reasons given  for  refusing  his  application,  contained  within  the
    Respondent's refusal letter dated 3rd March 2015.  There  is  no  doubt
    that difficulties were caused for the FTT by not  having  received  and
    read the Respondent's bundle prior to the hearing, and  the  Respondent
    not being represented.

22. However it was unfair to make findings on issues of which the Appellant
    was not given notice, and therefore did not have the chance to address.



23. The hearing was adjourned to enable further evidence to  be  given,  so
    that the decision could be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.  The findings
    contained in paragraph 42 of the FTT decision had not  been  challenged
    and were therefore preserved, as was the finding in paragraph  48  that
    the interviews taken alone  do  not  provide  a  sound  basis  for  the
    conclusion that the relationship  is  one  of  convenience.   Also  not
    challenged and therefore preserved was the finding in paragraph 54 that
    the Sponsor embarked  on  the  relationship  in  the  belief  that  the
    Appellant intended a long-term relationship.

Re-making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 25th February 2016

24. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and that each party had served the other with
    any documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.

25. I had received the  Respondent's  bundle  with  Annexes  A-F,  and  the
    Appellant's bundle  comprising  479  pages,  together  with  a  further
    nineteen-page bundle submitted at the error  of  law  hearing  on  15th
    January 2016 and which had been admitted into evidence pursuant to rule
    15(2A) of the 2008 Procedure Rules.

26. Mr Lewis made a further rule 15(2A) application, to admit into evidence
    a third statement of the Sponsor, together with witness statements from
    Cheryl Huda and Lucie Philbin, both of whom were present  in  order  to
    give  evidence.   There  was  no  objection  from  Mr  Duffy  to   this
    application which was granted so that the statements could be  admitted
    into evidence.

27. Mr Duffy advised that he had no oral submissions to make.  He explained
    that this was because the Respondent's case, which was set out  in  the
    refusal letter dated 3rd March 2015, was that the relationship was  one
    of convenience, because of inconsistent  answers  given  at  interview,
    when  the  Appellant  and   Sponsor   were   questioned   about   their
    relationship.  The FTT had rejected this as a reason  for  finding  the
    relationship to be one of convenience, and those findings had not  been
    challenged and had been preserved.  Mr Duffy did not intend  to  pursue
    the other matters raised by the FTT.

28. Mr Lewis indicated that  the  Appellant,  Sponsor  and  witnesses  were
    present and if necessary he would tender  them  for  cross-examination.
    This was not however necessary as Mr Duffy indicated  that  he  had  no
    questions, and the Tribunal had no questions.

29. Mr Lewis therefore submitted that the appeal should be  allowed.   Both
    representatives agreed that because the application was for a residence
    card as an extended family member, if the appeal was allowed, it should
    be allowed to the extent that the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance  with  the  law,  and  therefore   the   decision   remained
    outstanding before the Respondent to consider regulation 17(4)  of  the
    2006 Regulations.

30. I announced at the hearing that the appeal was allowed and that I would
    issue a written decision confirming my reasons.  Mr Lewis applied for a
    fee award, which Mr Duffy indicated he could not oppose.

My Conclusions and Reasons

31. In allowing this appeal, I have taken into account all of the  evidence
    both oral and documentary placed before the  Tribunal,  and  considered
    that evidence in the round.  Generally, in an appeal against a  refusal
    to issue a residence  card,  the  burden  of  proof  would  be  on  the
    Appellant, and the standard of proof is a balance of probabilities.

32. In this appeal, the primary reason for  refusing  the  application  was
    that the Respondent contended that  the  parties  had  entered  into  a
    relationship  of  convenience.   The  Court  of  Appeal  recently  gave
    guidance in Rosa v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 14.  The guidance related to marriages of convenience, but the
    same principles apply in relation to relationships of convenience.   It
    was held that the legal burden was on the Secretary of State  to  prove
    that an otherwise valid marriage was a marriage of convenience so as to
    justify the refusal of a residence card  under  the  2006  Regulations.
    The Upper Tribunal decision in Papajorgji [EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 38 (IAC) was  approved.   Although  the
    legal burden of proof in relation to marriage lay on the  Secretary  of
    State, if the Secretary of State adduced evidence capable  of  pointing
    to the conclusion  that  the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience,  the
    evidential burden shifted to the Appellant.  In this appeal, I  do  not
    find that the Secretary  of  State  has  adduced  evidence  capable  of
    pointing  to  the  conclusion  that  the  relationship   was   one   of
    convenience.

33. The issues raised by the FTT at the hearing, had not been raised by the
    Respondent when the application for a residence card was  refused,  and
    were not relied upon at the hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

34. I have already set out paragraph 42 of the FTT decision, which  finding
    was preserved,  and  I  set  out  below  paragraph  48  which  is  also
    preserved;

         "48  I do not accept that the  interviews  taken  alone  provide  a
             sound basis for that conclusion.  If that were the only  basis
             upon which it could be said that this relationship was one  of
             convenience the appeal would fail." (the FTT must  have  meant
             the appeal would succeed)

35. Having preserved the unchallenged findings that the  answers  given  in
    interview do not provide a basis for contending that  the  relationship
    is one of convenience, I am satisfied that the parties are in a durable
    relationship.  The Sponsor was found to be credible by the FTT and that
    finding was preserved.  I am satisfied that the Appellant did not enter
    into this relationship for the purpose of gaining leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.  I accept his evidence  that  he  and  the  Sponsor
    first made internet contact in November 2012, and  thereafter  remained
    in contact until the Sponsor visited the United Kingdom  in  May  2014,
    and that the parties started to cohabit on 10th May 2014 and are  still
    living together.

36.  There  is  extensive  documentary  evidence   contained   within   the
    Appellant's bundle, to prove that the parties cohabit, and  to  support
    their contention that they  are  in  a  durable  relationship.   It  is
    accepted  that  for  the  purposes  of  the   2006   Regulations,   and
    consideration of a durable relationship, there is no formal requirement
    that the parties must have cohabited for at least two years.

37. I note that further evidence, which I regard as independent,  has  been
    produced in support of the claim that the  parties  are  in  a  durable
    relationship.  This is the witness statement evidence of  Cheryl  Huda,
    and Lucie Philbin.  I attach particular weight to the evidence of Lucie
    Philbin who explained that she rented a room in the  flat  occupied  by
    the Appellant and Sponsor  and  lived  there  from  August  2014  until
    October 2015.  At this time Ms Philbin was working full-time  with  the
    Army Reservists at the University of London Training  Corps.   She  has
    explained in her witness statement that in her view the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor were in a normal committed relationship during  the  time  that
    she shared their flat with them.

38. Ms Philbin has commented specifically in her  statement,  that  she  is
    closer to the Sponsor than the Appellant, and that if she thought  that
    the Appellant was using the Sponsor, she would not  consider  attending
    the Tribunal to give evidence to  support  him.   She  did  attend  the
    Tribunal hearing, and was prepared to answer any questions put to  her,
    and I do attach significant weight to her independent evidence.

39. I therefore conclude that the Secretary of State has not discharged the
    burden of proof, whereas the Appellant has provided sufficient evidence
    to prove that he and the Sponsor are in  a  durable  relationship,  and
    therefore the appeal should be allowed.

40. I set out below the third paragraph to the head note to the decision in
    Ihemedu (OFM - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC);

         "(iii)   Regulation 17(4) makes the issue of a residence card to an
             OFM/extended family member a matter of discretion.  Where  the
             Secretary of State has not yet exercised that  discretion  the
             most an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is  to  allow  the
             appeal as being not in accordance with  the  law  leaving  the
             matter  of  whether  to  exercise  this  discretion   in   the
             Appellant's favour to the Secretary of State."

41. In this case I have found that the  Appellant  is  an  extended  family
    member of the  Sponsor.   However  the  Respondent  has  not  exercised
    discretion pursuant to regulation 17(4) and therefore I  conclude  that
    the decision is not in accordance with the law, which  means  that  the
    Respondent must now  consider  the  issue  of  discretion  pursuant  to
    regulation 17(4) of  the  2006  Regulations.   In  my  view,  and  both
    representatives agreed, this disposal is open to the  Tribunal  because
    the Respondent's decision pre-dated the changes made to  appeal  rights
    introduced by the Immigration Act 2014, which abolished  the  right  of
    appeal on grounds that the decision is not in accordance with the  law.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is allowed, to the extent that the Respondent's decision  is  not
in accordance with the law.
Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity to the Upper Tribunal and I see  no  need  to  make  an  anonymity
order.






Signed                              Date 29th February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is allowed.  I make a full fee award in the sum of �140.






Signed                              Date 29th February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

