
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10041/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th July 2015                    |On 28th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                              IRENE OHUI SACKEY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells, instructed by Maliks and Khan Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 14 February 1970.   She  is
    the widow of Davies Addie, an Italian citizen, who died in  the  UK  on
    21st March 2013. She has two children born 25th September 2001 and 25th
    June 2004.  They are Italian citizens.

2.   The Appellant applied for a  residence  card  as  confirmation  of  her
    right to reside in the United Kingdom as the parent of an EEA  national
    on 6th August 2013 but that application was refused in a decision dated
    4th February 2014. The children were not self  sufficient  because  the
    Appellant was in receipt of state benefits and  under  the   Chen  (ECJ
    C2000/02) principle, they did not  have  relevant  insurance  cover  to
    prevent them being a burden on  the  state.  The  Appellant,  as  their
    primary carer, could not satisfy Regulation 15A(2) of  the  Immigration
    (European   Economic   Area)   (Amendment)   Regulations   2012   ["the
    Regulations"]. She could not benefit from  Regulation  15A(3)  because,
    although her late husband was in the UK for a period of about two years
    before his death, the Appellant and her  children  remained  in  Italy.
    There was  no  suggestion  that  she  does  in  fact  comply  with  the
    Regulations.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant and her children  were
    prejudiced by the decision which, it was said, breached their rights of
    residence under EU law on the basis that the Appellant had no status in
    Italy. The Respondent's appeal was allowed by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    30th June 2015 on the basis that First-tier Judge Griffith erred in law
    in accepting the Appellant's mere assertion of  a  lack  of  status  in
    Italy. The decision was set aside and  the  appeal  adjourned  for  re-
    hearing.

Submissions

4.   Mr Wells confirmed that enquiries  had  been  made  and  the  Appellant
    would be granted a right of residence in Italy. However, the  Appellant
    still wished to pursue her appeal on Article 8  grounds.  The  children
    had a right to education in the UK following Baumbast  (C-413/99)  [73]
    and Teixeira (C-480/08) [65]. The children  had  spent  a  considerable
    amount of time in Italy, but they had also been  educated  in  the  UK.
    Interference with their education was sufficient to engage  Article  8.
    It was disproportionate to expect them to return to  Italy  with  their
    mother given the ruling in Teixeira. The fact that a reference  to  the
    CJEU had been  made  in  NA  Pakistan  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  995,
    strengthened  the  Appellant's  argument  that  there  should   be   no
    interference with the children's education at this time.

5.   Mr Avery submitted that the Appellant could not meet  the  requirements
    of the Regulations. Any reference to EU considerations  had  a  minimum
    impact on Article 8. The Appellant had a right of  residence  in  Italy
    and she and her children had lived there until they came to the  UK  in
    2013. The  children  could  continue  their  education  in  Italy.  Any
    interference was not so significant so as to engage  Article  8  or  to
    render the refusal of a residence card disproportionate.

6.   Mr Wells submitted that education was not transitory and was  intrinsic
    to the child. Interference with education was a serious matter and  the
    children in this case should be treated the  same  as  British  citizen
    children. Interference with their education would have a  long  lasting
    effect and requiring the to return to Italy was disproportionate in the
    circumstances.

Relevant EU provisions

7.   Article 12 of Directive 2004/38/EC provides:

         "Retention of the right of residence by family members in the event
         of death or departure of the Union citizen

         1.   Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,  the  Union
         citizen's death or departure from the host Member State  shall  not
         affect the right of residence of his/her  family  members  who  are
         nationals of a Member State.

         Before acquiring the right  of  permanent  residence,  the  persons
         concerned must meet the conditions laid down in points (a), (b),(c)
         or (d) of Article 7(1).

         2.   Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,  the  Union
         citizen's death shall not entail loss of the right of residence  of
         his/her family members who are not nationals of a Member State  and
         who have been residing in the host Member State as  family  members
         for at least one year before the Union citizen's death.

         Before acquiring the right of permanent  residence,  the  right  of
         residence of the persons concerned  shall  remain  subject  to  the
         requirement that they are able to show that  they  are  workers  or
         self-employed persons or that they have  sufficient  resources  for
         themselves and their family members not to become a burden  on  the
         social assistance system of the  host  Member  State  during  their
         period of residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance cover
         in the host Member State, or that they are members of  the  family,
         already  constituted  in  the  host  Member  State,  of  a   person
         satisfying these requirements. "Sufficient resources" shall  be  as
         defined in Article 8(4).

         Such  family  members  shall  retain  their  right   of   residence
         exclusively on a personal basis.

         3.   The Union citizen's departure from the host  Member  State  or
         his/her death shall not entail loss of the right  of  residence  of
         his/her children or of the parent who has  actual  custody  of  the
         children, irrespective of nationality, if the  children  reside  in
         the  host  Member  State  and  are  enrolled  at   an   educational
         establishment,  for  the  purpose  of  studying  there,  until  the
         completion of their studies."

8.   Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68 provides:

         "The children of a national of a Member State who is  or  has  been
         employed in the territory of another Member State shall be admitted
         to that State's general educational, apprenticeship and  vocational
         training courses under the same conditions as the nationals of that
         State, if such children are residing in its territory.

         Member States shall encourage all efforts to enable  such  children
         to attend these courses under the best possible conditions."

Discussion and conclusions

9.   The Appellant came to the UK in April 2013 in order to  bury  her  late
    husband, returned to Italy, and then re-entered the UK in August  2013.
    She came to the UK, with her children,  after  her  husband  had  died.
    Therefore, they cannot benefit from Article 12 of Directive  2004/38/EC
    because they did not reside in the UK for at least one year before  his
    death. They do not have a retained right of residence in EU law.

10.  The underlying purpose of Article 12 is explained in  Recital  (15)  to
    the Directive which provides:

         "Family members should be legally safeguarded in the event  of  the
         death of the Union  citizen,  divorce,  annulment  of  marriage  or
         termination of a registered partnership. With due regard for family
         life and human dignity, and in certain conditions to guard  against
         abuse, measures should therefore be taken to ensure  that  in  such
         circumstances family members already residing within the  territory
         of  the  host  Member  State  retain  their  right   of   residence
         exclusively on a personal basis."

11.  In Baumbast the Court held that children of an  EU  citizen  "who  have
    installed themselves in a Member State during  the  exercise  by  their
    parent of right of residence as a migrant worker in that  Member  State
    are entitled to reside there in order  to  attend  general  educational
    courses there, pursuant to Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68.  The  fact
    that the parents of the children concerned meanwhile divorced, the fact
    that only one parent is a citizen of the  Union  and  that  parent  has
    ceased to be a migrant worker in the host Member  State  and  the  fact
    that the  children  are  not  themselves  citizens  of  the  Union  are
    irrelevant in this regard."

12.  In this case the children have not installed themselves  in  UK  whilst
    their father was exercising a right of residence. They came to  the  UK
    after their father died. They do not have a right  to  education  under
    Regulation 1612/68 and cannot derive a  right  of  residence  in  these
    circumstances.

13.  This case can be distinguished from Teixeira because in that  case  the
    child was born in the UK and was residing with the EEA parent prior  to
    the divorce. The child was in education and had an independent right of
    residence under Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68 when her mother sought
    to rely on it as her primary carer.  The  Appellant,  in  this  appeal,
    cannot therefore benefit  from  the  ruling  in  Teixeira  because  the
    children were not already residing in the UK and in education prior  to
    their father's death.

14.  In Amirteymour and others  (EEA  appeals;  human  rights)  [2015]  UKUT
    00466 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that where no notice under  section
    120 of the 2002 Act has been served and where no EEA decision to remove
    has been made an appellant cannot bring a  human  rights  challenge  to
    removal in an appeal under the EEA Regulations.

15.  Accordingly, the Appellant cannot  succeed  under  Article  8.  In  any
    event the Appellant and her children can return to Italy  and  continue
    their family and private life there. They have spent  the  majority  of
    their lives there and have only been educated in the UK for  a  limited
    time. The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 27th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 27th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
