
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10218/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 July 2015                      |On 26 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   l.a.a.
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An application for permission to appeal was made by  the  Secretary  of
    State but for the purposes of this appeal I will refer to  the  parties
    as they were termed before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 27  August  1968  and  he
    appealed against the decision of the Secretary of  State  taken  on  14
    February 2014 to remove him from the United Kingdom under Section 10 of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 3. The appellant first entered the United Kingdom on 4 August 2000 and was
    refused leave to enter and removed on 6 August 2000 to Jamaica.

 4. He returned to the UK in December 2001 giving the name  of  MD  with  a
    forged Jamaican passport and he lived for  thirteen  years  in  the  UK
    undiscovered by the authorities.

 5. On 14 September 2014 he was arrested  for  possession  with  intent  to
    supply controlled drugs, namely cannabis and in possession of a folding
    flick knife.

 6. He was charged with the possession of an offensive weapon in  a  public
    place and possession of controlled  drugs,  cannabis,  and  he  pleaded
    guilty at Camberwell Green Magistrates'  Court  receiving  a  custodial
    sentence of eight weeks in total.

 7. He had a long-term partner, CD with whom he had been  living  for  over
    two years and they had two children together.   Ms  D  also  had  three
    children from previous relationships.  All of the children are  British
    citizens as indeed was Ms D.  One of Ms D's children was in poor health
    and undergoing medical treatment.

 8. The appellant also had two children in Jamaica and a child  born  on  8
    March 2012 with another woman in the UK.

 9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb and  Cockrill  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal both under the Immigration Rules and  outside  the  Rules  under
    Article 8.

Application for Permission to Appeal

10. The Secretary of State contended in the application for  permission  to
    appeal that that there was a material misdirection in law further to S-
    LTR.16.??

11. The Tribunal concluded that it had not been established the Appellant's
    conduct character or associations were such that it made  his  presence
    in the UK undesirable [103]. ??This  conclusion  by  the  Tribunal  was
    unsupported by the evidence as there was a clear basis  for  concluding
    that the appellant's conduct and character were such that his  presence
    in the UK was undesirable. The Secretary of State was entitled to reach
    such a conclusion and she was not palpably wrong in her assessment.??

12. The application for permission to appeal  asserted  that  the  Tribunal
    concluded, at [91], that the appellant was  not  a  witness  of  truth,
    finding that he made a calculated decision to  use  a  different  alias
    'perfectly knowingly' [94-95].  Despite this, the Tribunal appeared  to
    make positive credibility findings  ("having  said  that  there  are  a
    number  of  areas  in  which  we  accept  the  appellant's   evidence")
    effectively on the sole basis that the appellant used a false  identify
    to avoid detection by the authorities [92-93].??

13. Thus, in assessing the facts  of  the  case,  the  Tribunal  sought  to
    minimise the appellant's character and conduct by way of generalisation
    [104-106] and despite the previous adverse credibility findings.??

14. The appellant's conduct was undesirable for several reasons:  his  poor
    immigration history, his willingness to lies to immigration  officials,
    and the authorities as well as his convictions and his reprimand in the
    UK.??At [106] when assessing suitability the Tribunal reasoned that the
    appellant's conduct 'needs to be placed in the scales" with his  family
    life. ??There was no scope to  take  account  of  the  strength  of  a
    person's  family  life  when  considering   whether   the   suitability
    requirements are met. If the suitability requirements were not met then
    it was the  respondent's  policy  of  exceptional  circumstances  which
    allows for all relevant factors including family life to be taken  into
    account. ??Taken cumulatively, as the factors must be, the  appellant's
    character and conduct did disclose a basis to  refuse  his  application
    under S-LTR 1.6.

15. Despite previous adverse credibility findings [90-95] the  Tribunal  in
    assessing the factors sought  to  minimise  the  appellant's  character
    despite having concluded that he was not a witness of truth.   Moreover
    the Tribunal erred at  [106]  in  concluding  the  appellant's  conduct
    needed to be placed in the scales with his family life.  There  was  no
    scope to take into account the  strength  of  a  person's  private  and
    family life when considering the suitability requirements.

16. It was stated that taken cumulatively as  the  factors  should  be  the
    respondent  asserted  that  the  appellant's  character   and   conduct
    disclosed a basis  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  to  refuse  his
    application under S-LTR1.6.

17. Further, in concluding that the appellant could take advantage of  EX.1
    the Tribunal had approached the provision as a stand-alone clause which
    ran  contrary  to  the  decision  in  Sabir  (Appendix  FM   EX.1   not
    freestanding) [2014] UKUT 00063.  In  adopting  the  parent  route  the
    Tribunal should have found that EX.1 was not available to the appellant
    as he could not meet other Rules under  E-LTRPT.   The  appellant  also
    fell foul of FLTR 1.6.

18. It was also contended that the judge exercised a freewheeling Article 8
    analysis unencumbered by the Rules.

19. Although there was reference to Section 117B(6) of the Immigration  Act
    2014, the Tribunal was required  to  have  regard  to  all  the  public
    interest considerations and Section 117B(6) was not a stand-alone test.
     This states the public  interest  does  not  require  the  appellant's
    removal but does not go so far as to state that the public interest was
    defeated.   Had  the  Tribunal  undertaken  a  holistic  assessment  as
    required the public interest in the appellant's removal would prevail.

20. In addition the Tribunal had erred in addressing the subsistence of the
    appellant's relationship with his claimed partner and children as  well
    as the genuineness of their cohabitation.  This was  an  appellant  who
    had habitually lied and used deception to benefit himself.

21. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Shimmin in that
    the Tribunal had regarded Appendix FM EX.1 as a stand-alone clause  and
    had also erred in its assessment of Article 8 and  the  application  of
    Section 117B.

The Hearing

22. Mr Norton explained the position of the Secretary of State carefully to
    the appellant who was unrepresented at the error of law hearing  before
    me.  He was given a copy of the papers so  that  he  might  familiarise
    himself with the position prior to commencement of the hearing.

Conclusions

23. At paragraph 13 of the decision the Tribunal stated:

         "The way in which that subsection (LS-LTR.1.6) is worded gives  the
         Secretary of State a  discretion.   Accordingly  we  must  consider
         whether  or  not  the  discretion  should   have   been   exercised
         differently".

24. In fact S-LTR1.1 states:

         "The applicant will be refused limited leave to remain  on  grounds
         of suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.1.2 to 1.7 apply."

    S-LTR.1.6 states:

         "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the
         public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
         not  fall  within  paragraphs   S-LTR.1.3   to   1.5),   character,
         associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to  allow  them
         to remain in the UK."

25. Should the appellant fall for refusal under Section 1.6 it is mandatory
    to refuse t limited leave to remain on grounds of suitability.  It  was
    accepted  that  the  appellant  had  criminal  convictions.   Had   the
    appellant contested that he had a criminal conviction or  that  he  had
    entered the UK illegally there may have been grounds to  challenge  the
    basis of the application of S-LTR.1.6 but in the circumstances of  this
    appeal it is not the case that there is a discretion to be exercised by
    the Tribunal where the  facts,  as  in  these  circumstances,  are  not
    disputed.  As recorded by the Tribunal the appellant had entered the UK
    using a forged Jamaican passport, had used the friend's name  perfectly
    knowingly [94] and

         "This was a calculated decision  from  the  start  to  use  someone
         else's identity with a view, so  to  speak,  to  remain  below  the
         radar" [94].

26. With relation to the conviction the Tribunal noted at [96]:

         "We note specifically the conviction and sentence.  It  seems  that
         he received one caution rather than two"

    and

         "... this is a case that does not involve violence" [104].

    From the  evidence  it  is  clear,  however,  that  the  appellant  was
    convicted of possession of an offensive weapon and  for  possession  of
    drugs.

27. There was no challenge by the appellant  to  the  effect  that  he  had
    indeed been convicted of these offences and therefore there was a sound
    basis for the adoption by  the  Secretary  of  State  of  paragraph  S-
    LTR.1.6.  This was not in the discretion  of  the  Tribunal.   At  this
    point in the deliberations there was no scope to take into account  the
    strength of a person's private and family  life  when  considering  the
    suitability requirements.

28. It is also the case that there appeared to be contradictory findings of
    fact, regarding credibility, within the decision  and  which  supported
    the Tribunal's conclusions.

29. As a result and because the appellant had not  fulfilled  the  relevant
    substantive parts of the Immigration Rules, the Tribunal erred  in  law
    by stating at paragraph 115 that the appellant

         "... succeeds under the Rules on the premise that he is not  barred
         from consideration of the application of EX.1  by  the  suitability
         requirements."

30. In particular SS Congo v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  387  confirms  that  the
    Immigration  Rules  are  the  starting  point  of   a   proportionality
    consideration under Article 8, and  in  this  particular  instance  the
    foundation of the decision under the Immigration Rules was concluded in
    error.  In particular the Secretary of State's position as set  out  in
    the Rules should be given weight and this was not  the  case  that  was
    addressed effectively by the Tribunal because of the error committed in
    the previous assessment.

31. Although I find that this was not necessarily a "free wheeling  Article
    8 analysis unencumbered by  the  Rules"  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    identify  the  difficulties  with  the  appellant's  case   under   the
    Immigration Rules as highlighted above and also failed to apply Section
    117B(6) of the Immigration Act 2014 correctly. Section 117B(6) does not
    necessarily 'trump' all the other public interest  considerations.   In
    an assessment of proportionality the Tribunal was required to have  all
    relevant considerations set out in Section 117B and other factors which
    may be relevant following Huang v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2007] UKHL  11.   Dube  (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT  00090
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) confirms that Sections  117A  to  117D
    'do not represent any kind of radical departure  from  that  "override"
    previous case law on Article 8 so  far  as  concerns  the  need  for  a
    structured approach.  In particular they do not disturb  the  need  for
    judges to ask themselves the five questions set out  in  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27.  Sections 117A to 117D are essentially a  further  elaboration
    of Razgar's question 5  which  essentially  about  proportionality  and
    justifiability'.

32. An assessment of the same may have made a material  difference  to  the
    outcome.

Notice of Decision

The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent of
the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
