
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10292/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th May 2016                             |On 27th May 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ganiyat bolanle bodun
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by MA Consultants
(London)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant is  a  citizen
    of Nigeria born on 5 August 1960.  Her appeal against the  Respondent's
    decision to remove her from the UK,  pursuant  to  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999,  was  allowed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules by First-tier Tribunal Judge Owens in a decision  promulgated  on
    29th September 2015.
2.   The Respondent appealed on the grounds that the  judge  had  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for concluding  that  there  were  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's integration in Nigeria  and  allowing  the
    appeal under paragraph 276ADE.

3.   Secondly, very significant obstacles to integration  was  a  very  high
    threshold test entailing something which  would  prevent  or  seriously
    inhibit the Appellant from integrating and establishing a private life,
    or those obstacles which would cause very serious  hardship.  The  fact
    that the Appellant may find it difficult or challenging  on  return  to
    her country of nationality is not the relevant test.

4.   The question was whether the Appellant  had  the  ability  to  form  an
    adequate private life by the standards of the country of return, not UK
    standards. The Appellant was very familiar with  Nigerian  society  and
    culture, spending most of her adulthood resident there. The  judge  had
    failed to apply the appropriate test and  had  misdirected  herself  in
    law.  The delay on the part of the Respondent was not  a  factor  which
    weighed in the Appellant's favour given that her appeal  was  dismissed
    in 2009 and a fresh application was not raised until 2015.

5.   Permission was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McDade  on  12th
    April 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge  failed  to
    properly justify the Appellant's situation was such that  reintegration
    would be highly problematic.

6.   In submissions Mr Tufan relied on the grounds. He  submitted  that  the
    Appellant came to the UK, aged 37.  The judge had erred at paragraph 30
    in applying the case of Ogundimu (Article 8 new rules)  Nigeria  [2003]
    UKUT 60 to the Appellant's case.  This did not  deal  with  significant
    obstacles, but dealt with links to the Appellant's home  country.  Ties
    were not relevant in the assessment of significant obstacles which  was
    a high test. The judge had applied the wrong test set out  in  Ogundimu
    and therefore  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  show  that  there  were
    significant obstacles to her integration.

7.   Further, the judge  relied  on  the  phrase  at  paragraph  37  of  his
    decision that Immigration Judge Bartlett accepted in June 2009 that the
    Appellant would have great difficulty re-adjusting to life in  Nigeria.
    He had equated this phrase to the very significant obstacles  test  and
    had failed to apply the high threshold to the facts of the  Appellant's
    case.

8.   Mr Karim relied on the case of  Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set
    aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC).   He  submitted  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal amounted to a disagreement with the judge's  findings.  Contrary
    to Mr Tufan's submissions ties to the country of origin  were  relevant
    in considering whether there were significant obstacles to integration.





9.   Paragraph 4 of the head note to Ogundimu stated:


         "The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties'  in  paragraph
         399A of the Immigration Rules imports a concept involving something
         more than merely  remote  or  abstract  links  to  the  country  of
         proposed  deportation  or  removal.  It  involves  there  being   a
         connection to life in that  country.  Consideration  of  whether  a
         person has 'no ties' to such  a  country  must  involve  a  rounded
         assessment of all of the relevant circumstances and is  not  to  be
         limited to 'social, cultural and family' circumstances."

10.  The test therefore involved more than abstract links  and  was  equated
    with the significant obstacles test. The test was a high  one,  but  in
    this case it had been met.  The  Respondent  had  not  shown  that  the
    judge's conclusion was perverse and  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
    judge's factual findings. The judge had considered the Appellant's ties
    to Nigeria and ties to UK, whether she was a vulnerable individual, her
    family network, her employment and the  prevailing  conditions  in  the
    country of origin and her ability to obtain accommodation.  These  were
    all relevant to  the  assessment  of  whether  there  were  significant
    obstacles to integration. The judge had addressed all relevant  factors
    and found in favour of the Appellant. There were no factors  which  she
    had failed to take into account.

11.  In relation to paragraph 37, the judge did not  equate  this  with  the
    test of significant obstacles, but had merely stated that this was  the
    judge's finding in 2009.  The  judge  then  went  on  to  consider  the
    situation  since  then  and  found  that  the  difficulties  had   been
    compounded by the intervening six years.  The Appellant  was  55  years
    old and had been away from Nigeria for a period of eighteen  years  and
    four months.  The judge took into  account  all  relevant  factors  and
    applied the appropriate test to the appropriate  standard,  namely  the
    high threshold of very significant obstacles to integration.  There was
    no arguable error of law and the decision should be upheld.

12.  In response Mr Tufan submitted that the judge found that the  Appellant
    had ties to Nigeria. The judge had  applied  the  wrong  test  and  the
    decision was lacking in reasons. This was not a  perversity  challenge.
    There  were  insufficient  reasons  to  support  the  judge's  finding.
    Further, the failure  to  remove  the  Appellant  did  not  go  in  the
    Appellant's favour. The judge had erred in relation to  delay  and  the
    conclusions in that respect were perverse.

Discussion and Conclusion

13.  It is quite clear from paragraphs 30 and 31  that  the  Appellant  must
    establish that there were significant obstacles to her  integration  in
    Nigeria and that was the issue before the judge and the test  that  she
    applied to the facts as  she  found  them.  The  judge's  reference  to
    Ogundimu did not undermine  this  and,  in  fact,  whether  there  were
    significant ties to Nigeria and the UK was relevant to  the  assessment
    of whether there were significant obstacles to integration.
14.  The judge accepted that the Appellant grew  up  in  Nigeria  and  lived
    there until the age of 36 and that she spoke the native language.   The
    judge found that the Appellant had some ongoing ties to Nigeria because
    her  daughters  resided  there  and  she  communicated  with  them   by
    telephone. However, this relationship was limited  because  they  lived
    with the Appellant's ex-husband  who  had  subjected  her  to  domestic
    violence. Therefore, the Appellant would not be able to return  to  her
    husband's household and her daughters could not financially assist  her
    or visit her should she return to Nigeria.

15.  The Appellant had been absent from Nigeria for a significant number  of
    years, her parents had died and she had no  siblings  or  other  family
    members there.  She had no connection to any other person and the  fact
    that  she  had  converted  to  Christianity  may  in  fact  hinder  her
    integration. The judge took into account  that  the  Appellant  was  55
    years old, she was single, she was not highly educated and did not have
    significant skills or experience  to  enable  her  to  find  employment
    easily. Lack of employability was compounded by her age and her health.
    She suffered from asthma, was depressed and was  currently  undertaking
    tests for her kidneys. The Appellant was a victim of domestic  violence
    and therefore was a vulnerable person.

16.  These factors  were  all  relevant  in  assessing  whether  there  were
    significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration  in  Nigeria.  The
    judge's finding that in these circumstances, after such a long absence,
    the Appellant does not have any meaningful connection with Nigeria  and
    that there is no one in Nigeria who can assist her on a temporary basis
    while she seeks to re-establish herself was a finding that was open  to
    her on the evidence before her.

17.  The judge does not merely follow  the  findings  of  Immigration  Judge
    Bartlett but looked at the situation since the decision  in  June  2009
    and accepted that the Appellant had remained in the UK  for  a  further
    six years and had now been away from Nigeria  for  eighteen  years  and
    four months.  There was delay on the part of the Respondent, although I
    accept that the Appellant could have left  voluntarily.   However,  the
    fact of the matter was that the Appellant had been absent from  Nigeria
    for a significant amount of time and given the other factors  mentioned
    above, there were very significant obstacles to integration.

18.  At paragraph  38,  the  judge  concluded  that,  given  the  individual
    circumstances, of this case, there would be very significant  obstacles
    to the Appellant's integration in Nigeria and it would be unjustifiably
    harsh for her to return there, given the strength of the ties  she  has
    to the UK and the lack of an ongoing connection to Nigeria. The judge's
    findings were open to her on the evidence before her and she  has  gave
    adequate reasons for her conclusions at paragraphs 31 to 37.

19.  The judge appreciated the high threshold test and  the  Respondent  was
    well aware why the appeal had been allowed. Accordingly,  I  find  that
    there was no error of law in the judge's decision dated 29th  September
    2015 and I dismiss the Respondent's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 26th May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


