
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10365/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th January 2015                            |On 19th January 2015       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before


                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN


                                   Between


                            MRS DORCUS NABAGASERA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin (instructed by Arlington Crown
                  Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant with regard to a determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge McDade) promulgated on 6th October 2014 by  which  he  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal  against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to
    refuse her leave to remain in the UK on the basis of her family life.

 2. The Appellant entered the UK with leave as a student valid  until  31st
    March 2009.  Some six weeks  prior  to  the  expiry  of  her  visa  she
    travelled to Uganda and married her husband, a man  of  Rwandan  origin
    who came to the UK as a refugee  in  2000  and  who  became  a  British
    citizen in 2005.

 3. Due, I was told, to a delay in obtaining the marriage  certificate  the
    Appellant's leave expired before she could submit  an  application  for
    leave to remain as a spouse.  That was refused in August 2009 without a
    right of appeal.  She made further representations and the refusal  was
    maintained  in  November  2010.  The  Appellant  made  another   spouse
    application in July 2011 and the  Secretary  of  State  issued  another
    refusal in September 2012, again with no right of appeal.  In  February
    2013 the Appellant requested a removal decision be made which it was in
    December 2013.  That decision gave the Appellant, for the first time, a
    right of appeal.

 4. The Judge heard the case in September 2014 and dismissed it.

 5. The grounds seeking permission to appeal assert that  the  Judge  erred
    in, having found that, as the application was made on  10th  July  2011
    which predated Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  being  added  to  the
    Immigration Rules, they had no application and  the  appeal  should  be
    considered under Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   However  the  Judge  then
    considered EX.1, contrary to his  decision  that  Appendix  FM  had  no
    application.

 6. The grounds also assert that the Judge erred in failing to take  s.117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  into  account  as
    s.117 was inserted into the Act by s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014  on
    28th July 2014.

 7. Finally the grounds assert that the Judge  erred  in  his  approach  to
    Article 8.

 8. While the Judge undoubtedly erred in taking Ex.1 into account,  I  find
    that error was immaterial to the  outcome.   Indeed  Ex.1  provides  an
    exception to the requirement that an Appellant meet the Rules and so is
    more generous than the older Rules.  However the Judge found  that  the
    Appellant did not come within it.  The error of law could only  operate
    in the Appellant's favour.

 9. Similarly while the Judge undoubtedly  erred  in  failing  to  consider
    s.117 that could not have assisted the Appellant.   I  will  deal  with
    that below.

10. Regarding the Judge's approach to Article 8, there is a wealth of  case
    law regarding Article 8 - the starting point being Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
    27 and the five steps contained in Lord Bingham's judgment  as  to  the
    way to approach Article 8.  The answers to the first four questions  in
    this appeal are undisputed and uncontroversial and this case is clearly
    about proportionality.  So much was noted by the Judge at  paragraph  6
    of the determination.

11. Since s117 was inserted into the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 by s19 of the Immigration Act 2014, a  Judge  is  required  to
    take into account certain matters which legislation tells us are or are
    not in the public interest.  An assessment of proportionality  involves
    conducting a balancing exercise with the public interest in maintaining
    immigration control on the one side and the family and private life  of
    the applicant on the other.

12. The relevant parts of s.117 in this case are:-


    117A Application of this Part


     (1)     This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


             (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and
         family life under Article 8,
                   and
             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
         Rights Act 1998.


     (2)     In considering the public interest question, the court or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
         (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
         (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to
    the considerations
         listed in section 117C.


     (3)     In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
question of whether an
         interference with a person's right to respect for private and
         family life is justified under
                   Article 8(2).

        117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
cases

     (1)     The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
public interest.


     (2)     It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
interests of the economic well-being
         of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in
         the United Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons who
         can speak English-


         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.


     (3)     It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
interests of the economic well-being
         of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in
         the United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
         persons-


         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.


     (4)     Little weight should be given to-


         (a) a private life, or
         (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
         established by a person at a time when the person is in the United
         Kingdom unlawfully.


     (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
person at a time when
         the person's immigration status is precarious.


     (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
public interest does not
         require the person's removal where-


         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
    with a qualifying
         child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
    United Kingdom.


    117D Interpretation of this Part


     (1)     In this Part-


         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
    Rights;


         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
    who-


         (a) is a British citizen, or
         (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
    seven years or more;


         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-


         (a) is a British citizen, or
         (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of the
         Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).


13. The words in s.117A (2) "in particular" make clear that while  a  Judge
    is required to take the specified matters into account  it  is  not  an
    exhaustive list.  A poor immigration history is  not  referred  to  but
    clearly relevant for example.

14. S.117B(1) is self evident and refers back to  Article  8  of  the  ECHR
    itself.

15. This Appellant speaks English. The Appellant works as a nurse  and  her
    husband works as a Pharmacist earning well  in  excess  of  the  income
    requirement and she is thus financially independent.

16. S.117B(4) is relevant.  The husband is British and  although  there  is
    no doubt that the couple are in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    and have been for many years, they became involved and commenced  their
    relationship when the Appellant's  situation was  precarious  and  they
    got married when she had only six  weeks  leave  to  remain  left.  The
    husband knew this.   They could not be certain  that  leave  to  remain
    would be granted and thus could not be certain that  they  could  enjoy
    their married life in the UK. Indeed that is  what  transpired  as  her
    leave to remain expired and thus she could not possibly  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules.

17. Mr Hawkin argued that she was not very late with  her  application  and
    should thus not be penalised as it was caused by a delay in getting the
    marriage certificate.  However it was her choice to leave  it  so  late
    before getting married and it was her choice to continue to  remain  in
    the UK making repeated applications while she was  an  overstayer.   By
    that time it was her fault.  She  had  been,  quite  properly,  refused
    under the Immigration Rules.  She could and  should  have  returned  to
    Uganda then and made an application.  Instead she remained  in  the  UK
    illegally for several more years.

18. The Appellant does not come within the exception at s.117B(6) as  there
    are no children.

19. Accordingly while the  Appellant  speaks  English  and  is  financially
    independent this is a neutral point. it is clear that  the  absence  of
    these are factors that weigh against an Appellant but  they  cannot  be
    reasons to allow an appeal.

20. On the Secretary of State's side of the balance is that  the  Appellant
    knowingly overstayed  her  visa  and  remained  in  the  UK  illegally.
    Although not prosecuted, that is a criminal offence.  Her husband  knew
    that at all times. While it was argued that  she  did  so  unwittingly,
    that is not the case.  She may have not intended that  her  application
    would be late but it was her choice to remain and submit an application
    from within the UK when she had no right to be here and to continue  to
    do so several times.  The fact that the  Secretary  of  State  did  not
    issue a removal decision does not assist the Appellant.  The  Secretary
    of State was not obliged to do so; whereas the Appellant was obliged to
    leave but failed to do so.

21. While there is a right to marry there is not a right to choose in which
    country a couple will live unless they meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The fact that the husband is a British citizen  does
    not afford him the right to have his wife here with him if  she  cannot
    meet the Immigration Rules and she does not.

22. It was argued by Mr Hawkin that it would be unduly harsh to require the
    Appellant to return to Uganda and make application from there.   It  is
    not.  She is of Ugandan nationality.  The husband has family  there,  a
    daughter who he visits annually and the Appellant  herself  has  family
    there.

23. Mr Hawkin relied upon Chikwamba [2008]  UKHL40,  MA  (Pakistan)  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 953 and AB (Jamaica) [2007] EWCA Civ 1302  arguing  that  when
    the Appellant  would inevitably succeed in  an  application  for  entry
    clearance from Uganda she should not be required to  leave  solely  for
    that purpose.  The facts of this case are very different from the cases
    relied upon, particularly as the  husband  is  a  frequent  visitor  to
    Uganda.  Furthermore s.117, which is primary legislation, restricts the
    application of Chikwamba.

24. It can never be said that  an  application  for  entry  clearance  will
    inevitably succeed as the First-tier Tribunal Judge  said.  Things  may
    change. If however the Appellant is right and they will succeed in  her
    application then her stay in Uganda will be temporary.

25. Accordingly the Judge took all relevant matters into account; correctly
    distinguished Chikwamba and although he erred in the law he applied the
    end result was inevitable and no other result could have ensued on  the
    facts of this case.

26. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.








Signed                              Date 16th January 2015





Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
