
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA104612015
                                                                 IA104642015
                                                                 IA104772015
                                                                 IA104812015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd June 2016                     |On 13th June 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  mrs anber farhan butt (first respondent)
                  mr farhan islam butt (second respondent)
                          [i b] (third respondent)
                          [m b] (fourth respondent)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Miss McCall, (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    a First-tier Tribunal (Judge Majid) which in a decision promulgated  on
    29th October 2015 allowed the appeals of the four  Respondents  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to grant them leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom and making directions  for  their  removal
    from the UK under S.10 Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. In this decision I shall refer  to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  "the
    Respondent" and to the four  Respondents  as  "the  Appellants".   This
    reflect the respective positions of the parties as they were before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3. No anonymity was sought by the  Appellants  either  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal nor before me; therefore I see no reason to grant anonymity.

Background

 4. The Appellants are respectively Mrs Butt, Mr Butt her husband and their
    two children both of whom are dependant minors, born on [ ]  2007  [IB]
    and [ ] 2008 [MB]. All four Appellants are citizens of Pakistan.

 5. Mr Butt arrived initially in the UK in 2003 in possession of a  student
    visa.  He made various applications to extend his leave but by 2009  it
    is correct to say that he was here without leave.  Mrs Butt entered the
    UK in 2006 also in possession of a student visa valid until  2007.   Mr
    and Mrs Butt's daughter [IB] born on [ ] 2007 and their  son  [MB]  was
    born on [ ] 2008.  Both children were born in the UK  but  neither  are
    British citizens.

 6. On 21st March 2014 Mrs Butt made an application for leave to remain  in
    the UK along with her husband and two children as  her  dependants,  on
    the basis of family/private life. This  application  was  made  on  the
    grounds that her eldest child had been born  in  the  UK  (as  had  the
    youngest child) and had lived here for over  seven  years  and  was  in
    education.  It was further claimed that both children had been  brought
    up in the "English culture" and therefore would be unable to settle  in
    Pakistan.

 7. Mrs Butt's application to remain was refused by the Respondent.  It  is
    of note that Mrs Butt as well her husband was by this time  in  the  UK
    without valid leave.  The Respondent considered the applications of the
    family but refused all applications after considering their  Article  8
    ECHR  private/family  life  claims  and  after  considering  the   best
    interests  of  the  children  under  S.55  Borders,   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009.  All four family members appealed to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 8. When the appeals came before Judge Majid, he heard  evidence  from  Mrs
    Butt and her husband (whom he erroneously refers to as  the  "principal
    Appellant"). Mrs Butt is the "principal Appellant ";  her  husband  and
    children apply as her dependants.

 9. After setting out the evidence heard from Mr and Mrs  Butt,  the  judge
    then wrote a heading entitled "Dispositive Reasons and  Deliberations".
    Under that heading he set out a  large  number  of  paragraphs  quoting
    extensively from case law together with general comments  on  the  2012
    Immigration Rules (twenty paragraphs or so). In fairness there is  also
    contained under that heading, a long  paragraph  describing  Mr  Butt's
    statement  together  with  a  few  words  confirming  that   Mrs   Butt
    corroborates Mr Butt.

10. Within that section, two paragraphs only are of  particular  note.   In
    [12] the judge says:

         "Miss McCall submitted that the appeal should  be  allowed  because
         the children could not survive  in  Pakistan;  they  were  born  in
         Britain and have never gone anywhere else.   There  is  no  'public
         interest' for separating them from their parents and living  in  an
         alien culture.  They would definitely  suffer  a  lot  in  Pakistan
         because all of their schooling has been in this  country  and  they
         have gone nowhere else in their lives."

11. He continues in [29]:

         "...The rule of law demands that these Appellants should be  helped
         by the system because the 'best interests' of the children have  to
         be taken into account.  The first  Appellant  (the  father  of  the
         children) had told me that his children have always been using  the
         English language in their schooling which has been  exclusively  in
         this country...  The children are definitely brought up in  English
         culture and during our stay in  Norwich  they  only  had  two/three
         Asian children in the  school  and  had  to  have  English  friends
         virtually all the time.  I am also minded to allow this appeal  due
         to the fact that both children have spent over seven years in  this
         country and, on that  basis  alone,  any  judge  could  allow  this
         appeal."

12. The judge then says, in the last paragraph of  his  decision,  that  in
    view of his deliberations he is  persuaded  that  the  Appellants  come
    within the relevant Immigration law. Finally under a heading "Notice of
    Decision" he simply says "Appeal allowed."

13. The Respondent sought permission to appeal the decision. Permission was
    granted in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that the  judge  has  misdirected  himself  (a)  in
         making no reference to the Immigration Rules (paragraph  276ADE(iv)
         and Appendix FM) before going on to consider Article 8 of ECHR; (b)
         by relying heavily on the children's education in  the  UK  without
         regard to the fact that  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         children to leave with their parents  (reference  is  made  to  the
         cases of EV (Philippines), EA (Nigeria) and AM (Malawi)) and (c) by
         failing to apply Section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 in respect of all the Appellants.

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide if the decision  of  the  FtT
    contains an error of law such that it must be set aside and remade."

UT Hearing/Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  not
    sustainable and must be set aside for  legal  error.   I  now  give  my
    reasons for so finding.

15. Miss McCall who appeared before me for the Appellants accepted  at  the
    outset that none of the Appellants can meet the Immigration Rules.  She
    agreed that what was before the judge was  an  Article  8  ECHR  appeal
    only.  She submitted that despite the terms of the grant of  permission
    there was adequate reasoning in [29] sufficient to sustain the  judge's
    conclusion in allowing the appeal(s).  I disagree.

16. I find first  that  the  judge  appears  in  [12]  to  have  completely
    misunderstood what was before him. The Respondent's  case  is  and  has
    always been that the Appellants return to Pakistan as a family.   As  I
    said earlier, both Mr and Mrs Butt remain in the UK without leave.  The
    judge appears to have failed to understand this and therefore fails  to
    take into account that the starting point of the best interests of  the
    children is in being with their parents; neither of  whom  have  lawful
    leave to remain in the UK.

17. Further when considering the situation of the children he has failed to
    have  regard  to  the  more  recent  jurisprudence  set   out   in   EV
    (Philippines), EA (Nigeria) and AM (Malawi).  Those  cases  all  add  a
    gloss to Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  The judge was obliged to take those  matters  into  account  and
    nowhere do I see that he has done so.

18. The reasoning referred to by Miss McCall in [29]  falls  far  short  of
    that required to explain in clear  terms  why  the  judge  reaches  the
    conclusion he does when he says "he is minded to allow the  appeal  due
    to the fact that both children have  spent  over  seven  years  in  the
    country and on that basis alone any judge could allow this appeal."

19. I find for the foregoing reasons that the FtT has erred in law and  the
    decision must be set aside and remitted for a fresh hearing.  I  direct
    that no findings of fact shall stand.  Given the need for  a  new  full
    fact-finding exercise, I consider it appropriate that the appeal should
    be returned to the First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge  Majid)  for  that
    Tribunal to remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dated  29th  October  2015  is  set
aside.  None of the findings of fact made  by  that  Tribunal  shall  stand.
The appeal should be considered  afresh  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not
Judge Majid) and that Tribunal shall remake the decision.

No anonymity was sought  in  these  appeals.   Therefore  anonymity  is  not
ordered.


Signed   C E Roberts   Date 10 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts
