
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: IA/10404/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                           Decision  and
                                             Reasons Promulgated
On 4  December  2014                                            On  23  June
                                  2015


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                                    N K N
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person.
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Trevaskis promulgated on 19 September 2014, dismissing the Appellant's
      appeal against a decision dated 10 February 2014 to  refuse  to  issue
      her with a Residence Card as confirmation of  a  derivative  right  of
      residence.


Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Uganda:  her  personal  details  are  a
      matter of record on file and are not reproduced here in  keeping  with
      the anonymity order that has  been  made  in  these  proceedings.  She
      entered the UK on 7 November 2007 with limited  leave  as  a  student.
      Further leave to remain as a Tier 4 student was granted on 14 December
      2009 valid until 15 August 2010. The  Appellant  applied  for  further
      leave as a dependent spouse on 11 February 2010, but  her  application
      was refused with no right of appeal on 15 January  2011.  On  21  June
      2013 the Appellant applied for a 'derivative residence  card'  as  the
      primary carer of a British Citizen resident in the UK. The application
      was based  on  the  Appellant's  care  for  her  daughter  IB  (d.o.b.
      16/10/2012).


   3. The application was refused on 10 February 2014 for reasons set out in
      a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') of that date,  with  reference
      to regulations 15A(4A)(c), 15A(7) and 18A of the Immigration (European
      Economic Area Regulations 2006, and a Notice of  Immigration  Decision
      was issued accordingly.


   4. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      dismissed the appeal under both the EEA Regulations and Article  8  of
      the ECHR for reasons set out in his determination,


   5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  which
      was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on 5 November 2014.


Consideration

   6. Before addressing the substance of the grounds upon  which  permission
      to appeal has been granted, for completeness I make brief  mention  of
      the circumstances of the Appellant's non-attendance before the  First-
      tier Tribunal. As observed by Judge Colyer, in the  Notice  of  Appeal
      that was faxed to the  Tribunal  it  is  unclear  as  to  whether  the
      Appellant was electing for  an  oral  hearing  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal or a consideration of her case 'on the papers'.  The  Grounds
      in support of the application for permission to appeal make  it  clear
      that the Appellant had wanted her case dealt with on  the  papers.  In
      the event, the appeal was listed for an oral hearing,  and  Notice  of
      Hearing duly issued.  Notwithstanding  the  issuing  of  a  Notice  of
      Hearing the Appellant - perhaps understandably in circumstances  where
      she had not wanted to attend in the first place - did not attend.  The
      First-tier Tribunal Judge comments on this and gives consideration  to
      whether or not to proceed in the absence of the Appellant at paragraph
      10 of his decision. The Grounds in  support  of  the  application  for
      permission to appeal seek to suggest that the Judge's misunderstanding
      as to the Appellant's intentions may have worked a  prejudice  against
      the Appellant (Grounds at paragraph 1).  Having  carefully  considered
      the content of the Judge's decision I can find no  evidence  that  any
      adverse inference was drawn  from  the  Appellant  seeming  -  in  the
      Judge's eyes - failure to attend. It is to be noted that the Appellant
      effectively had what she wanted: a determination on the papers,  there
      being no oral evidence heard before the First-tier  Tribunal.  In  any
      event Judge Colyer did not grant permission to appeal on  this  point,
      and it was not pursued any further before me.


   7. As regards the substance of the case, I turn first to a  consideration
      in respect of the EEA Regulations.


   8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made findings at paragraph 15 in respect
      of IB's father's involvement in her life, and concluded  that  he  was
      "not satisfied that he is not exercising  primary  responsibility  for
      her care in the wider sense of that word". In this context it is noted
      that in the Respondent's decision letter the father's nationality  was
      identified as British, and  he  was  "thus  an  exempt  person"  (i.e.
      pursuant to regulation 15A(6)(c)). That being so, the Judge's findings
      were such that the Appellant did not meet the definition of a 'primary
      carer' under regulation 15A(7). In such circumstances  she  could  not
      meet the criteria of regulation 15A(4A), which requires the  applicant
      to be "the primary carer of a British citizen" (15A(4A)(a)).


   9. Moreover, at paragraph 16 the Judge made findings to the  effect  that
      "the Appellant has failed to discharge the  burden  of  proof...  that
      [IB's father] is unable to assume care responsibility for [IB]".  This
      was in effect to  uphold  the  Respondent's  decision  in  respect  of
      regulation 15A(4A)(c) - "the relevant British citizen would be  unable
      to reside in the UK or in another EEA State if  [the  applicant]  were
      required to leave".


  10. The challenge to these findings and  conclusions  in  the  Grounds  in
      support of the application for permission to appeal - upon  which  the
      Appellant placed reliance before me - is limited. It is  pleaded  that
      the Judge made an "assumption"  as  to  the  extent  of  the  father's
      responsibility. In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal Judge made  an
      assessment on the available evidence,  and  reached  a  conclusion  in
      respect of which she stated clear and adequate reasons.


  11. In all the circumstances I find nothing of substance in the challenge,
      and otherwise no basis to impugn the Judge's findings of primary fact,
      or her application of those findings to the Regulations. No  error  of
      law is disclosed in respect of the decision under the EEA Regulations,
      and accordingly the decision stands.


  12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to consider  Article  8  of  the
      ECHR (paragraphs 19-34). In my judgement it was  entirely  unnecessary
      for the Judge to do so: as she  identified  at  paragraph  19  of  the
      decision the Appellant had made no application under  the  Immigration
      Rules (i.e. no application by reference to Appendix  FM  or  paragraph
      276ADE), and moreover 'human rights' grounds were not  raised  in  the
      Notice of Appeal. I return to these circumstances below.


  13. However, having embarked upon an evaluation of Article 8, it seems  to
      me that the  Judge  fell  into  error.  In  particular,  there  is  an
      unresolved inconsistency between the premise of the decision under the
      EEA Regulations that IB could remain in the UK with her father  (which
      the Judge takes forward to the first and second  Razgar  questions  at
      paragraph 24  of  her  decision),  and  the  premise  of  the  Judge's
      proportionality  evaluation  where  matters  are  evaluated   on   the
      assumption that IB will not remain in the UK but  will  accompany  the
      Appellant upon  her  removal.  Moreover,  there  is  an  inconsistency
      between the Respondent's own acknowledged position as indicated in the
      case of Sanade [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) where it was acknowledged  that
      a British citizen child could not reasonably be expected  to  relocate
      outside the European Union, and the Judge's observation  at  paragraph
      30(x) that "it would be reasonable to expect the Appellant's  children
      to  leave  the  United  Kingdom...",  repeated  in  similar  terms  at
      paragraph 33 - "I find that, although IB  is  a  British  citizen,  it
      would be reasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom with the
      appellant, because I have found that her best interests will be served
      by remaining with her mother". This last quotation in itself  suggests
      that the 'best interests' evaluation has failed to take  into  account
      the  interests  of  IB  in  being  able  to  take  advantage  of   the
      circumstance of her British nationality.


  14. In my judgement the unresolved tensions and  inconsistencies  in  this
      context are such as to constitute an error of  law  on  the  basis  of
      inadequacy of reasoning. This requires that the First-tier  Tribunal's
      decision in respect of Article 8 be set aside.


  15. I have considered the appropriateness  of  remaking  the  decision  in
      respect of Article 8. As the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted,  the
      Appellant had made no  application  under  the  Immigration  Rules  or
      otherwise in respect of Article 8, and had not pleaded  Article  8  in
      her Notice of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. Nor  is  it  apparent
      that any issue in respect of Article 8 was  otherwise  overtly  raised
      before the First-tier Tribunal. For  example,  in  this  context,  the
      Judge observes at paragraph 23 of the decision "The Appellant has  not
      provided any evidence of having established  a  private  life  in  the
      United Kingdom". Yet further, in respect of  IB  and  the  Appellant's
      other non-British citizen children, there were  no  express  materials
      filed relevant to an evaluation of any of their best interests.


  16. It is to be noted that the Respondent informed the  Appellant  of  the
      procedures for making an application based on family or  private  life
      in the decision letter of 10 February 2014. The  Appellant,  to  date,
      has elected not to make any such application, and also elected not  to
      raise any  Article  8  grounds  or  advance  any  relevant  Article  8
      materials or arguments before the First-tier Tribunal.


  17. Were the Tribunal now to embark upon an Article 8 assessment, not only
      would it be doing so as a decision-maker of first instance rather than
      as an appellate authority, it would be necessary to  issue  Directions
      for the filing of further  evidence  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
      private life and more particularly in respect of the best interest  of
      her children. In circumstances where Article 8 has not been  expressly
      pleaded, in my judgement this would be an  inappropriate  use  of  the
      resources of the Tribunal. On the particular facts  here,  the  better
      procedure if the Appellant wishes to have her and her children's human
      rights under Article 8 (or indeed otherwise) assessed, is in the first
      instance for her to make an appropriate application to the Respondent.


  18. There is no express application before me  to  amend  the  Grounds  of
      Appeal submitted with the Notice of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal,
      and nothing has been raised  by  way  of  a  statement  of  additional
      grounds pursuant to section 120 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002. In so far as such an application might be implied  by
      reason of the Grounds of appeal in  support  of  the  application  for
      permission to appeal - which in my judgement in any event do  no  more
      than opportunistically  'pick  up  on'  the  Judge's  own  unnecessary
      consideration of Article 8 - I refuse such an application.


  19. Accordingly, although the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
      respect of Article 8 is set aside, I find that  no  Article  8  issues
      have been duly and properly raised before the Tribunal and accordingly
      it is not necessary to reach any decision on Article 8.


  20. The overall effect is that the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed  under
      the EEA Regulations. No other decision is taken in the appeal.


  21. It remains open to the Appellant to apply to  the  Respondent  if  she
      wishes Article 8 to be considered.




Notice of Decision

  22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in respect of Article  8
      involved a material error of law and is  set  aside  in  that  regard.
      However, no new decision is made in  respect  of  Article  8,  it  not
      having been formally raised as a Ground of Appeal.


  23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in respect  of  the  EEA
      Regulations involved no error of law and stands.


  24. The appeal remains dismissed on EEA grounds.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     17 June 2015




