
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal No: IA/10859/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                               MR MOHSIN JAMIL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  No appearance
For the Respondent: Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated on 1 June 2015,
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Meyler (hereinafter referred to as the
         FTTJ).

Background

      2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 2 April 2011 with leave
         to enter as a Tier 4 (General) migrant, valid until 31 May 2012. He
         extended his leave on the same basis until 29 December 2014. On  27
         December 2014, the appellant applied for leave  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom, outside the Immigration Rules. He  sought  a  short
         period of leave  in  order  to  enable  him  to  re-take  an  IELTS
         examination and thereafter obtain a Confirmation of  Acceptance  of
         Studies (CAS).

      3. The appellant's application was refused, on 2 March  2015,  on  the
         basis that he was seeking a variation of leave for  a  purpose  not
         covered by  those  Rules.  In  addition,  the  Secretary  of  State
         commented thus; "Grants of such leave are rare and are  given  only
         for  genuinely  compassionate  reasons."  It  was  said  that   the
         appellant  could  pursue  his  studies  in  Pakistan  or  make   an
         application for entry clearance to return to the United Kingdom.  A
         decision was also made to remove  the  appellant  from  the  United
         Kingdom.

      4. In his grounds of appeal, the appellant stated  that  it  would  be
         disastrous if he had to return to his  country  without  completing
         his studies; that his private life was adversely  affected  by  the
         respondent's decision and there were compelling  and  compassionate
         circumstances which meant that the Secretary of State  should  have
         exercised her discretion in his favour.

      5. The FTTJ considered the appellant's appeal without  a  hearing,  as
         requested. He concluded that the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to
         appeal the refusal of his application for an "extension of leave as
         a Tier 4  (General)  Student"  because  such  decisions  no  longer
         attracted a right of appeal as of 20 October 2014.  The  FTTJ  made
         reference  to  The  Immigration  Act   2014   (Commencement   No.3;
         Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order 2014.

      6. The grounds of application argue, in essence, that the  FTTJ  erred
         in finding there  was  no  valid  appeal  before  him  because  the
         appellant had not made a points-based application.

      7. FTTJ Nicholson granted permission on the  above  basis,  commenting
         that while it was not apparent that the appellant had any  prospect
         of success on a human rights appeal, he was entitled  to  have  his
         appeal heard.

      8. The Secretary of State lodged a Rule 24  response  on  3  September
         2015. The respondent stated that force was seen in the  appellant's
         grounds, however owing to the  absence  of  a  file,  in  order  to
         protect the Secretary of State's position, the appeal was  opposed.
         The issue of materiality was also raised, in view of the  basis  of
         the application.

Error of law

      9. At the hearing before me, the appellant did not appear and nor  was
         he represented. I put the matter  back  in  the  list  and  further
         delayed the hearing, however  no  message  was  received  from  the
         appellant. At 1440 hours, I decided to proceed with the  appeal  in
         the absence of the appellant for the following reasons. The  notice
         of hearing was posted to the appellant by first  class  post  on  2
         November 2015, to the address notified by him on form  IAFT-4.  The
         said notice was not returned to the Tribunal by the Royal  Mail.  I
         also took into consideration the standard direction provided on the
         face of the  notice  of  hearing,  that  is  "If  a  party  of  his
         Representative  does  not  attend  the  hearing  the  Tribunal  may
         determined the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  that  party."  I  was
         therefore satisfied that the appellant had been given notice of the
         hearing and the consequences of not attending the hearing.

     10. I therefore heard submissions from Mr Whitwell, who  conceded  that
         the FTTJ had  erred  in  concluding  that  the  appellant  was  not
         entitled  to  appeal.  However,  he  argued  that  the  appellant's
         application for more time to obtain a CAS did not come  within  the
         requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of  the  Rules.  It
         was open to the appellant to apply for further leave to remain as a
         Tier 4 migrant  after  the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  or,  in  the
         alternative, to make an application for entry clearance in the same
         capacity. With regard to the respondent's exercise  of  discretion,
         there was no fault to be  attributed  to  the  Secretary  of  State
         regarding the appellant's failure to pass his IELTS. There were  no
         compelling circumstances. The appellant had been  residing  in  the
         United Kingdom since 2011 and had  sufficient  time  to  obtain  an
         English language certificate.  He invited me to dismiss the appeal.

     11. I decided that the FTTJ  had  made  a  material  error  of  law  in
         declining to entertain the  appellant's  appeal  on  the  erroneous
         basis that he had made an application under Tier 4 after 20 October
         2014, which from that date no longer attracted a right  of  appeal.
         In fact the appellant made an  application  for  further  leave  to
         remain, for a purpose outside the Rules. While  the  FTTJ  granting
         permission rightly noted the lack  of  any  apparent  prospects  of
         success, I considered the appellant had been  completely  denied  a
         hearing, which is a material  error,  regardless  of  the  ultimate
         outcome of his appeal.

     12. I accordingly set aside the decision of the FTTJ  in  its  entirety
         and proceeded to remake the decision immediately. In  doing  so,  I
         had regard to the appellant's application to  the  respondent,  his
         grounds of appeal against the refusal of his application as well as
         his grounds of appeal against the  decision  of  the  FTTJ  and  Mr
         Whitwell's submissions. At the end of the hearing, I dismissed  the
         appeal and now give my reasons.

     13. The appellant sought a short period  of  further  leave  to  remain
         because he had been unsuccessful in his IELTS. That application was
         made on 27 December 2014, however the appellant has been silent  as
         to whether he  has  been  able  to  subsequently  pass  an  English
         language test. In his grounds of appeal, the  appellant  refers  to
         the private life he has built up  in  the  United  Kingdom  over  a
         period of around 4 years. He mentions his  friendships  and  having
         acclimatised to  this  country.  In  addition,  he  refers  to  the
         prospect of returning to his country of origin  without  completing
         his studies as a "disaster."

     14. No argument was put that the appellant could meet the  requirements
         of the Rules relating to family or private life  and  nor  did  the
         particulars which he provided give any indication that he met those
         Rules.

     15. The reasons put forward by  the  appellant  do  not,  in  my  view,
         amounting to compelling reasons for considering  his  circumstances
         outside the Rules. Nonetheless, for completeness, I have gone on to
         consider Article 8 in line with the test in Razgar  notwithstanding
         that no application was made in relation to the  appellants'  human
         rights.

     16. The appellant has built up a private life  in  the  United  Kingdom
         over the four or more years he has been residing here. I  therefore
         find that the decision of the respondent would have consequences of
         such gravity as to engage the operation of Article 8.

     17. I accept that such interference is  in  accordance  with  the  law,
         given that the appellant failed to meet  the  requirements  of  the
         Rules to extend his stay and that there is a necessity for a system
         of  immigration  control.  The  appellant  has  not  provided   any
         compelling reasons, which ought to have merited a positive exercise
         of  the  Secretary  of  State's  discretion  and  accordingly   the
         respondent's refusal to do  so  does  not  amount  to  an  unlawful
         decision.

     18. In assessing the public interest under Article  8(2),  I  have  had
         regard to the  provisions  of  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended by  section  19  of  the
         Immigration Act 2014 and have attached weight to them. As indicated
         above, the maintenance of effective immigration control is  in  the
         public interest. I  have  borne  in  mind  the  importance  to  the
         economic well-being of the United Kingdom that persons  seeking  to
         enter or remain are able to speak English. In  this  instance,  the
         appellant has not demonstrated that this  is  the  case.  That  his
         studies were ended owing to his failure to pass an IELTS  does  not
         assist his case. There was  no  evidence  before  me  in  terms  of
         financial independence, however there is no reason to believe  that
         the appellant, who states  that  his  studies  are  funded  by  his
         parents, is unlikely to be financially independent or  would  be  a
         burden on taxpayers.

     19. I have also considered the fact that  the  appellant  came  to  the
         United Kingdom in a temporary capacity in order to study;  to  some
         extent he has achieved that goal. The appellant would have  had  no
         expectation of being permitted to remain  here  permanently.  While
         the appellant may well have  made  friendships  here,  these  could
         continue by remote means; new friendships could be forged  and  old
         friendships re-established in Bangladesh. In addition, there is  no
         bar to the appellant seeking to return to  the  United  Kingdom  in
         order to study, should he meet the requirements of the Rules.

     20. I have been guided by the conclusions  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC),  in  relation
         to the judgments of the Supreme Court in Patel and  Others  v  SSHD
         [2013] UKSC 72, serving to refocus attention  on  "the  nature  and
         purpose of Article 8 of the ECHR, and in  particular  to  recognise
         that Article's limited utility in private life cases that  are  far
         removed from the protection of an individual's moral  and  physical
         integrity. "

     21. Considering all  the  evidence  before  me,  I  conclude  that  the
         circumstances of the appellant does not outweigh  the  respondent's
         concerns as to the maintenance of an effective immigration  control
         and that  the  decision  does  not  amount  to  a  disproportionate
         interference with the appellant's private life.

     22. The appeal is dismissed.

Conclusions

      1) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2) I set aside the decision of the FTTJ.

      3) I re-make the appeal by dismissing it.


Signed:  Date: 22 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

