
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA107142015
                                                                 IA107152015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th May 2016                              |On 14th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                      shahid hussain (first appellant)
                       tayyaba abid (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by AWS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan born on  18th  April  1983  and
    16th February 1988 respectively.  They appeal, with permission, against
    the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Watt),  who  in  a
    determination promulgated on 12th November 2015 dismissed their appeals
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to grant leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  their  family  and
    private life.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  28th
    April 2016 for the following reason:-

         "It is arguable that the judge erred in law by failing to make  any
         findings on the relationship between the First  Appellant  and  his
         brother who resides in the UK in the context of Article  8  of  the
         ECHR."

 3.  At  the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  Appellants  were
    represented by Mr Sharma and the Secretary  of  State  by  Mr  Kandola.
    Neither representative had appeared in the court below.

 4. There is no dispute  about  the  factual  background  set  out  in  the
    determination which can be summarised as follows.  The First  Appellant
    entered the UK on 3rd October 2008 as a student with leave  until  31st
    January 2010.  He had been granted  entry  clearance  to  study  for  a
    Masters degree between 2009 and 2011.  He obtained his qualification in
    2012.  He then obtained leave to remain to study for a  further  course
    in business management until 18th January 2013  and  then  undertook  a
    further course.  On 4th September 2013 he was granted leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student valid until 30th January 2015.

 5.  In  September  2013,  he  visited  Pakistan  and  married  the  Second
    Appellant.  She was granted leave to enter as his spouse  in  or  about
    November 2013.  She subsequently entered the UK on  7th  December  2013
    and they have been living together in the UK  since  that  date.   They
    have two children born to them whilst in the United Kingdom in 2014 and
    2015.

 6. The Appellants made applications for leave to remain on  the  basis  of
    their private life on  29th  January  2015.   The  Secretary  of  State
    considered those applications but in a detailed  refusal  letter  dated
    5th March 2015, the Secretary of State refused their application  under
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 7. There is no dispute as to the reasons given by the Secretary  of  State
    for refusing their respective applications and they are set out in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs [5] to  [14]  of
    the determination.  The judge heard evidence from the First  Appellant,
    his brother and a friend and neighbour  of  the  First  Appellant  [see
    paragraph 21] that evidence was recorded at paragraphs  [18]  to  [21].
    The judge's findings of fact and conclusions are set out at  paragraphs
    [20] to [29] and after having considered and evaluated the evidence  in
    the context  of  the  Rules,  he  dismissed  their  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 8. On behalf of the Appellants, Mr Sharma submitted  that  the  judge  had
    recorded the evidence at paragraph [20]  that  the  Appellant  and  his
    brother are "moral support"  for  each  other  and  at  paragraph  [23]
    recorded the submission made by Counsel that the First Appellant  lived
    with his brother and that the case was advanced on  the  basis  of  one
    "outside of the Rules".  Thus he submits he had family  life  with  his
    brother.  However, the judge failed to make findings about this  within
    the determination.   He  further  submitted  that  the  Respondent  had
    accepted in the Rule 24 response that there had been no finding in this
    respect and whilst he acknowledged that it was not necessary to set out
    every piece of the evidence, where there was a key conflict this should
    have been resolved.

 9. He submitted that in relation to the current case  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant lived with someone whom he depended on for moral support  was
    sufficient evidence upon which to make a finding of dependency and thus
    "family life."

10. He reminded the Tribunal that the Immigration Rules relating to Article
    8 are not a "complete code" and that family life between the  Appellant
    and his brother were not a matter that could be  considered  under  the
    Rules.  Thus the error of law relied upon was that the judge failed  to
    consider family life between the Appellant and his brother.

11. Mr Kandola, on behalf of the Secretary of State relied on the  Rule  24
    response in which it was submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    directed himself appropriately having considered the  submissions  made
    by the parties and the relevant factors relating to the claim  overall.
    He submitted that whilst a specific finding had not been made,  on  the
    face of the evidence the relationship was not one in which it could  be
    said it was  one  of  dependency  and  the  brothers  referred  to  the
    relationship being one of "moral support".  As such, the error was  not
    material as there appeared to be nothing upon which to  indicate  there
    was family life with the Appellant's adult brother  or  that  it  would
    make the decision disproportionate.

12. By way of reply, Mr Sharma submitted that the relationship between  the
    Appellant and his brother had not been considered and was  therefore  a
    material error.  He therefore submitted that in the light of that,  the
    decision should be set aside and should be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

13. I reserved my decision.

14. The way in which the case was advanced before the Immigration Judge  is
    set out at paragraphs [22] and [25].  Firstly,  it  was  conceded  that
    neither Appellant could succeed under Appendix FM; under  the  "partner
    route"  or  the  "parent  route"  in  the  light   of   their   factual
    circumstances.  Neither Appellants were British citizens or settled  in
    the UK with  refugee  leave  or  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds.
    Furthermore, neither of the two children were British citizens nor  had
    they lived in the UK for seven years.

15. It was submitted that each  Appellant  satisfied  paragraph  276ADE(vi)
    relating to their private lives.  Whilst the written  grounds  at  [19]
    give the appearance that there  was  a  challenge  to  the  conclusions
    reached under paragraph 276ADE, permission  was  not  granted  on  that
    ground but in any event Mr Sharma has not advanced any  submissions  on
    the  basis  that  either  Appellant  could  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE in the light of the  factual  findings  made  by  this
    judge.  Even if there had been such a challenge, I  am  satisfied  that
    the findings of fact made were ones that were  open  to  him  and  were
    firmly evidence-based conclusions reached from the  evidence  given  by
    the respective parties.

16. Those findings can be summarised as follows.  In relation to the  First
    Appellant he was born in 1983 and had entered the United Kingdom at the
    age of 25 in October 2008 as a student.  Therefore  he  had  spent  his
    first 25 years in Pakistan.  The judge rejected his claim that  he  had
    no friends or social connections  in  Pakistan  or  that  those  social
    connections  had  been  broken.   The  judge  found   that   this   was
    inconsistent with the Appellant's  conduct  in  2013  when  he  visited
    Pakistan in 2013 and lived  there  for  a  period  of  six  weeks.   In
    relation to the Second Appellant, the First Appellant had  returned  to
    Pakistan and married her in November 2013 and as a consequence she  had
    entered the UK in December 2013  and  thus  had  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a short  period  when  placed  against  her  lengthy  prior
    residence in Pakistan of the previous 25 years [see paragraph 26].  The
    judge considered their family circumstances noting that  they  had  two
    children born in 2014 and 2015 but in view of their  young  ages,  that
    their private lives centred upon their  parents  and  that  they  could
    return to Pakistan with their parents as a family unit [paragraph  26].
    Consequently the judge found that none of  the  Appellants  could  meet
    paragraph 276ADE and that there were no significant obstacles to  their
    integration in Pakistan.

17. It had also been argued that the circumstances of the Appellants should
    be considered outside of the Rules for the reasons given  at  paragraph
    [23] of the determination namely the length of residence of  the  First
    Appellant, that he had obtained qualifications in the UK and  had  made
    many friends and that he was living with his  brother  and  was  giving
    "moral support to his brother" and that he had not been a burden on the
    state and had a good command of English [see 24].

18. The ground advanced on behalf of the Appellant by Mr Sharma and set out
    in the written grounds is that the judge erred in  law  by  failing  to
    make findings on the relationship between the Appellant and his brother
    in the context of Article 8.  As I have set out,  Mr  Sharma  submitted
    that in the light of the judge's recording at paragraph [20]  that  the
    Appellant relied on his brother for moral support and at paragraph [23]
    recording the submission made that the Appellant lived with his brother
    and was giving moral support to his brother that this was  evidence  of
    family life or in the alternative could be considered as  part  of  the
    First Appellant's "private life".  However he submitted  there  was  no
    finding on this.  He described this as a  "key  conflict"  that  should
    have been resolved and that as the Rules are not a complete code, their
    relationship was not covered under paragraph  276ADE  and  thus  should
    have been considered outside of the Rules.

19. In the skeleton argument prepared for the  hearing  by  Mr  Sharma,  he
    submitted at paragraph [5] that the relevant question is whether  there
    was an arguable substantive breach of the Appellant's Article 8 rights.
     I  have  considered  with  care  the  submissions  from  each  of  the
    advocates.  I have considered them in the light  of  the  determination
    and the evidence that was before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  have
    reached the conclusion that  it  is  not  arguable  that  there  was  a
    substantive breach of the Appellant's Article 8 rights and  that  there
    is no material error of law in the judge's determination.  I shall give
    my reasons for reaching that conclusion.

20. When considering the  jurisprudence  relating  to  Article  8,  if  the
    requirements of the Rules cannot be met, and  a  judge  finds  that  an
    Article 8 assessment outside  them  is  required,  there  needs  to  be
    compelling circumstances (see SS (Congo) and  others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    387).  At paragraph [33] the court said:-

         "In our judgment, even though a test  of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim for a grant  of  LTR
         outside the new Rules in Appendix FM.   In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of 'very compelling reasons'  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of the public interest factors as finds expression in
         the Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules  in  Appendix
         FM."

21. Thus it is not sufficient to simply find that if in a particular  case,
    the requirements of the Rules are not met, an  assessment  outside  the
    Rules will be required.  Compelling circumstances need to be identified
    taking into account the public interest.   Any  assessment  will  still
    need to be made "through the lens" of the  new  Rules  (see  paragraphs
    [37] and [74] of AQ and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 250)  and  that  reasons
    why an applicant fails to meet the requirements of the Rules are  taken
    into account.

22. When that is applied to the consideration  of  the  issues  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, in my judgment it demonstrates that the judge  had
    given full and proper  regard  to  that  jurisprudence.   He  correctly
    identified whether there were circumstances which would  cause  him  to
    look at Article 8 outside of the Rules.  Whilst he  made  reference  to
    whether there were any "special circumstances" I am satisfied that when
    the determination was read as a whole that what the judge was referring
    to were  "compelling  circumstances".   The  judge  then  proceeded  to
    consider this issue "through the lens" of the Rules taking into account
    the reasons why the parties concerned could not meet  the  requirements
    either under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.   The  judge  considered
    their length of residence (the  First  Appellant  since  2008  and  the
    Second Appellant since December 2013).  He had earlier found that there
    were  no  significant  obstacles  to  the  family's  reintegration   to
    Pakistan.  The parties continued to have cultural and language ties  to
    Pakistan and in the case of both Appellants had prior lengthy residence
    of some 25 years and the Second Appellant had family in Pakistan.   The
    judge also found,  contrary  to  their  evidence,  that  they  retained
    friendships in Pakistan evidenced by  the  First  Appellant  living  in
    Pakistan for six weeks in 2013 [paragraph 28].

23. The judge took into account the two children, both of  whom  were  very
    young born in 2014 and 2015 and that there was nothing to say that  the
    children could not re-establish life  in  Pakistan,  their  country  of
    nationality.  The judge considered that whilst  the  second  child  had
    complications at birth, there were no health needs for either child (or
    indeed the two adult  Appellants)  which  would  require  consideration
    outside of the Rules.  Thus the  "compelling  circumstances"  that  the
    Appellants' Counsel sought to rely upon as identified at paragraph [23]
    had been taken into account in the earlier part of the determination.

24. The judge also identified  the  public  interest  factors  relevant  to
    Section 117B and that the Appellant's private life was established at a
    time when his residence was precarious (see AM (Malawi))  and  that  he
    had been granted a visa for a limited purpose as a student and that the
    Second Appellant had entered as a spouse only for as long as the  First
    Appellant  was  a  student  in  this  country.   Thus  the  "compelling
    circumstances" that Counsel had sought to rely upon and  as  identified
    in paragraph [23] of the determination had been taken into account.

25. Mr Sharma submits that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  consider
    family  life  with  his  brother  and  that  this  had  amounted  to  a
    "compelling circumstance".  I have considered the determination in  the
    light of the evidence that was advanced before the judge.  He  recorded
    at [20] that the Appellant's brother gave evidence that he relied  upon
    his brother for moral  support  in  the  UK.   At  [23]  he  records  a
    submission that the First Appellant lived with his brother  in  the  UK
    and was giving "moral support to his brother."

26. I have considered the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal both  the
    documentary evidence and the oral evidence and   I  am  satisfied  that
    this was the extent of the evidence that was  before  the  judge.   The
    documentary evidence in the  form  of  a  witness  statement  from  the
    Appellant at paragraph [9], referred to  his  brother's  circumstances.
    He had come to the UK in November 2012 as  a  student,  he  had  met  a
    Portuguese national and married her and they were living together.   At
    paragraph [20] he said that since his arrival he had lived with him and
    that they depended  on  each  other  for  day-to-day  needs  and  moral
    support.  There was a witness statement from  the  Appellant's  brother
    (see page 31 Appellant's bundle) and that he had lived with his brother
    and stated "I and my brother support each other for everything."  There
    was no further particularisation or any further evidence concerning the
    asserted level of dependency either in the documentary evidence  or  as
    set out in the determination.  Nor has it  been  substantiated  in  the
    evidence before me that there was anything  more  than  the  judge  had
    recorded as it being "moral support".  As I have set out  earlier,  the
    documentary evidence was vague and wholly lacking in detail.

27. In my judgment the evidence  does  not  demonstrate  that  family  life
    existed between the two adult siblings.  The  decision  of  Kugathas  v
    SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 (as set out in the decision of Singh and Anor v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630), records Sedley LJ accepting the approach  of
    the European Commission for Human Rights in S v The UK [1984] 40 DR 196
    that

         "Generally the protection of family life under Article  8  involves
         cohabiting dependants, such as parents and their  dependant,  minor
         children.  Whether it extends to other relationships depends on the
         circumstances  of  the  particular  case.   Relationships   between
         adults, a mother and her 33 year old son in the present case, would
         not  necessarily  acquire  the  protection  of  Article  8  of  the
         Convention without evidence  of  further  elements  of  dependency,
         involving more than the normal emotional ties."

     At paragraph [19] he stated he stated that

         "Returning to the present case, neither blood ties nor the  concern
         and affection that ordinarily go with them are,  by  themselves  or
         together, in my judgment enough to constitute family life.  Most of
         us have close relations of whom we are extremely fond and  whom  we
         visit, or who visit us, from time to time, but none of us would say
         on those grounds alone that we share a family life with them in any
         sense capable of coming within the meaning and purpose  of  Article
         8."

     At paragraph [25] Arden LJ stated that

         "25.     Because there is no presumption  of  family  life,  in  my
             judgment a family life is not  established  between  an  adult
             child and  his  surviving  parent  or  other  siblings  unless
             something more exists than normal  emotional  ties  ...   Such
             ties might exist if the Appellant were dependant on his family
             or vice versa ..."

28. The decision of Singh at [24]  stated  that  "the  love  and  affection
    between an adult and his parents or siblings will not of itself justify
    a finding of family life.  There has to be something more."

29. In this case, the evidence in my judgment was wholly  lacking  and  did
    not demonstrate any level of  dependency  other  than  "moral  support"
    which was not particularised or evidenced any further than that.   When
    set against the particular facts of  the  Appellant  and  his  brother,
    namely that the First Appellant and his brother were both  adults,  the
    First Appellant had entered the UK in 2008  and  his  brother  had  not
    entered until 2012 and therefore had  been  living  independently  from
    each other  during  that  period.   Both  his  brother  and  the  First
    Appellant had formed independent family lives of their own  with  their
    respective partners.  The Appellant's brother was  married  to  an  EEA
    national.  The First Appellant had also established a family life  with
    his wife.  Consequently I am satisfied that there was no foundation for
    a finding that family life existed based on the evidence that  was  put
    before the First-tier Tribunal and the nature of the relationship (even
    if it was considered as part of private life).  It cannot  be  said  it
    was of a compelling nature to demonstrate that a grant of leave outside
    of the Rules was warranted.

30. Therefore whilst the judge did not refer to  the  relationship  between
    the Appellant and his brother, in the light of the lack of evidence and
    in the light of the particular circumstances I have  identified  above,
    it has not been demonstrated that this was a "compelling circumstance".
     Consequently, any error in the judge's approach has not been shown  to
    have been material and on the particular facts as found by the judge it
    could not properly be said that they would warrant  a  grant  of  leave
    outside of the Rules or that their removal was disproportionate.




Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law.  I dismiss the Appellants' appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 13 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
