
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10983/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 May 2016                        |On 24 May 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                             MOHAMAD RADI LAHUAK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 1  July  1981.  This
    appeal arises from the respondent's decision to refuse his  application
    for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his  private  and  family
    life under Article 8 ECHR. The appellant's ensuing appeal was heard  by
    First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  Judge  Manuell  who,   in   a   decision
    promulgated on 2 October 2015, dismissed the appeal. The appellant  now
    appeals that decision.



Background

 2. In 2007 the appellant left Iraq  and  was  granted  refugee  status  in
    Bulgaria. He then moved to Denmark.

 3. The appellant's sister lives in the UK. In 2010, whilst  the  appellant
    was in Denmark, his sister introduced him to a female British  citizen,
    originally from Kuwait, who visited him  in  Denmark  and  subsequently
    became his partner.

 4. In September 2011 the appellant was refused leave to enter the UK.

 5. In January 2013 the appellant entered the UK unlawfully. On 26 February
    2013 he and his partner entered into  an  Islamic  marriage  and  began
    living together.

 6. The appellant and his partner have two children: the eldest was born on
    2 December 2013 and the youngest was born on 29 January 2016. Both  are
    UK citizens. The eldest child has medical problems relating to her hip,
    for which she has required surgery on several occasions.

 7. The appellant  applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his
    relationship with his partner and their first child (the  second  child
    not yet having been  born).  The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's
    application, finding both that he was unable to  satisfy  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules (Appendix FM and Section 276ADE) and that there  were
    no exceptional circumstances that would warrant a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules.

Decision of First-tier Tribunal

 8. At paragraph [11]  the  FtT  stated  that  Counsel  for  the  appellant
    accepted that the Immigration Rules could not be met. The decision does
    not include  any  consideration  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  only
    assesses the appellant's Article 8 claim outside the framework  of  the
    Rules.

 9. The FtT accepted that the appellant had established a  family  life  in
    the UK with his partner  and  child.  It  then  proceeded  to  consider
    whether there were compelling or exceptional circumstances  that  would
    warrant the appeal being allowed outwith the  Rules.  In  finding  that
    there were not, the FtT identified a number of factors relevant to  the
    proportionality of the appellant  being  removed  from  the  UK.  These
    included the following:

          i) The appellant is a persistent  immigration  offender  and  his
             partner has been "complicit in his behaviour".

         ii) His marriage has not been recognised in English law and he and
             his partner chose to have children knowing he had no right  to
             be in the UK

        iii) The appellant and his wife have no real ties  to  the  UK  and
             have "shown wholesale contempt for UK law"

         iv) The appellant's partner has family  in  the  UK,  including  a
             sister in law, who could assist her if she remained in the  UK
             whilst her partner was removed.

          v) Family life with  the  appellant's  partner  and  child  could
             continue, and the future needs of the appellant's child  could
             be met, outside the UK. The decision as to whether the  family
             life should continue outside the UK would be a choice for  the
             appellant and his partner.

10. At paragraph [4], when setting out the relevant  law,  the  FtT  stated
    that Sections 117A-D of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 ("the 2002 Act") must be  taken  into  account.  Consideration  of
    these sections was undertaken at paragraphs [19] and [20] where it  was
    stated:

         "19. ... The appellant met none of the positive factors set out  in
         section 117B, which in any event do not create a right of entry.

         20.  The appellant has recently  established  family  life  in  the
         United Kingdom, which was  no  longer  in  dispute.  The  appellant
         developed his family life in the United Kingdom while he and Mrs Al
         Anazi  [his  partner]  were  well  aware  that  his  presence   was
         "precarious" to apply the terms used in section 117B(6). Indeed, it
         could hardly be more precarious"

11.  At  paragraph  [21]  the  FtT  assessed  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's child, and stated as follows:

         "21. The  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  child  favour  the
         appellant's presence in the United Kingdom. But this is  a  special
         situation where there  has  been  flagrant  breach  of  immigration
         control. The child's best interest are not paramount.  No  evidence
         was provided to show that family life could not be lived elsewhere,
         as already noted above. The  child  is  young  and  adaptable.  Her
         medical needs have been met. There was no evidence that any  future
         needs could not be met elsewhere. Many British Citizens live abroad
         by choice, which in the present appeal would (if in fact made) be a
         choice of the parents"

Grounds of appeal and submissions

12. Several grounds of appeal were submitted but permission to  appeal  was
    limited to two of the grounds which, taken together, essentially  argue
    that the FtT erred by failing to properly construe  and  apply  Section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act  or  give  proper  consideration  to  the  best
    interests of the appellant's child.

13. Mr Lahuak was not represented and addressed  the  Tribunal  through  an
    interpreter. He explained that he now has two children,  both  of  whom
    are British citizens. In response to questions posed about  his  status
    in Bulgaria, he submitted that he previously  had  temporary  residence
    but this had now expired. He claimed that  he  would  not  be  able  to
    return to Bulgaria - or Denmark (where his status depended on his right
    to reside in Bulgaria) - and would, if removed from  the  UK,  have  no
    alternative other than to be sent to Iraq. He considers it unacceptable
    to be sent to Iraq because of the danger he maintains he and his family
    would face. His wish is to live in the UK in peace and safety with  his
    wife and children, all of whom are British citizens.

14. Mr Melvin  argued  that,  taking  all  of  the  material  circumstances
    together, it was clear that it was proportionate, and  reasonable,  for
    the appellant to be removed and there were no compelling  circumstances
    that would justify the appeal being allowed outside the Rules.

15. He argued that the FtT had not misapplied Section 117B(6) of  the  2002
    Act. To the extent that its decision was inconsistent  with  Treebhawon
    and others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC), Mr Melvin  argued
    that (a) Treebhawon was promulgated after  the  FtT  decision  and  (b)
    Treebhawon was wrongly decided and should not be  followed.  He  argued
    that the correct interpretation of Section 117B(6), when having  regard
    to Section 117A(2), is that all of the factors in Section 117  must  be
    considered and it should not be treated  as  a  stand-alone  provision.
    This, he argued, is consistent with KMO (section 117  -  unduly  harsh)
    Nigeria [2015] UKUT 543 (IAC) as well as a recent  unreported  decision
    (which I was invited to consider).

Consideration of the applicable law

16.  Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act  sets  out  mandatory   public   interest
    considerations that the FtT must take into account when  assessing  the
    proportionality of a person's removal  from  the  UK  under  Article  8
    outside the framework of the Immigration Rules.

17. One of the considerations in Part 5A is section 117B(6) which states:

         '(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom.

18. On its face, the wording in 117B(6)  is  very  clear:  where  a  person
    satisfies subsections 6(a)  and  6(b)  the  public  interest  does  not
    require his or her removal.

19. The  Upper  Tribunal  recently,  in   Treebhawon  and  others  (section
    117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC), considered how Section 117B(6) should
    be interpreted and stated as follows:

         "20.  In  section  117B(6),   Parliament   has   prescribed   three
             conditions, namely:

               b) the person concerned is not liable to deportation;

               c)  such  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, namely a person  who
                  is under the age of 18 and is a  British  citizen  or  has
                  lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of
                  seven years or more; and

               d) it would not be reasonable to expect the qualifying  child
                  to leave the United Kingdom.

             Within   this   discrete   regime,   the   statute   proclaims
             unequivocally that where these three conditions are  satisfied
             the public interest does not require the removal of the parent
             from the United Kingdom. Ambiguity there is none.

         21. Giving effect to the  analysis  above,  in  our  judgment  the
             underlying Parliamentary intention is  that  where  the  three
             aforementioned conditions are satisfied the  public  interests
             identified in section 117B(1) - (3) do not apply."

20. Mr Melvin developed an  argument  as  to  why  Treebhawon  was  wrongly
    decided. In  sum,  he  maintained  that  Treebhawon  effectively  turns
    Section 117B(6) into a freestanding  provision  which  is  inconsistent
    with the requirement in Section 117A(2) to have regard to  all  of  the
    Section 117B considerations. Moreover, he argued  that  the  assessment
    under Part 5A of the 2002 Act must be understood in the proper  context
    which is that an appeal does not succeed or fail because of the Section
    117B considerations but rather on the basis  of  there  being  (or  not
    being) an infringement of Article 8 ECHR. Section 117, therefore,  does
    no more than illuminate the assessment of an Article 8 claim during the
    balancing  exercise  that  is  carried  out  when  making  findings  on
    proportionality. These arguments follow the reasoning of an  unreported
    decision to which Mr Melvin drew my attention. I  have  considered  the
    analysis in that decision, which corresponds to the submissions made by
    Mr Melvin. However, having regard  to  section  11.3  of  the  Practice
    Directions, I have decided not to cite the decision because citing  it,
    as opposed to considering the argument of the  reasoning  found  in  it
    (which I have done) does not provide me with material assistance.

21. Although Mr Melvin has made an attractive argument, I do not accept it.
    The wording in  Section  117B(6)  is  unambiguous  and  clear:  if  the
    conditions specified therein are met,  the  public  interest  does  not
    require a person's removal from  the  UK.  That  is  what  the  statute
    provides, and Treebhawon does no more than reiterate this.

Error of law

22. Having regard to Section 117B(6) and its proper  interpretation,  along
    with the best interests of the appellant's eldest child, in my judgment
    the FtT materially erred in three ways.

23. Firstly, the FtT misconstrued the requirements of Section  117B(6).  At
    paragraph [20] the FtT referred to the appellant's  immigration  status
    as being "precarious" in the context of  considering  Section  117B(6).
    However, the appellant's immigrations status, whilst relevant to  other
    considerations under Section 117B, has no relevance to Section 117B(6).
    Conflating Section 117B(6) with other considerations  is  an  error  of
    law.

24. Secondly, it is clear that the FtT, in reaching its decision as to  the
    proportionality of the appellant's removal, placed  significant  weight
    on the public  interest  this  would  serve  (at  paragraph  [21],  for
    example, it referred to this being "a special situation where there has
    been flagrant breach of immigration control"). In  so  doing,  the  FtT
    failed to recognise that where  the  conditions  specified  in  Section
    117B(6)  are  satisfied  the  public  interest  does  not  require  the
    appellant's removal  irrespective  of  how  flagrant  his  breaches  of
    immigration control have been.

25. Thirdly, the FtT  erred,  in  its  analysis  of  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for the appellant's eldest child to leave the UK, by failing
    to take into account material factors  relevant  to  her  specific  and
    particular circumstances. This  included,  inter  alia,  a  failure  to
    consider:

      a) which country the appellant's child would be  removed  to  and  the
         challenges she may face in that country;

      b) the implications for the child's health of leaving  the  UK  (other
         than a comment that her medical needs have now been  met  which  is
         not  consistent  with  the  medical  evidence  of  her   underlying
         problems);

      c) the implications of the child being removed to a country  that  her
         mother is not  a  citizen  of  and  to  which  her  mother  has  no
         connection; and

      d) the significance of a British citizen child having to leave the  UK
         (other than a comment of no specific relevance to  the  appellant's
         child's circumstances that "many British citizens  live  abroad  by
         choice").

26. Accordingly, for the reasons I have set out  above,  I  find  that  the
    decision of the FtT contains a material error of law.

Remade decision

27. I accept the findings of the FtT that (a) the appellant  is  unable  to
    satisfy the Immigration Rules; (b) there is  family  life  between  the
    appellant and his partner and child such that Article 8 is engaged; and
    (c)  the  issue  to  be  determined  is  the  proportionality  of   the
    appellant's removal under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

28. The assessment of whether  the  appellant's  removal  is  proportionate
    requires consideration to be given to Part 5A of the 2002  Act  and  in
    particular Section 117B(6).

29. As explained above,  if  the  three  conditions  specified  in  Section
    117B(6) are  satisfied,  the  public  interest  does  not  require  the
    appellant's removal. The first condition under Section 117B(6) is  that
    the appellant is not liable for deportation. This is clearly  met.  The
    second condition is that he has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with a qualifying child.  It  is  clear  from  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant has such a relationship with two children.

30. The third condition is that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant's children to leave the UK. This condition is also met. It is
    unclear from the evidence whether, if the appellant  were  removed,  it
    would be to Iraq (the country of  his  nationality)  or  Bulgaria  (the
    country that  granted  him  asylum).  However,  irrespective  of  which
    country would be  his  destination,  it  would  not,  in  my  view,  be
    reasonable to expect his children to accompany him.  They  are  British
    citizens. Their mother is a British citizen who has  no  connection  to
    either Iraq or  Bulgaria.  The  eldest  child  has  required,  and  may
    continue to require,  ongoing  medical  treatment  which  is  currently
    provided by the NHS  and  to  which,  as  a  British  citizen,  she  is
    undoubtedly entitled. It may well be reasonable,  taking  into  account
    all of the circumstances, for the appellant to leave the UK without his
    partner and children, but that is not the condition stipulated  Section
    117B(6) which concerns only whether it  would  be  reasonable  for  his
    children to leave the UK.

31. As highlighted in the recent decision of  PD  &  Others  (Article  8  -
    conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC) the test  of
    "reasonableness" represents a less exacting threshold than other  tests
    found in the Immigration  Rules,  such  as  "insurmountable  obstacles,
    exceptional  circumstances  [and]  very  compelling  factors".  Whilst,
    clearly, there may be circumstances in which it would be reasonable  to
    expect British citizen children to leave  the  UK  (particularly  where
    they will be travelling to an EU country), I find that  in  this  case,
    where they would be travelling to a country with which they  and  their
    British national mother  have  no  connection,  and  where  the  eldest
    daughter has ongoing medical needs which are being provided by the NHS,
    it would not be reasonable.

32. I recognise that the public interest considerations at sections 117B(1)
    - (3) of the 2002 Act strongly favour the appellant being removed  from
    the  UK.   Subsection  (1)  states  that   maintenance   of   effective
    immigration controls is in  the  public  interest.  The  appellant  has
    entered the UK unlawfully and as such this is a case where  the  public
    interest in  immigration  control  is  brought  into  sharp  focus  and
    warrants  being  given  considerable  weight.  With  respect  to   sub-
    paragraphs (2) and (3), the appellant does not speak English and is not
    financially independent.

33. However, the consequence of having found that the three  conditions  of
    Section 117B(6) are satisfied is that  the  public  interest  does  not
    require the appellant's removal. This  is  the  clear  and  unambiguous
    language of  the  2002  Act,  the  interpretation  of  which  has  been
    confirmed by the Upper Tribunal in Treebhawon. Accordingly, the  public
    interest considerations identified in sections 117B(1)  -  (3)  do  not
    apply however strong they might otherwise have been.

34. As the public interest does not require  the  appellant's  removal,  it
    follows that the balancing exercise under Article 8  weighs  firmly  in
    his favour.

    DECISION

35. The FtT's decision contains a material error of law and is set aside.

36. The decision I substitute is to allow the  appellant's  appeal  outwith
    the framework of the Immigration Rules under Article 8 ECHR.
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 23 May 2016                   |

