
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10823/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 April 2014                              |On 15 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                          NICHOLAS ORLANZO PATRICK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms K. Cronin, Counsel instructed by Birnberg Pierce
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 23 October  1989.  He
       arrived in the UK in April 2002 with two of his siblings in order to
       live with his aunt, after the murder of his mother by his father. He
       was granted indefinite leave to remain on 4 August 2003.

    2. On 9 December 2011, in the Crown Court at Southend, he was convicted
       of  an  offence  of  assault  occasioning  actual  bodily  harm  and
       possession of  cannabis  and  sentenced  to  a  term  of  14  months
       imprisonment. He received a further  4  weeks  imprisonment  to  run
       consecutively for breach of a suspended sentence, making a total  of
       15 months' imprisonment. The sentence was reduced on appeal  to  one
       of 10 months imprisonment for the offence of assault with  the  four
       weeks imposed for breach of  the  suspended  sentence  left  intact,
       resulting in a total sentence of 11 months' imprisonment.

    3. On 30 April 2012 a decision was made to  make  a  deportation  order
       against the appellant, ostensibly with reference to paragraph 364 of
       HC  395  (as  amended).     His  appeal  against  the  decision  was
       dismissed by a Panel of the First-tier Tribunal consisting of First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Cooper and Mr B.D. Yates,  a  non-legal  member,
       after a hearing on 4 November 2013.

    4. An earlier appeal against the respondent's deportation decision  was
       allowed by the First-tier Tribunal, but that decision was set  aside
       for error of law.

   Submissions

    5. Ms Cronin relied on the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. She
       submitted that there was no reference in the  determination  to  the
       appellant's documents,  or  at  least  what  the  content  of  those
       documents was.

    6. It was submitted  that  this  was  a  case  which  was  governed  by
       paragraph 364 of the  immigration  rules  but  the  Panel  had  only
       referred to it at [142] and had elided that paragraph of  the  rules
       with the 'new' Article 8 rules. Ms Cronin relied on the decision  in
       MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393(IAC)  in  terms
       of retrospectivity in relation to  the  new  Article  8  deportation
       rules. It was submitted that the Panel did not engage with paragraph
       364.

    7. It was further submitted that the  Panel  did  not  give  sufficient
       consideration to the appellant's  relationship  with  his  aunt  and
       siblings with reference to the decision in Beoku-Betts  [2008]  UKHL
       39, seeming to conclude that the appellant  could  only  have  'one'
       family life, with his partner Ms McKay. The Panel had failed to take
       into account the bond that  exists  between  family  members  having
       regard to the traumatic events  that  the  family  experienced.  The
       appellant's sister has quite serious  mental  health  problems,  and
       there was nothing to contradict that evidence. The Panel  had  given
       insufficient weight to the circumstances of all interested parties.

    8. In addition, it was submitted that  no  account  was  taken  of  the
       effect on Ms McKay of the appellant's removal and the assessment  of
       the reasonableness of her returning to Jamaica  with  the  appellant
       was flawed. The Panel stated that she would  have  the  'option'  of
       returning with the appellant but that  is  not  the  same  thing  as
       'reasonableness'.

    9. There was evidence that the appellant needed a  particular  form  of
       treatment (to deal  with  the  trauma  he  had  suffered),  and  the
       evidence from Mr McDonald was that that treatment had  finally  been
       found for him. Dr Bell also gave  [written]  evidence  to  the  same
       effect. That evidence had not been evaluated when the assessment was
       made of the seriousness of the offences.

   10. As regards the issue of self-harm, it was irrational of the Tribunal
       to be sceptical of the risk in this respect. There was disclosure of
       such a risk to his GP, before any question of deportation arose.  It
       was incorrect for the Panel to have  concluded  that  there  was  no
       evidence other than from Dr Bell as to the risk of self-harm;  there
       was evidence from Mr McDonald. Furthermore, the temporary help  that
       might be available to the appellant on return to  Jamaica  would  be
       totally inadequate to deal with the risk of self-harm.

   11. Lastly, it was submitted that the Panel was wrong in [157] to  state
       that there was a need to find "exceptional circumstances", and there
       was no consideration of the decision in Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR
       546.

   12. On behalf of the respondent Mr Avery submitted that  the  Panel  did
       have regard to paragraph 364 of the immigration rules,  albeit  that
       they did not refer to all of it. In any event, given the findings of
       fact, it is debatable whether this is an issue which could have  had
       any effect on the outcome of the proceedings.

   13. As regards family life, the Panel accepted that  the  appellant  and
       his sister had always been close. It  properly  considered  all  the
       evidence and the factual  situation  as  it  is  now.  It  had  also
       considered his relationships as an aspect of private life, and it is
       evident therefore that the relationships had not  been  ignored.  As
       regards Ms McKay's pregnancy,  the  evidence  in  that  respect  was
       rather limited and it is  a  matter  that  is  referred  to  in  the
       determination.

   14. The Panel took into account the evidence of the  risk  of  self-harm
       and referred to the  most  significant  aspects  of  that  evidence.
       Although the appellant had claimed to have self-harmed, there was no
       medical evidence in that respect. It is a matter that relied on what
       the appellant had said to various people.

   15. A proper assessment had been made in relation to  the  claimed  risk
       from the appellant's father. It was not clear that  the  appellant's
       father was going to be released (from Broadmoor) or  that  he  would
       come into contact with the appellant if he was.

   16. Even if [157] could have been more  detailed,  there  is  sufficient
       reasoning in the determination as a whole.

   17. In reply Ms Cronin submitted that it was a serious error of law  not
       to apply paragraph 364 which governed this appeal. The finding  that
       he does not have family life with his sister and brother,  Kristeria
       and David, is irrational. The conclusion that  they  could  maintain
       contact by modern means of communication  belies  the  closeness  of
       their relationship and ignores how important  that  relationship  is
       for the appellant's continuing stability. There was no reference  by
       the Panel to Ms McKay's pregnancy, albeit that  it  was  unusual  to
       have evidence in the way it was given of that very recent event. Her
       pregnancy was not taken into account in relation to her  ability  to
       relocate.

   18. It was further submitted that there was an inadequate assessment  of
       the evidence in terms of the risk of suicide in  the  event  of  the
       appellant's deportation. It was in any event not  clear  from  [156]
       what conclusion the Panel came to as to the risk of suicide.

   My assessment

   19. I deal firstly with the complaint about  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
       consideration, or what is said to be a  lack  of  consideration,  of
       paragraph 364 of the rules. It is argued that because of the date of
       the immigration decision in this case, it was  paragraph  364  which
       applied, rather  than  the  'new'  deportation  rules  contained  in
       paragraphs 398 and 399.

   20. The decision to make a deportation order was made on 30 April  2012.
       The 'new' deportation rules came into force  on  9  July  2013.  The
       grounds at [4] contend that the appellant "did not seek to have  his
       claim determined under the post-July rules." Reference  is  made  to
       the decision of the Upper Tribunal in MF (Nigeria) in which  it  was
       decided that the new deportation rules did  not  have  retrospective
       effect. On that point the Court of Appeal (MF  Nigeria  [2012]  EWCA
       Civ 1192) expressed no disagreement.

   21. I note that the grounds of appeal before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and
       indeed as initially advanced before the First-tier Tribunal, seeking
       permission to appeal,  whilst  asserting  what  rules  governed  the
       appeal, do not actually raise a distinct complaint about the  First-
       tier Tribunal's approach in this respect. This is in contrast to the
       submissions made before me, namely that it was a "serious  error  of
       law" not to have considered the appeal under paragraph 364.

   22. The reason for what is evidently a shift  in  emphasis  between  the
       grounds and the submissions in this respect can, it seems to me,  be
       deduced from what is recorded in the determination of the First-tier
       Tribunal  and  in  the  appellant's  skeleton   argument.   In   the
       determination the Panel was plainly aware that  the  application  of
       the correct rule was an issue, stating  at  [57]  that  "It  is  not
       entirely clear" whether paragraph 364 or paragraphs 398-399B  apply.
       At  [127]  it  was  stated  that  it  was  common  ground  that  the
       substantive appeal was to be considered with reference to Article  8
       of the ECHR. At [128] it was stated as follows:

              "Ms Cronin correctly pointed out in her skeleton argument that
             the Upper Tribunal in MF Nigeria concluded that the Immigration
             Rules brought into  effect  in  July  2012  did  not  apply  to
             deportation decisions made before that  date.  She  also  noted
             that the Court of Appeal in the same case did not  specifically
             address that issue...She nevertheless  sought  to  address  the
             criteria imposed by the new paragraphs 398-399B...arguing  that
             they were in any event met in this case."

       In the next paragraph the Panel stated that:

             "Out of abundant caution, we shall  adopt  the  same  approach,
             considering whether the Appellant can meet the requirements  of
             the new Rules and, if not, whether his  appeal  succeeds  under
             the broader principles of established Article 8 jurisprudence."



   23. At [142] the Tribunal referred to  paragraph  364  stating  that  it
       establishes  a  presumption  that  where  a  person  is  liable   to
       deportation the public interest requires deportation,  and  that  it
       will only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest
       will be outweighed in a case where removal would not be contrary  to
       the refugee and human rights conventions. There is then reference to
       the provisions of paragraphs 398 and 399. There is further reference
       at [145] to the appellant's skeleton argument on the application  of
       the 'new' deportation rules. It is as well to turn at this point  to
       that skeleton argument.

   24. When one looks at the skeleton argument dated 3 November 2013 it  is
       clear that reliance was placed on the 'new' deportation rules as per
       paragraphs 398 and 399. Paragraph 2 of the skeleton argument  refers
       to a supplementary reasons for deportation letter dated 28  November
       2012, and stating that this letter did  not  explicitly  address  or
       apply the new rules. At [12] and [13] of the skeleton argument it is
       asserted that paragraph 364 applies. However, at [14] it  is  argued
       that the new, post July 2012 rules, are "indicative of R's  view  as
       to how the balance should be struck between the public interest  and
       the individual right" and going on to  state  that  the  appellant's
       case "meets some of the  criteria  and  all  of  the  public  policy
       assumptions under these Rules-as noted in the bold annotation to the
       rules cited below" (emphasis as in original).

   25. There then follows a rehearsal of  the  post-July  2012  rules  with
       interspersed arguments or comments as to the  extent  to  which  the
       appellant is able to bring himself within those Rules.

   26. Whilst I am satisfied that this appeal is governed by paragraph 364,
       the First-tier Tribunal can hardly be criticised  for  dealing  with
       the appeal on the basis advanced on behalf  of  the  appellant.  The
       Panel was evidently encouraged to consider the extent to  which  the
       appellant was able to meet the post-July 2012 rules.  Regardless  of
       that, in the grounds before me at [4], it is said  that  the  appeal
       fell to be considered under Article 8 case law, which  is  what  the
       Panel did.

   27. It is also worth  noting  that  at  [142]  the  Panel  compared  the
       provisions of paragraph 364 and the new paragraph 398,  observing  a
       certain symmetry between the provisions.

   28. Aside from the observations I have made in terms of the way that the
       appeal was advanced before the First-tier Tribunal,  even  if  there
       was an error of law on  the  part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
       relation to paragraph 364, I cannot see how, in the circumstances of
       this case, that error of law could have affected the outcome of  the
       appeal. The Tribunal was in any event going to be driven  towards  a
       consideration of Article 8 proper,  and  such  a  consideration  was
       undertaken. Whilst it could be said that the  post-July  2012  rules
       heralded a more rigorous or more restrictive approach to  Article  8
       appeals, it has not been argued that the  Panel's  assessment  under
       Article 8 took into account in its  proportionality  assessment  the
       public interest  as  expressed  in  those  rules  in  terms  of  the
       legislature's view of where  the  public  interest  lies.  In  other
       words, the Panel did not  emphasise,  or  over  emphasise,  or  even
       expressly take into account, the appellant's  failure  to  meet  the
       post-July 2012 rules.

   29. I have set out above the submissions made on behalf of the appellant
       which fleshed out the written grounds. The first  of  those  grounds
       contends that there were errors in fact-finding made by  the  First-
       tier Tribunal. I can summarise the first aspect of  this  ground  as
       being an  assertion  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  its
       assessment of the extent to which the appellant has family life with
       his aunt and siblings. Reference is made in  the  grounds,  and  was
       made in submissions, to the appellant's background and  history,  to
       expert evidence, and to the evidence of the witnesses.

   30. In relation to this, and other grounds, it is necessary to point out
       that the Panel plainly had well in mind the  appellant's  background
       and history, which most significantly included the fact that  within
       days of the appellant's mother's arrival in the UK  the  appellant's
       father murdered her when the appellant  was  aged  about  12  or  13
       years. The Panel referred to that event at, for example,  [130]  and
       [154]. It also  referred  to  the  appellant's  father  having  been
       detained in a secure hospital with a restriction (under  the  Mental
       Health Act 1983). It was accepted that the appellant had experienced
       traumatic events as a child ([156]).

   31. The Panel gave detailed consideration to the question of whether the
       appellant had family life with his aunt and siblings, and approached
       this question taking into account the  findings  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal which heard a previous deportation  appeal  in  respect  of
       this appellant, in December 2012. The Panel accepted that,  applying
       the  Devaseelan  principles  (Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702)  the
       starting point in the fact-finding exercise was the findings of fact
       made by the previous Tribunal. The Panel then went  on  to  evaluate
       the relationships that the appellant now had and the extent to which
       the situation had moved on since that hearing  in  2012.  There  was
       consideration of the appellant's relationship  with  Jasmine  McKay,
       with whom he was living prior to  the  offence  which  prompted  the
       deportation decision. It was noted that although he was living  with
       his aunt at the time of the hearing before them, this was  primarily
       because it was a condition of his bail, and that it was  made  clear
       by the appellant and Ms McKay that  once  restrictions  were  lifted
       they intended to live together in their own independent household.

   32. It was accepted that the appellant and  his  sister  Kristeria  have
       always felt very close to each other, but the Panel noted  that  she
       now lives an independent life in Walsall and that she had two  young
       children and mainly communicates with the appellant by phone.

   33. At [136] there  was  consideration  of  his  relationship  with  his
       younger brother David, noting the evidence of the strength of  their
       relationship. David did not attend the  hearing  and  there  was  no
       witness statement from him. Although it was accepted that  they  are
       very close, the fact that the appellant intended to set up home with
       Ms McKay was a factor that  was  taken  into  account  in  assessing
       whether he and his brother have family life together.

   34. Although complaint is made in the grounds that  the  Panel  assumed,
       without evidence, that the appellant's brother would soon  be  going
       to university, that in my view is a minor issue in  the  context  of
       the family life assessment as a whole. The evidence that his brother
       was studying for his A levels was what prompted the  Panel  to  make
       the assumption about university, but as I have indicated, I  do  not
       consider this to be a significant matter in their assessment.

   35. I do not consider that the Panel adopted the approach of  concluding
       that because the appellant has family life with Ms  McKay  he  could
       not have family  life  with  his  aunt  and  siblings.  The  Panel's
       conclusion was based on an assessment of those other relationships.

   36. I do not accept that the Panel left out of account the  evidence  of
       the appellant's aunt and siblings as to their attachment to him, and
       even dependency. Nor do I accept that the  Panel  was  in  error  in
       failing to consider  the  evidence,  for  example  of  Dr  Bell,  in
       relation to the extent to which the appellant is dependent on family
       support. At [137] the Panel  stated  that  it  recognised  that  the
       appellant still looks to his aunt for moral and  emotional  support,
       but concluded that the relationship no  longer  amounted  to  family
       life. At [138] there is reference to the support that the  appellant
       has had from various professionals,  including  Dr  Bell.  There  is
       further reference to Dr Bell's evidence at  [156]  in  the  specific
       context of what is said to be a risk of self-harm or suicide.

   37. The First-tier Tribunal was not required to refer in detail to every
       aspect of the evidence. I  am  satisfied  that  its  conclusions  in
       relation to family life are free from any error of law.

   38. Similarly, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law in  the
       terms expressed in the grounds under the heading "A's  Trauma".  The
       First-tier Tribunal was plainly aware of the fact that the appellant
       had been provided with significant support because  of  his  history
       and background. There is  reference  in  the  determination  to  the
       support that he has had, for example at [151] where "counselling and
       support" is referred to. It  is  evident  that  in  considering  the
       findings made by the earlier Tribunal, this  Panel  was  aware  that
       those findings were made in the context of the  appellant's  account
       of the events of his  childhood,  which  are  referred  to  in  that
       earlier determination. I do not consider that it could be said  that
       the  finding  of  this  Panel  failed  to  take  into  account   the
       professional and medical evidence in the observation at  [152]  that
       in committing the serious assault which prompted  these  deportation
       proceedings there was nothing to suggest that  the  appellant  could
       not have 'walked away', "just as he promised Ms Jones he would  when
       she was preparing her report [in] 2008".

   39. At [138] the Panel concluded that the appellant had "woefully failed
       to live up to the expectations expressed by the Tribunal". That  was
       a reference to the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  which  allowed  the
       appellant's previous  deportation  appeal  after  a  hearing  on  17
       December 2008.

   40. The Panel in the appeal before me went on to state at [138] that  it
       acknowledged the "extraordinary tenacity and goodwill of the  "team"
       who have been  supporting  [the  appellant]  throughout  this  time,
       including his aunt, Dr Bell and in particular  Mr  McDonald  and  Mr
       Walsh, who have clearly gone to great  lengths  on  his  behalf...Ms
       Cronin  herself  seems  to  have  been  almost  equally   dedicated,
       representing him, as far as we can see, at every substantive hearing
       since and including the one in 2008".

   41. The Tribunal's assessment of the facts  of  the  appeal  included  a
       consideration of the appellant's offending history. At [139] it  was
       stated that everyone, including the appellant,  had  high  hopes  in
       2008 that he would change for the better. The Panel  referred  to  a
       report from Judith Jones at that time  whereby  the  appellant  said
       that he was ashamed of his criminal behaviour,  that  his  aunt  and
       sister's crying when he went to prison is something  that  he  never
       wanted to see again, that he wanted to sort out his life, and get  a
       job and look after his aunt.

   42. However, at [140] the Panel noted that within less than  a  year  of
       the promulgation of the determination of his appeal in January  2009
       he had committed an offence of criminal damage  in  September  2009,
       threatening behaviour  in  May  2010  and  disorderly  behaviour  in
       February 2011. He committed the index offence in August  2011.  That
       offence involved an assault with a five foot fence post.

   43. The point  advanced  in  relation  to  fear  of  violence  from  the
       appellant's father, has no merit. There was no evidence  before  the
       Tribunal which indicated that his father  had  been  released.  Even
       accepting that the respondent has indicated that his father would be
       considered for deportation closer to the expiry of his minimum term,
       as stated at [10] of the grounds, there was nothing to indicate that
       his release was expected  in  the  near  future.  In  addition,  the
       question of any potential future risk  to  the  appellant  from  his
       father has to be considered in the context  of  the  fact  that  the
       appellant is no longer a child who would be under the control of his
       parent. At the date of the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       the appellant was 24 years of age.

   44. It is contended that there is an error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's assessment of the  proportionality  of  the  interference
       with the appellant's family life  with  his  partner.  However,  the
       grounds in this respect amount to little more  than  a  disagreement
       with  the  Tribunal's  proportionality  assessment.  At  [153]   the
       Tribunal referred to Ms McKay's evidence of not envisaging going  to
       Jamaica with the appellant, that she is a British citizen  and  that
       she has lived all her life in the UK.  However,  the  Tribunal  also
       noted that Article 8 does not entail a right for a family to  choose
       where to exercise their family life. It also referred to Ms  McKay's
       age, her good health and the evidence that she does  not  appear  to
       have particularly strong ties to her immediate family. The Panel was
       entitled to conclude that going to Jamaica with the appellant was an
       option that was open to her. It is implicit in that conclusion  that
       the Panel were of the view that it would be reasonable for her to do
       so, contrary to what is said in the grounds.

   45. In submissions before me it was said that the  Panel  did  not  take
       account of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that Ms McKay
       was pregnant, and that this was  not  considered  in  terms  of  the
       question of her going with the  appellant  to  Jamaica.  However,  I
       cannot see how this establishes any error of law on the part of  the
       Tribunal when one considers the  evidence  that  was  before  it  in
       relation to the pregnancy.  This  can  be  seen  from  [98]  of  the
       determination. Ms McKay produced a pregnancy test kit, stating  that
       she had taken the test yesterday and  that  it  was  positive.  Even
       accepting that the Panel failed to take that evidence into  account,
       I do not accept that on the basis of that evidence the Panel  should
       have concluded that Ms McKay was in fact pregnant, or  that  if  she
       was, the pregnancy was viable and would  lead  to  the  birth  of  a
       child. Notwithstanding that at the hearing before me she was said to
       be two months away from giving birth, I am not  satisfied  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal erred in law in failing to take into account the
       evidence from Ms McKay as to  her  pregnancy  when  undertaking  the
       proportionality assessment.

   46. In [154] the  Panel  undertook  an  evaluation  of  the  appellant's
       circumstances on return to Jamaica in terms of his  ability  to  re-
       establish himself and in terms of family support or contact that  he
       could expect  on  return.  Again,  the  grounds  only  amount  to  a
       disagreement with that assessment but do not establish any error  of
       law.

   47. The grounds at [15(i)] assert that the Panel failed to determine the
       issue of whether the appellant was at risk  of  suicide.  I  do  not
       accept that assertion. At  [156]  it  is  evident  that  the  Panel,
       implicitly at the very least, did not  accept  that  aspect  of  the
       claim. Indeed, the submission before me to the effect  that  it  was
       irrational for the Panel to have been sceptical about this aspect of
       the claim, undermines that aspect of the grounds.

   48. I do not accept that there was any  error  of  law  in  the  Panel's
       assessment of the evidence in relation to the risk of  self-harm  or
       suicide. This issue is considered at [156] of the determination. The
       Panel was entitled to  conclude  that  although  the  appellant  had
       "disclosed" previous self-harming  attempts,  Dr  Bell's  report  is
       based solely on what the appellant told him and  that  there  is  no
       other medical or  psychiatric  evidence  to  support  those  claims.
       Although in oral submissions before me reference  was  made  to  the
       evidence of Mr McDonald whose evidence was that self harm  had  been
       disclosed to the appellant's GP, the Panel's conclusion in terms  of
       the lack  of  supporting  medical  or  psychiatric  evidence  was  a
       conclusion that was based on the evidence.

   49. Furthermore, the  Panel  went  on  to  conclude  that  even  if  the
       appellant was at risk of suicide,  appropriate  protective  measures
       can be taken in the UK, as set out in the decision letter [dated  28
       November 2012]. In addition, the Panel did not  ignore  evidence  of
       the extent to which family support is said  to  be  significant  for
       this appellant in terms of his mental  health.  This  was  expressly
       referred to at [156]. However, it was concluded that  the  appellant
       would not be  so  alone  in  Jamaica  as  had  been  suggested.  The
       conclusion that the high threshold for a breach of Article 3 of  the
       ECHR had not been reached in this regard is a sustainable one.

   50. The grounds do not raise any argument in relation to the decision in
       Maslov although the matter was raised in submissions  before  me  in
       terms of the Panel having failed to consider that decision. However,
       the  offence  which  triggered  this  latest  decision  to  make   a
       deportation order  was  an  offence  that  was  committed  when  the
       appellant was an adult. Putting aside the fact that  the  Panel  did
       refer Maslov when summarising the respondent's  reasons  for  making
       the deportation decision, the Panel did refer to the length of  time
       that the appellant had been in the UK and his age  when  he  arrived
       (see [131] and [148]), and his age of 24 years at the  date  of  the
       hearing.  It is clear from a reading of the Panel's reasons that  it
       was aware that the appellant was a settled migrant, for  example  at
       [154] where it was accepted that  it  would  be  difficult  for  the
       appellant to re-establish himself in Jamaica.

   51. Furthermore, even if the  Panel  did  err  in  not  making  explicit
       reference to the decision in Maslov in its reasons, as is clear from
       [46]-[47] in the respondent's own consideration of that case,  there
       are clear distinctions to be made between that case and that of this
       appellant. Explicit consideration of the Maslov principles could not
       have affected the outcome of the appeal.

   52. In summary, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law in the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal in any of the respects advanced.

Decision

   53. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point  of  law.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to dismiss the appeal on all grounds therefore stands.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 11/07/14
