
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10442/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 September 2018                         |On 10 October 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                               Mr WAQAS AHMED
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  3  April  1983.  On  11
    August 2011 he was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a  Tier
    4 general student until 15 December 2013. On 2 April  2013  he  applied
    for leave as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) and  on  9  January  2014  he  was
    interviewed. His application was refused under paragraph 245 DD of  the
    Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended). The Respondent was not satisfied
    the Appellant genuinely intended to establish or invest in  a  business
    or that funds which were to be advanced by  Profectus  Venture  Capital
    were genuinely available to do so.

 2. The Appellant appealed and, following consideration on papers, and in a
    decision promulgated on 31 July 2017, Judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal
    Roopnarine-Davies dismissed the Appellant's appeal. At paragraph  3  of
    her decision she found the Appellant had not filed any  evidence  which
    addressed  the  deficiencies  in  the  evidence  previously   submitted
    concerning the genuineness and availability of the loan  facility  said
    to have been made available by Profectus  and  which  deficiencies  had
    been identified by the Respondent in his reasons for the decision under
    appeal or by the Upper Tribunal in Arshad and Others (Tier 1 applicants
    - funding - "availability") [2016] UKUT 00334 (IAC).

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of
    the First-Tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison on 23 May 2018. Her reasons for
    so granting were:-

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission out of time to appeal against a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Roopnarine-Davies)
         promulgated on 31 July 2017 whereby it dismissed the Appellant's
         appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse his
         application for leave as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur). The Respondent
         was not satisfied that the Appellant genuinely intended to
         establish or invest in a business or that funds which were to be
         advanced by Profectus Venture Capital were genuinely available to
         do so. I am satisfied that there are special circumstances and
         accordingly I extend time and admit the application.

         2.   The Tribunal gave notice of its intention to decide the appeal
         without a hearing pursuant to the appropriate Procedural Rules for
         all appeals involved with funds from said organisation and invited
         the Appellant's solicitors to make representations which were duly
         submitted timeously. Although the Judge decided that the
         Appellant's for the submission were expressed in general terms it
         is arguable that if the Appellant had been given an oral hearing he
         would have been able to adduce evidence by giving oral evidence and
         for his representatives to make formal submissions on his behalf
         which may have made a material difference to the outcome or the
         fairness of the proceedings (Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]
         UKUT 00418 (IAC)."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. The Appellant was served with notice of today's hearing  by  way  of  a
    notice issued on 24 August 2018. At 11.15 today he  had  not  presented
    himself to the Tribunal to appear at  the  hearing.  He  is  acting  in
    person. Having been satisfied that he had been duly served with  notice
    of hearing, and on listening  to  the  submissions  of  Ms  Everett,  I
    decided to proceed to hear this appeal.

 6. The nub  of  the  Appellant's  grounds  and  the  basis  of  grant  for
    permission to appeal is that albeit the Appellant's submissions to  the
    First-Tier were expressed in general terms it is arguable  that  if  he
    had had the benefit of an oral hearing  he  would  have  been  able  to
    adduce evidence which may  have  made  a  material  difference  to  the
    outcome or the fairness of the proceedings.

 7. I find that the issue of fairness prevails at  all  times.  Indeed,  in
    coming to my decision it has been at the forefront of my mind. However,
    this Appellant, since making his application for permission  to  appeal
    has filed no additional evidence nor attended at today's hearing.

 8. Having considered the procedure adopted by the First-Tier Tribunal  and
    the Appellant's response to the requirement to  file  evidence  therein
    alongside the position in the Upper Tribunal I find that  there  is  no
    material error within the First-Tier Tribunal's decision. Fairness  did
    prevail. The Appellant had opportunities to provide  specific  evidence
    particularising his claim under the Immigration Rules and Article 8  of
    the ECHR and has failed to avail himself of them.

Notice of Decision

In those circumstances the decision of Judge Roopnarine-Davies  is  not  set
aside.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                                Date 1 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard








