

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number IA/10493/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Sheldon court
                         Determination Promulgated
On 7th October 2014                                               On 10th
October 2014
Prepared 8th October 2014

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                     H K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Ms E Norman (Counsel, instructed by Wildings Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on the 1st of January 1940
   who entered the UK on a visit visa on the 29th of March 2013. Following
   her arrival it appears that her family became concerned about her medical
   condition and subsequently she was diagnosed with dementia (which form is
   not stated). Following that an application for leave to remain outside
   the Immigration Rules was made which was refused.

2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by Judge Flower at Sheldon Court on the
   23rd of May 2014. In a determination promulgated on the 5th of June 2014
   the appeal was allowed under article 8. The Secretary of State sought
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal asserting that the Judge had
   failed to have regard to the provisions of Appendix FM when assessing
   article 8. Permission was granted by Judge Grant on the 21st of July
   2014.

3. The determination contains no reference to the case of Haleemudeen or
   paragraph 400 of the Immigration Rules both of which require the
   assessment of article 8 claims to be made by reference to the Appendix FM
   and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. In the summary of evidence
   it appears that there was no evidence to show what medical care would be
   available in Pakistan or to show how that could or could not be accessed
   by the Appellant.

4. Those errors do not assist and the Judge should have made the article 8
   assessment by reference to the Immigration Rules and explained why the
   result was unjustifiably harsh. However, for the reasons given below I am
   satisfied that had the Judge set out the reasons correctly the result
   obtained would have been the same and accordingly there is no material
   error in the determination.

5. The Judge summarised the medical evidence at paragraphs 21 and 22. It is
   clear from the evidence that was available that the Appellant's condition
   is significant and that she is unaware of her location, time and
   important personal events and that she is incapable of independent living
   requiring support for all her daily needs.

6. The unchallenged evidence is not only contained in the medical report
   but also in the evidence that she is without support in Pakistan. Given
   her state of health I do not see how she could be returned to Pakistan,
   she would be incapable of making her way out of the airport let alone to
   get home and then access whatever medical services may be available.

7. Whether predicated on the basis of her family life which is engaged or
   on her private life and her physical and moral integrity the Judge was
   entitled to find that her removal from the UK in her state of health
   would be disproportionate. Accordingly I am satisfied that the approach
   taken by the Judge, while erroneous, was not material to the decision and
   accordingly the determination stands.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

The Appellant has the benefit of a fee award from the First-tier Tribunal,
as the determination is undisturbed there is no effect on the fee order
made and the appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made by the Secretary of
State and has been rejected.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 9th October 2014


