
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
     Appeal Number: IA/10823/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th June 2016                             |On 4th July 2016              |
|Ex Tempore Judgment given on 13th June 2016   |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                      mr ronakkumar mahendrabhai patel
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Walker made on  23rd  November  2015  refusing  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 16th March 2015
    to cancel his leave and issue removal directions under Section 47.

 2. This case follows the recent  government  investigation  of  fraudulent
    practice  in  colleges  that  revealed  more  than,  according  to  the
    evidence, 29,000 invalid and 19,000 questionable results of ETS English
    language tests taken in 2012 and 2013 as a result of which licences  of
    those  50  colleges  and  three  universities  were  suspended.   Those
    colleges included Stanford College where the appellant took an  English
    language test in 2013.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 18th August  1980  and  his
    appeal was made under Section 82(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act.

 4. I set out his immigration history.  He was initially granted  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on 16th June 2011 as a  dependant  of  his
    wife who had leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  That leave
    expired on 26th August 2013 and he was then granted leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier  2  (General)  Migrant.   That  leave  was
    effective from 16th August 2013 and was due to expire  on  26th  August
    2015.

 5. On 15th March 2015 the appellant returned to the  UK  from  a  trip  to
    Paris and was detained and interviewed.  The following day he was given
    notice that his leave to remain had been  cancelled  and  that  removal
    directions had been made.  Those decisions were made on the basis  that
    the respondent was satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  used  a  false
    document namely an English language test obtained by using a  proxy  to
    take the speaking test in order to obtain his Tier 2 permission and  it
    is against that decision that the appeal was made.

 6. The Upper Tribunal case SM and Qadir (ETS burden of proof) [2016]  UKUT
    229, sets out that

    (i) 'the Secretary of  State's  generic  evidence,  combined  with  her
    evidence in relation to particular to these two appellants suffices  to
    discharge  the  evidential  burden  of   proving   that   their   TOEIC
    certificates had been proved by dishonesty'.

    '(ii)However given the  multiple  frailties  from  which  this  generic
    evidence was considered to suffer and in  the  light  of  the  evidence
    adduced by the appellant the Secretary of State failed to discharge the
    legal burden of proving dishonesty on their part'.

    That head note appears to have expanded further at paragraph 68  of  SM
    and Qadir which I will set out in full and says this:

    68. 'As our analysis  and  conclusions  in  the  immediately  preceding
    section make clear we have substantial reservations about the  strength
    and quality of the Secretary of State's evidence. Its shortcomings  are
    manifest.  On the other hand, and bearing in mind that the  context  is
    one of the alleged deceptions we must be mindful of  the  comparatively
    modest threshold which an evidential burden entails.  The calls for  an
    evaluative assessment on the part of the  Tribunal.  By  an  admittedly
    narrow margin  we  are  satisfied  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    discharged this burden.  The effect of this is that there is  a  burden
    again an evidential  one  on  the  appellant  of  raising  an  innocent
    explanation'.

 7. In this case Mr Khan has suggested that in fact on examination  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal that the three  stage  process  was
    not set out by the judge and in fact the decision would appear to  have
    considered the appellant's evidence but really relied on  the  evidence
    of the Secretary of State which  is  just  the  generic  evidence.   In
    effect the judge only undertook the  first  part  of  the  three  stage
    analysis which he was required to do and on examination of the decision
    I find there was an error of law  to  conclude  that  the  respondent's
    evidence was capable of demonstrating the last stage, that  is  to  the
    required standard.

 8. The reasoning is set out in the decision at paragraphs 39 to  45  which
    concluded  that  the  appellant  had  acted  dishonestly  but   without
    factoring in all  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  without  more
    analysis of the individual facts of this  case.   The  judge  concludes
    that there had been a change of circumstances entitling  the  decision,
    but it is clear that  had  the  evidence  been  analysed  in  a  manner
    according to Qadir, a different conclusion could be drawn.

 9. At the hearing before me Ms Ahmed validly attempted to  submit  further
    evidence that being from Professor French which I refused to  admit  as
    it failed to comply with Rule 15(2) of the Procedure Rules.  In  effect
    what has been provided by  the  Secretary  of  State  is  just  generic
    evidence together with the spreadsheet tool which shows that there  was
    an invalid test but in fact, that, was reliant as I said on the generic
    evidence.

10. Looking at paragraph  32  of  the  judge's  decision  I  note  that  in
    particular it was  accepted  that  the  appellant  has  a  Bachelor  of
    Commerce degree issued by the Sardar Patel University and that this was
    taught in English and this would have  entitled  the  appellant  to  10
    points as shown by the UK  Visas  and  Immigration  points  calculator.
    Although I note that this degree was not  in  fact  used  nor  did  the
    appellant seek to rely on it, it would appear that he could  have  done
    so and did not.  That however clearly indicates that he had English  to
    a standard which would question why he would even have the incentive to
    take a proxy test.

11. I also note a further factor to take into account.  That it  was  noted
    that the appellant was asked why he had taken the TOEIC test at all and
    he said that he took the test at the centre where they had the earliest
    date and I also note that the judge did not attach and nor do  I,  much
    weight to the fact that he took the test at a centre not  so  close  to
    home.   Equally it  is  perfectly  possible  that  a  test  could  have
    obtained a perfect score and that  should  not  be  taken  against  the
    appellant.

12. As pointed out by the appellant  in  his  witness  statement  the  test
    itself was taken some  time  ago  and  obviously  he  would  have  some
    difficulty in recalling what were the exact events.  I also noted  that
    from his interview, when he was detained on return at the  airport,  he
    gave his responses in English albeit that I do take into  account  that
    the test was taken in 2013  and  this  evidence  was  given  some  time
    afterwards,  in  2015.   Nonetheless  I  do  not  find  there  are  any
    significant discrepancies between  the  appellant's  witness  statement
    evidence and that which he described  in  his  interview  when  he  was
    detained.

13. I also note that reference was given from PTC Travel which is where the
    appellant has worked and that is an IATA and CAA, ATOL  licence  holder
    and a fully bonded travel agent and the witness evidence is  such  that
    he has worked for that organisation since 2010  and  according  to  the
    reference that he had had to use English for that purpose and could not
    perform these duties without a strong command of the English language.

14. In the light of the evidence I think that the  appellant  has  produced
    sufficient counter to the Secretary of State's generic evidence and the
    Secretary of State has failed to discharge the final  legal  burden  of
    showing that the appellant obtained this test certificate by proxy.  It
    follows therefore that I allow the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error of law and his decision  is  set
aside.  I remake the decision and allow the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
Date: 4th July 2016




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because of the complexity of the case.


Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
Date: 4th July 2016

