
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10157/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 March 2014                              |On 22nd April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                   ms r k
                            (Anonymity Direction)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hoare instructed by H & S Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The application for permission to appeal was made by the  respondent  but  I
shall refer to the parties as they were  addressed  before  the  First  Tier
Tribunal that is Ms R K as the appellant and the Secretary of State  as  the
respondent.

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  India  and  her  date  of  birth  is  12
    February 1986 and she appealed against the decision made  on  19  March
    2013 to refuse her application for leave to remain dated  23rd  January
    2012 and to remove her from the UK under Section 47 of the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. The appellant is a qualified nurse and taught  other  nurses  prior  to
    arriving in the UK.  She entered on 23 May 2011 with leave to enter  as
    the spouse of a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant valid until 27 January
    2012.  Her sponsor was Mr A S M whom she married in  India  on  1  June
    2010.

 3. The marriage ran into difficulties and she claimed to be the victim  of
    domestic violence once in the UK and she left  the  former  matrimonial
    home on 16 June 2011.  She made her application for leave to remain  on
    23 January 2012.

 4. In February 2012 she moved into the home of Mr A U,  a  friend  of  the
    appellant's father.  She then became romantically involved  with  their
    adult son, S U, who is a British citizen and born in the UK.

 5. In June 2012 the appellant and Mr M were divorced and she  commenced  a
    romantic relationship with their  son  and  on  16  August  2013  their
    daughter A was born.  S,  her  husband,  was  diagnosed  with  paranoid
    schizophrenia and needed indefinite treatment  and  the  appellant  was
    nominated as his carer.

First Tier Tribunal Determination

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Behan dismissed the  appeal  further  to  the
    Immigration Rules [2002] but allowed the appeal further to the  Article
    8 ECHR.

 7. An application for permission to appeal was lodged by the respondent on
    the  basis  that  "the  judge  had  correctly  established   that   the
    Immigration Rules do not assist the appellant".  However the appeal was
    subsequently allowed under the ECHR.  It was submitted that  the  judge
    was misdirected in this approach and  that  the  case  should  only  be
    allowed on such basis where it is exceptional in some way.  Exceptional
    meant circumstances which although the requirements of  the  Rules  had
    not been met, refusal would result in an unjustifiably  harsh  outcome.
    At paragraph 27 the judge concluded that relocation to India  was  "not
    seen as a realistic prospect" and therefore  the  judge  considered  it
    unlikely that Mr U, the appellant's partner, would live permanently  in
    India.  This was made on the basis of Mr U's  condition,  his  risk  of
    relapse and his need for a support network.  It was submitted that this
    finding did not appear to rely on objective evidence nor consider  that
    he would have the support of his partner.

 8. Furthermore, it was submitted that in allowing the appeal on Article  8
    grounds was misdirection as the appellant could return to India to make
    an appropriate application for leave to remain or live in  India  as  a
    family.  The appellant had failed to satisfy the  Rules  which  were  a
    detailed expression of government policy and control in immigration and
    protecting the public.  As such it was submitted that it  was  for  the
    appellant to  establish  that  there  was  an  "exceptional  basis  for
    granting leave outside the Rules (i.e. exceptional or  very  compelling
    circumstances) or to seek to comply with the Rules.

 9. At the hearing Mr Avery submitted that the approach by  the  judge  was
    fundamentally wrong and at  paragraph  22  she  merely  discounted  the
    Rules.  The Rules were an expression of  Article  8  and  informed  the
    overall approach to be taken.  The judge had not said  enough  in  this
    regard.

10.  Mr  Hoare  relied  on  the  respondent's  notice  which  set  out  the
    background.  He stated that the couple would have married if  they  had
    had access to the appellant's passport and they had a British daughter.
     It was spelt out to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  appellant's
    partner was a paranoid schizophrenic with  a  lifetime  condition.   He
    submitted that the provisions  of  EX.1  were  satisfied  in  that  the
    appellant had a genuine relationship with the  child  and  it  was  not
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

11. Under EX.1 it should be allowed.

12. Mr Avery submitted that the judge  should  have  looked  in  detail  at
    whether the appeal  succeeded  under  the  Rules  and  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

13. Mr Hoare submitted that there was policy guidance issued on 14  January
    2014 which stated that in the case of a British child the  Home  Office
    would not require a British citizen child to leave the  UK.   In  these
    circumstances the child would have to accompany the mother as the child
    was so young.  He submitted that EX.1A(1) and (2) were  both  satisfied
    particularly bearing in mind the fact that the father himself  required
    care and thus the appellant's  removal  would  require  the  daughter's
    removal.  The test of insurmountable obstacles  had  no  foundation  in
    law.  He submitted that there was not much consideration by  the  judge
    of the Immigration Rules but this made no material  difference  because
    the same analysis in Article that the judge conducted would  have  been
    conducted.

14. He also submitted that the appellant's leave was not precarious at  the
    time that she developed her relationship with her partner  as  she  had
    leave to remain and was awaiting a decision.  There was  no  scope  for
    finding that this was a precarious relationship.

15. Had the Rules been explicitly considered in the formula  suggested  the
    conclusion would have been the  same.   The  conclusion  was  available
    under the Rules as well as the old style Article 8.   Gulshan  (Article
    8: new rules: correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) did not exclude a
    residual application in accordance with the jurisprudence and the judge
    did give proper consideration to the best interests of the child.

16. Mr Avery submitted that the appellant did not inform the  Secretary  of
    State  on  the  application  of  the  new  circumstances  although   he
    acknowledged it was  raised  in  the  Section  120  notice.   Mr  Avery
    submitted that the appellant had failed to make an application and thus
    could not succeed under R-LTRP.1.1 and she could not succeed under EX.1
    alone as it was parasitic.



Conclusions

17. Gulshan (Article 8: new rules: correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640  (IAC)
    states at paragraph 24(b) and within the head note that "after applying
    the requirements of the Rules, only  if  there  may  arguably  be  good
    grounds for granting leave to remain outside them is it  necessary  for
    Article 8 purposes to go on and consider whether there  are  compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them: Nagre.

18. As identified at paragraph 21 of Gulshan, the  new  Rules  contemplated
    that there would be cases falling outside them  in  which  a  right  to
    remain could be established although it was  identified  that  the  new
    Rules provided better explicit coverage of the  factors  identified  in
    case law than was formerly the position.  On a thorough review  of  the
    Strasbourg guidance Sales J  (Nagre)  concluded  that  the  rules  were
    lawful and in  a  precarious  family  life  case  only  in  exceptional
    circumstances  would  removal  of  the   non-national   family   member
    constitute a violation of Article 8.

19. However the subsequent Court of Appeal case of MF (Nigeria) v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  1192  confirmed  that
    the test of exceptionality had not been  resurrected  and  further  the
    court remarked obiter that if "insurmountable" obstacles were literally
    obstacles which it is impossible  to  surmount  their  scope  was  very
    limited indeed and that for the reasons stated in  Izuazu  (Article  8:
    new rules) [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC) such  a  stringent  approach  would  be
    contrary to Article 8.

20. Thus the use of the term "exceptional circumstances" in the  new  Rules
    does not restore the pre-Huang exceptionality test rather the  term  is
    employed in the sense to be found in the Strasbourg case law where ties
    are forged in the knowledge that immigration status is precarious.

21. The judge at paragraph 22 was clear that she did consider  Appendix  FM
    and  considered  R-LTRP  subparagraph  1.1(b).   She  found  that  this
    paragraph required an applicant to have made a  valid  application  for
    limited or indefinite leave to remain as a partner and that  no  matter
    the extent to which the appellant is required to and/or does  meet  the
    other many and various requirements of the Rule, she may not be granted
    leave to remain under it.  The judge made clear why she  proceeded  not
    to analyse  the  detailed  provisions  of  this  Rule  further  in  the
    determination.

22. Mr Avery confirmed at the hearing that the appellant could not  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules because she had made no  application  as  a
    partner although she had submitted her  additional  grounds  of  appeal
    further to the Section 120 notice.  I note that EX1  is  parasitic  and
    merely by fulfilling the provisions of EX.1 it is clear from case  law,
    Sabir (Appendix FM EX.1 not  freestanding)  [2014]  UKUT  63  that  the
    appellant cannot succeed.

23. What is clear from the determination set out at paragraph  2  to  7  is
    that  the  appellant's  partner  has  been  diagnosed   with   paranoid
    schizophrenia and that she and  her  partner  have  a  British  citizen
    daughter.  Evidence was put before the judge that  the  partner  needed
    exactly the same medication and the support of his care co-ordinator to
    remain stable.  Thus I do not accept that the judge speculated in  this
    regard.

24. The judge also considered paragraph 276ADE because it  was  clear  that
    this was refused by the respondent.

25. The judge noted, although it  was  not  the  fault  of  the  respondent
    because further grounds had been submitted,  that the new  relationship
    or the birth of their child had not been considered by  the  respondent
    and thus for these reasons there were arguably good grounds for further
    'old style' consideration of Article 8 in the context of the background
    history.  Bearing in mind the evidence given  and  the  fact  that  the
    judge found the relationship to be credible and although fortuitous did
    not find that it had a hint of contrivance it was open to the judge  to
    make the findings she did.  It was  not  submitted  by  the  respondent
    before the First-tier Tribunal that the relationship of  the  appellant
    was founded when her immigration status was precarious.

26. The judge found that the appellant met several elements of the Rule  R-
    LTRP  but  as  stated  above  could  not  fulfil   all   the   relevant
    requirements.

27. The judge acknowledged at paragraph 23  that  although  the  respondent
    intended Appendix FM to set out a complete code for the  assessment  of
    Article 8 rights she was required to go on and  consider  those  rights
    independent of, though informed by,  the  respondent's  Rules  and  she
    rightly set out MF (Nigeria) whereby a Tribunal is obliged to  consider
    all of the relevant case law concerning Article 8.

28.  I  find  she  correctly  considered  in  the  context  of  the   whole
    determination that there were arguably good grounds for moving on to  a
    consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules  and  had  correctly  made
    findings within those Rules.  She bore in mind the guidance  in  Razgar
    and considered the weight of the public interest and the legitimate aim
    of firm and fair immigration control encapsulated  in  the  immigration
    rules.

29. At paragraph 26 in particular the judge considered whether the decision
    would be proportionate.  I do not find that the judge has speculated in
    relation to the decision regarding Mr  Uppal  and  she  considered  the
    child's best interests further to ZH  (Tanzania)  not  least  that  the
    decision would have the effect  of  separating  a  genuine  couple  and
    separating Arshiya from one of her parents.  The judge  recognised  the
    child's best interests were not a trump card. She also noted  that  the
    child was a UK citizen and although the  judge  did  not  refer  to  or
    allude to Sanade (British children - Zambrano  -  Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT
    00048 (IAC), I find this would be a factor.

30. I find that  as  Mr  Hoare  pointed  out  the  judge  stated  that  her
    immigration status was precarious but this was not the case.   Even  if
    it were the judge had factored this in and noted that the  child  could
    not be held responsible for the actions of her parents.

31. Overall,  I  find  that  the  judge  has  given  consideration  to  the
    Immigration Rules, and proceeded to find that there were  good  grounds
    for considering the matter further to Article 8.

32. In sum, the judge found that  overall  in  the  circumstances  she  was
    satisfied that the need for immigration control was outweighed  by  the
    effect on family life.  Further to Razgar and Huang  I  find  that  the
    judge assessed the evidence and gave a reasoned decision.

33. Even if the judge did not fully examine the Immigration  Rules  I  find
    that there were compelling grounds for her to consider the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights outside the Rules and this is what she has done.

34. My final point is to underline that the application dated 23rd  January
    2012 must have contained an application regarding human rights  as  the
    statement of grounds of appeal referred to a statement accompanying the
    application which referred  to  the  breakdown  of  marriage  owing  to
    domestic violence. I note that the skeleton argument before  the  First
    Tier Tribunal confirmed  that  the  appellant  made  a  valid  in  time
    application on the basis of domestic violence and  human  rights.   The
    application form refers to a statement attached. This skeleton argument
    was settled by Mr Hoare who had conduct of the case from  January  2012
    and whose name was cited on the application form.   In  this  regard  I
    accept that this appeal rests on an application dated 23rd January 2012
    and which was, in turn, based on human rights and  made  prior  to  the
    introduction of Appendix FM and Gulshan would not apply.

35. For the reasons given above, I find there is no error  of  law  in  the
    determination and the determination shall stand.



Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date 18th April 2014


Judge Rimington

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
