



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10555/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 1st December 2014                         |On: 4th February 2015        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              Mrs Amandeep Kaur
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hossein, SEB Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The Respondent is a national of India date of birth 15th May  1988.
         On the 8th September 2014  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Bart-
         Stewart) allowed her appeal against a decision to  refuse  to  vary
         her leave to remain and to  remove  her  from  the  United  Kingdom
         pursuant to s47 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.
         The Secretary of State now has permission to  appeal  against  that
         decision.

      2. The matter is issue was whether Ms Kaur was entitled to any further
         leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant.    She  had
         applied for further leave to remain in that capacity in order  that
         she could study for a BTEC Higher National Diploma in Business. The
         application was refused on the ground that a further grant of leave
         would result in Ms Kaur having spent in excess of 3 years  studying
         at below degree level, contrary to the  requirements  of  paragraph
         245ZH (h) of the Immigration Rules.  By the  Secretary  of  State's
         calculations Ms Kaur had already had periods of leave  totalling  1
         year and 11 months; the BTEC  was  due  to  last  approximately  14
         months.

      3. The First-tier Tribunal  noted that Ms Kaur's first grant of  leave
         had been from 1st January 2011 until the 19th  January  2014.  This
         three-year grant was to enable her to undertake a BTEC. However  on
         the 20th November 2013 the Secretary of State  had  curtailed  that
         leave because the Tier 4 Sponsor had its licence  revoked,  on  the
         30th October 2013.  The First-tier  Tribunal  therefore  calculated
         the period in which Ms Kaur had already undertaken sub-degree level
         study as being January 2011  to  October  2013,  a  period  of  "22
         months". Since this BTEC was going to take less than 14 months  the
         First-tier Tribunal concluded that Ms Kaur  would  not  have  spent
         more than 3 years studying at below degree level  and  allowed  the
         appeal.

      4. The Secretary of State now appeals on the following grounds:

          i) The relevant period for the purpose of the Rule is "the  grant
             of leave", not the period actually studied;

         ii) The determination contains an error of fact  amounting  to  an
             error of law,  since  the  period  between  January  2011  and
             October 2013 is in fact 33 months, not 22 as calculated by the
             Tribunal.

    Error of Fact

      5. The determination does contain an error of fact.  The  period  from
         January 2011 to October 2013 is  not  22  months.  It  is,  as  the
         drafter of the grounds calculates, 33 months.  This  miscalculation
         was plainly relevant to the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow
         the appeal and in those circumstances must amount to  an  error  of
         law.

      6. The second issue raised by the grounds is less straightforward. The
         Secretary of State here contends that the relevant period  for  the
         purpose of calculating the 3  years  of  study  is  the  "grant  of
         leave". Reference to the rule itself shows that  this  is  not  the
         case:

             (h)  If the course is below degree level the grant of leave to
             remain the applicant is seeking must not lead to the applicant
             having spent more than 3 years in the UK as a Tier 4 Migrant
             since the age of 18 studying courses that did not consist of
             degree level study.

             [emphasis added]

      7. It was not therefore an error for the Tribunal to  have  calculated
         the relevant from the day at which Ms  Kaur  started  studying,  to
         when she stopped because the college had its licence revoked.    Mr
         Duffy contended that there was  HO  guidance  to  the  effect  that
         periods of non-study should also be counted.  Since  such  guidance
         would be plainly contrary to the clear wording of the Rule I am not
         prepared to construe paragraph 245ZH (h) as the Secretary of  State
         contends.

      8. I set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside. It contains  a
         material error of fact which amounted in the  circumstances  to  an
         error of law.

    The Re-Made Decision

      9. Ms Kaur has studied at below degree level for the following periods
         since her arrival in the UK:  between 31 Jan 2011 and 30  Oct  2013
         she undertook a Diploma in Business & Adminstrative  Management  at
         Northam College (NQF level 5).  She has therefore  so  far  studied
         for a period of 33 months.

     10. The course which she wished to take when she made this  application
         was to run from the 27th January 2014 to  the  6th  March  2014,  a
         period of 13 months and 9 days.  If she is permitted to  take  this
         course she will have studied in the UK at below degree level for  a
         total period of 46 months and 9 days. That equates to well  over  3
         years.  Ms Kaur does not meet the requirements of  paragraph  245ZH
         (h) and the appeal is dismissed under the Rules.

     11. Insofar as Ms Kaur relies on Article 8 I am not satisfied that  the
         Article is engaged, or if is, that any decision to remove her  from
         the UK would be disproportionate. She came to the UK in a temporary
         capacity as a Points Based System  Migrant  and  can  have  had  no
         expectation of being permitted to stay beyond the period  of  leave
         granted.  There  are  no  particular  features  in   the   evidence
         indicating that any interference with her  private  life  would  be
         disproportionate.

    Decisions

     12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law
         and it is set aside.

     13. The decision in the appeal is remade  as  follows:  the  appeal  is
         dismissed on all grounds.  There was  no  request  that  I  make  a
         direction for anonymity.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           1st February 2015
