
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/10824/2015
                                                               IA/10826/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th June 2016                      |On 15th July 2016                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

            miss emmanuella naa amerley gyapong (first appellant)
              Mr daniel nii amartey gyapong (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Sharma, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Ghana born  respectively  on  17th  June
    1997 and 6th June 1999.  They are brother and sister.  The  Appellants'
    immigration history is set out in detail in the decision and reasons of
    Judge Davies at  paragraphs  2  to  5.   I  have  given  due  and  full
    consideration to these paragraphs.

 2. On 19th November 2014 the Appellants had applied for  indefinite  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  This was despite the fact that  their
    visa valid for six months from 14th October 2013 to 14th April 2014 had
    expired.  Their claim was based under paragraph 298 of the  Immigration
    Rules, namely that they sought indefinite leave to remain as the  child
    of a parent, parents  or  a  relative  present  and  settled  or  being
    admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom.  Those applications were
    refused by Notices of Refusal dated 4th March 2015.

 3. The Appellants appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal M Davies sitting at Hatton Cross on  19th  October  2015.
    In a decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  12th  November  2015  the
    Appellants' appeals were dismissed under the Immigration Rules  and  on
    human rights grounds.

 4. On 26th November 2015 Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 17th May 2016 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Shimmin
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Shimmin  noted  that  the  grounds
    requesting permission to appeal argued that the judge had erred in:

      1) relying on evidence in the form of  a  witness  statement  admitted
         after the hearing which was  not  put  to  the  Appellants  or  the
         witness, and

      2) the approach of the judge to the funds available to the Appellants.

    Judge Shimmin considered that both grounds constituted material  errors
    of law and that it was arguable that the failure of the  judge  to  let
    the Appellant or witness answer a deficiency in the  witness  statement
    was unfair and that the judge's consideration of the funds available to
    the Appellant was also an error.

 5. On 26th May 2016 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  In summary the Rule  24  response  submitted  that  the  judge
    directed  himself  appropriately  and  that  the   evidence   submitted
    posthearing was submitted by the Appellants themselves and that it  had
    always been  within  the  Appellants'  knowledge  that  the  Respondent
    disputed there was sole responsibility  for  the  Appellants  by  their
    father and as such they had had every  opportunity  since  the  refusal
    letter to adduce the evidence to support their case or  to  provide  an
    explanation when submitting the requested letter.   In  any  event  the
    Rule 24 reply contended that even if it were found to be  in  error  to
    have referred to the witness statement, it was contended that the error
    would not be material and that it is noted that the  witness  statement
    formed a small part of a significant number of  findings  made  by  the
    judge and those findings would, it was contended, be  undisturbed  even
    if no reliance  had  been  placed  on  the  witness  statement  or  the
    Appellants were given the opportunity to comment upon it.

 6. With regard to the funds it is  submitted  in  the  Rule  24  reply  in
    reliance upon Ahmed (benefits: proof of receipt:  evidence)  Bangladesh
    [2013] UKUT 84 that the burden was on  the  Appellants  to  demonstrate
    that they had the relevant funds by way of a schedule setting  out  the
    sources of income and how the weekly calculation was made.  The Rule 24
    response noted that it was open to the judge given the lack of evidence
    to determine that the Appellants had failed  to  discharge  the  burden
    upon them when considered in line with the Immigration Rules on what is
    considered to be public funds and that the finding was not solely based
    on the fact that the Appellant was in receipt of child tax credit.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellants appear by  their  instructed
    Counsel Mr Sharma.  Mr Sharma is extremely familiar with  this  matter.
    He appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and he is also the author of
    the Grounds of Appeal.  The  Respondent  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Norton.

 8. Whilst I am not rehearing this matter, I am also referred to an  up-to-
    date  bundle  of  documents   provided   by   the   Appellants'   legal
    representatives.  In particular that bundle introduces new evidence  so
    far as it relates to the Sponsor's finances, bearing in mind  that  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had noted in his determination that no
    schedule of income and  expenditure  had  been  included.   I  am  also
    provided with a letter from the headmaster of  Christ  Mission  School,
    Accra stating that Daniel was a student there between 2008 and December
    2013 and that he lived with his grandparents who were his guardians and
    responsible for his education.  Mr Norton does not  object  to  any  of
    this  additional  evidence  being  before  me  albeit  that  all  legal
    representatives acknowledge that the issue extant  is  whether  or  not
    there are material errors of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge.

Submissions/Discussions

 9. Mr Sharma is grateful with the  concession  made  that  the  letter  by
    Christ Mission School could be admitted in evidence,  bearing  in  mind
    that part of the thrust of the Grounds of Appeal emphasised the failure
    to allow questions to be put to a witness.  Mr Sharma points  out  that
    there had been a previous hearing in this matter on a visit visa appeal
    but that at the hearing before the First-tier  Judge  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer merely waived the visit visa decision  in  front  of
    the Tribunal and the  judge  decided  that  it  was  relevant  to  hear
    evidence.  Copies of the witness statement, i.e. the witness  statement
    that  was  before  the  visit  visa  appeal,  were  therefore  sent  in
    afterwards to the judge.  Mr Sharma alleges that  an  unfair  prejudice
    arose  to  the  Appellants  thereafter  in  the  allowing  in  of  this
    documentation without the right of cross-examination or  response.   He
    points out that none of the material from the earlier  visit  visa  had
    been placed before the Tribunal for the purpose of the appeal  and  the
    reason was that it was a lack of relevance in relation  to  the  papers
    not supplied.

10. At the judge's request the witness statement from the visit visa appeal
    was sent in by email.  It was only served because the judge  wished  to
    see it.  The judge thereafter took points from that  witness  statement
    and the Appellants were never given the opportunity to answer them.  Mr
    Sharma submits that in such circumstances it was wrong  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to make adverse findings on the basis  of  evidence
    on which the witnesses had no  opportunity  to  comment.   Further,  he
    refers to the email that attached the witness statement to  the  judge,
    the content of which is set out at  paragraph  12  of  his  Grounds  of
    Appeal and he contends that it was necessary at least  for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to make reference to the submissions and  to  raise
    any conflicts that had arisen.

11. Mr Sharma takes me to paragraph 31 of the judge's decision noting  that
    he heard oral testimony from all three attendees, namely the Appellants
    and their witnesses, particularly bearing in mind his finding  that  he
    was not satisfied that they were telling the truth and the  claim  that
    the Appellants had been living with their maternal  grandparents  prior
    to coming to the UK rather than with their mother,   then  it  is  only
    right that they should have been given the opportunity  to  answer  the
    questions set out in the witness statement and that the failure  to  do
    so creates a procedural unfairness.  Further, he submits that the judge
    also misdirects himself as to the facts and circumstances in this  case
    and to the documentation to be found in a previous bundle including the
    witness statement of the  Appellant  in  which  there  is  evidence  he
    submits confirming residence with the grandparents.   He  submits  that
    these issues have not been addressed by the judge.

12. He further points out that the Tribunal clearly did not have before  it
    the letter from the Appellants' school and that based on  the  lack  of
    evidence regarding residence the judge wrongly made findings  that  the
    Appellants were not living with their grandparents.

13. Finally he contends that the approach adopted to the funds available to
    the Appellant was erroneous  and  that  the  finding  to  be  found  at
    paragraph 55 and thereafter is in conflict with the guidance  given  in
    KA (adequacy of maintenance) Pakistan [2006] UKAIT 00065  as  addressed
    in Ahmed (benefits: proof of receipt: evidence) Bangladesh [2013]  UKUT
    84 (IAC).

14. Mr Norton relies on the Rule 24 stating that it had  been  accepted  by
    the judge that if the Appellants were living with  their  parents  they
    were also living with their mother and he refers me to paragraphs 5  to
    7 and paragraph 21 of the decision.  He contends that on its facts  the
    witness statement, which is  the  subject  of  this  appeal,  gives  no
    support for the case and the fact  the  Appellants  were  not  able  to
    comment thereon does not help them.  Further he takes me  to  paragraph
    31 pointing out there is a clear finding that the judge did not believe
    what he had been told.   Consequently  he  submits  that  there  is  no
    unfairness as the Appellants were given the opportunity to provide  the
    further (old) witness statement but that did not help them.  He  states
    that it  is  the  Secretary  of  State's  position  that  that  witness
    statement was not going to be  of  assistance  to  the  Appellants  and
    consequently there is no material error in law in the failure to  allow
    questions to be put to the Appellants thereon.

15. So far as the maintenance calculation is concerned  Mr  Sharma  accepts
    the criticism that the judge has not been in a position  to  carry  out
    the calculation because the up-to-date figures  were  not  before  him,
    albeit that there is now an updated schedule  in  the  current  bundle.
    However he maintains the position that there was a misdirection by  the
    judge and a miscalculation of the level of income available.  Mr Norton
    indicates that he agrees that the information was not before the  judge
    and that what was required were details of  tax  credits  for  the  two
    younger children who are British  citizens  and  not  subject  to  this
    appeal and that the judge was entitled to consider that adding two more
    children would require more provision of public funds.

The Law

16.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

17. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

18. The main thrust of the Appellants' Counsel's submission is  that  there
    has a procedural unfairness by  reliance  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge on evidence within a witness statement that he specifically asked
    to examine after the conclusion of the evidence and that  he  has  made
    reference to this without giving due and  proper  consideration  to  an
    attached email or giving consideration with a response by way of cross-
    examination or further evidence-in-chief.  It is the contention of  the
    Secretary of State that even if such an error  has  arisen  it  is  not
    material because there is no benefit to be found to the Appellants.  It
    is the very strong submission of Mr Sharma that that is not  the  case.
    Questions of procedural unfairness need to be dealt with carefully.  In
    this case there is a possibility that had the judge had the opportunity
    to have a full explanation of issues that were before him that he might
    have come to a different  decision.   This  is  particularly  important
    bearing in mind the adverse findings of credibility made  at  paragraph
    31.  In such circumstances the correct approach is to find  that  there
    are material errors of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and set it aside and to order the matter to be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and reheard.

19. In addition there are arguments made by Mr Sharma that  the  conclusion
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge conflicts with the guidance  given  in
    KA and Ahmed that the receipt  of  further  funds  to  the  Appellants'
    father's two British children adds to the proper funds available rather
    than evidence a diminished  ability  to  maintain  the  Appellants.   I
    accept that the Appellants have not helped themselves by providing  up-
    to-date financial details but that that  is  now  available.   In  such
    circumstances in the interests of fairness again it is appropriate that
    this evidence be considered by the  Tribunal  and  I  direct  that  all
    issues to be reheard are at the remitted hearing.

Administrative Request

20. I am advised by Mr Sharma that the first Appellant has  sponsorship  to
    attend a  course  at  university  in  Finland  presumably  starting  in
    September.  In  such  circumstances  he  asks  that  this  decision  be
    expedited and in the event that there is to be a  rehearing  that  that
    too be expedited.  Mr Norton acknowledges the  position  and  does  not
    raise any objection.

Decision and Directions

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.

 2) None of the findings of fact are to stand.

 3) The matter is remitted to  be  heard  at  Hatton  Cross  on  the  first
    available date 21 days hence with  an  ELH  of  two  hours  before  any
    Immigration Judge other than Immigration Judge M Davies.

 4) That in view of the pending place for the first Appellant at university
    in Finland the administration do its utmost to list the  appeal  during
    August 2016.

 5) That it is recorded that the Appellants' representatives have lodged an
    up-to-date bundle attached to a letter of 15th June 2016.  In the event
    that they wish to add any further material to that bundle then it  must
    be  lodged  and  served  within  fourteen  days  of  receipt  of  these
    directions.

 6) That there be leave to the Secretary of State to also file any  further
    documents upon which they seek to rely within fourteen days of  receipt
    of this decision.

 7) That in the event that the  Appellants  seek  an  interpreter  for  the
    remitted hearing then they do notify the administration at Hatton Cross
    within seven days of receipt of these directions.


No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 15 July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date 15 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

