
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10874/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2016                                 |On 19 May 2016                |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                           hannah elisabeth capon
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mumon, instructed by J M Wilson
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Hannah Elisabeth Capon, was born on 28 December 1993 and
    is a female citizen of the United States of America.  The appellant and
    her son (born 2014) arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 June 2014  on  a
    visit visa valid until 1 December 2014.  Whilst in the  United  Kingdom
    and by an application dated 1 November 2014, the appellant applied  for
    a variation of leave to remain on the basis of her wish  to  settle  in
    the United Kingdom with her husband.  Her application was refused by  a
    decision dated 6 March 2015.  The appellant appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Atkinson)  which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  21
    September 2015 dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Mr Mumon raised a preliminary issue at the Upper Tribunal hearing on  3
    May 2016.  Judge Andrew had granted permission only in respect  of  the
    grounds of appeal concerning Section 117B of the 2014 Act.  She refused
    permission in respect of those grounds raising issues  under  Chikwamba
    [2009] 1 AER 363.  Mr Mumon told me  that  a  renewed  application  for
    permission had been made in respect of that  ground  and  it  had  been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins.  I did not have a copy  before
    me.  I have no reason to doubt what Mr Mumon told me is  true.   Having
    discussed the matter with both representatives, I stated that  I  would
    determine the appeal on the basis of all  the  grounds  raised  by  the
    respondent including that initially refused by Judge Andrew.

 3. The parties agree that the appellant could not meet the requirements of
    HC 395, in particular paragraph 276ADE and paragraph  E-LTRPT2.3.   The
    appellant had only been living in the United Kingdom for five months at
    the date of the application.  The appellant challenges  the  additional
    finding in respect of paragraph E-LTRPT2.3 but there was no significant
    obstacle to her returning and  integrating  into  life  in  the  United
    States of America [16].

 4. I find the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.   I
    have reached that conclusion for the following reasons.   I  find  that
    this was a case which falls fully within the parameters of the House of
    Lords decision in Chikwamba.  The evidence put  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal does not appear to have been disputed by the respondent.   The
    appellant claims that it would be (in  the  words  of  Judge  Atkinson)
    "Emotionally traumatic for her and [the child] to have to return to the
    United States in order to make  an  application  for  settlement."   It
    appears that it may take anything between five days and six  weeks  for
    such an application to be processed.   Very  significantly,  the  judge
    appears  to  have  based  his  determination  of  the  appeal  on   the
    understanding that the appellant would succeed with an application from
    the United States [33].  The judge  recorded  at  [11],  that  "in  the
    present  case  it  is  not  disputed  that  the  appellant  meets   the
    substantial requirements of the Rules relating to  the  status  of  the
    parties'  relationship   and   level   of   income,   maintenance   and
    accommodation."  I find that it is that particular finding that led the
    judge to err in law and  in  the  application  of  Chikwamba.   Indeed,
    rather than (as the judge appears to have assumed) there being  only  a
    minimal disruption with the appellant's private and family life  caused
    by her being required to remain in the United States for only five days-
    six weeks in order to make an application for entry clearance requiring
    her to undertake that journey (with its attendant cost which the  judge
    does  not  appear  to  have  considered)  in  circumstances  where  the
    Secretary of State agrees that the appellant meets all the requirements
    of the necessary Immigration Rule is, for the  reasons  stated  in  the
    opinions of the House of Lords in Chikwamba, disproportionate.  If  the
    appellant is plainly unable to meet the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules then she would, by entering on a visit  visa  and  attempting  to
    remain under Article 8 ECHR, the obtaining of a  significant  advantage
    which she would not have obtained had she applied for settlement out of
    country.  There exists a significant public  interest  for  seeking  to
    discourage such individuals in circumventing immigration  law.   Whilst
    there may, as  in  this  present  case,  be  some  public  interest  in
    discouraging individuals from "switching" from a temporary  to  a  more
    established and settled status whilst in this country, that is  plainly
    outweighed when one considers that there is minimal public interest  in
    refusing leave to remain to a person who will obtain entry clearance in
    any event.  In short, the fact that entry clearance might  be  obtained
    in as short a period as five days,  strengthens  the  appellant's  case
    under Article 8 in circumstances where she  can  meet  the  substantive
    requirements for settlement as a spouse; the  shortness  of  the  delay
    does not, as the First-tier Tribunal Judge appears  to  have  believed,
    render any interference proportionate.

 5. I do not intend to deal with the other arguments  as  set  out  in  the
    grounds  of  appeal,  in  particular  as  regards  discrimination  (the
    exclusion of the  appellant  from  applying  under  paragraph  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM) although I do find that those  grounds  are  significantly
    less cogent and persuasive than the Chikwamba point.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  21
September 2015 is set aside.  I remake the  decision.   The  appeal  of  the
appellant against the decision of the  respondent  dated  6  March  2015  is
allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 4 MAY 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

