
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10829/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 9 May 2017                         |On 26 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                            OLUWASEYI KAYODE DISU
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan of Counsel instructed by AA & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 8 November 1976.   On  28
    May 2008 he arrived with entry clearance as a work permit  holder.   He
    next made two applications, in March and December 2012, for a Residence
    Card as the husband of Marie  Gesser,  said  to  be  a  Dutch  national
    exercising Treaty rights here.  Both applications were refused  by  the
    Respondent.  On 23  February  2015  he  made  application  through  his
    solicitors for limited leave based on his private and family life  with
    Ms Okumagba, a Nigerian national and their two  children  protected  by
    Article 8 of the European Convention.

 The Respondent's decision

 2. On 26 February 2015 the Respondent refused the application because  she
    considered the Appellant did not meet the time critical requirements of
    paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules and did  not  accept  that
    his relationship with Ms Okunagba was genuine and subsisting.  Further,
    the Respondent considered the Appellant  had  not  shown  he  had  sole
    parental responsibility for his two pre-school age children.  She found
    there were no very significant obstacles to the re-integration  of  the
    Appellant in Nigeria where he had spent the majority of  his  life  and
    that taking account of the best interests  of  his  children  it  would
    still be reasonable to expect him to return to Nigeria.

 3. On 18 March 2015 he lodged notice of appeal under  Section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.   He  asserted
    he had access rights and parental responsibility for the  children  and
    had been fulfilling his financial responsibilities towards them and was
    still in a relationship with Ms Okumagba.   On  return  to  Nigeria  he
    would be destitute.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 4. By a decision promulgated on 22 August 2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Moxon dismissed the appeal  on  all  grounds.   The  Appellant
    sought permission to appeal on the basis that the Judge  had  erred  in
    not finding him credible and had not given  adequate  reasons  for  his
    conclusions including the conclusion that the Appellant and his partner
    did not live together and had contact with his children.

 5. On 14 December 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Grimmett  refused
    permission on all grounds.  The application for  permission  to  appeal
    was renewed to the Upper Tribunal although the grounds are  limited  to
    disagreeing with the decision of Judge Grimmett.  On 20  February  2017
    Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce granted permission on because the finding of
    Judge Moxon that there was no evidence the Appellant was active in  his
    children's lives was arguably not adequately reconciled with the  clear
    terms of the Child Arrangements Order made on 5 August 2015 by District
    Judge MacGregor.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 6. The Appellant and Ms Okumagba were present.  I explained the purpose of
    and procedure for an "Error of Law" hearing.

 7. Mr Norton informed me that the Respondent  had  revoked  Ms  Okumagba's
    Residence Card issued under  Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 and that  she  had  lodged  notice  of  appeal  on  14
    February 2017 against that decision and the appeal had  been  allocated
    the Tribunal reference EA/01775/2017.

 8. The Judge had adequately dealt with the issue of the Child Arrangements
    Order of 5 August 2015 (CAO) and referred me to paragraphs 12  and  33-
    35.  He was entitled to reach the conclusions contained in paragraph 39
    and there was no material error of law in his decision.

 9. For the Appellant, Mr Khan submitted that paragraphs 34 and 35  of  the
    Judge's decision were inconsistent with the evidence contained  in  the
    Appellant's statement and in the letter of  10  August  2015  from  the
    solicitors for the younger child at pages 8 and 9  of  the  Appellant's
    supplementary bundle filed on 15 August 2016.  The  Judge's  conclusion
    was unreasonable when set against the making of the CAO and  which  the
    Judge had not mentioned at paragraphs 33-35 of his decision.   Mr  Khan
    continued that the CAO was evidence of the Appellant's  involvement  in
    the lives of his children and of the evidence  which  would  have  been
    before Judge MacGregor about the Appellant's  involvement  which  would
    have enabled him to make the CAO.

10. In response, Mr Norton submitted that Judge Moxon had kept the  CAO  in
    mind in the course of  reaching  his  decision,  as  evidenced  by  the
    various references to it in his decision.  It should be noted that  the
    CAO was made by consent so there was no need for the  Family  Court  to
    embark on a fact-finding exercise.  The making of the CAO had not  been
    opposed by the local authority or any other person with an interest  in
    the children.  The First-tier Tribunal  had  conducted  a  fact-finding
    exercise and the Judge had  reached  his  conclusions  for  sustainable
    reasons.  The Appellant would need to show  the  Judge's  reasons  were
    irrational and he had failed to do so.

11. Mr Khan mentioned that the children had been taken back  into  care  in
    October 2015 but he did not know when they had  been  returned  to  the
    mother.  The presence of the Appellant and the mother together  at  the
    hearing showed their relationship was subsisting.  The Judge had  erred
    in law and his decision should be set aside.

Findings and Consideration

12. From the information in the  Tribunal  file  the  following  chronology
    appears:-

         November 2014-early 2015   The children are in care

         23 February 2015  The Appellant makes his human rights claim

         26 February 2015  The Respondent refuses the claim  and  makes  the
                                   decision under appeal

         30 July 2015  The Appellant and his partner enter into  a  Parental
                                   Responsibility Agreement in relation  to
                                   their younger child

         5 August 2015 The Family Court makes the CAO by consent

         17 August 2016    The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal (IAC)

         About October 2016     The children are taken back into care

         At some subsequent date    The children are returned to their
                                   mother
         before 9 May 2017

13. Other than the witness statements before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    Family Court Orders, including the CAO, and a  social  worker's  report
    referred to by the Judge and any oral testimony, there was  little,  if
    any, evidence of contact between the Appellant and his children  or  of
    the Appellant's financial support of  his  children  put  before  Judge
    Moxon.  At the start of the hearing before me, I did enquire of Mr Khan
    whether there was any documentary evidence which the  Appellant  wished
    me to consider.  He said there was none.

14. Judge Moxon made several references to the CAO as well as the  Parental
    Responsibility Agreement of 30 July 2015.  He gave sustainable  reasons
    for finding the Appellant had failed to discharge the burden  of  proof
    to show he had continuing contact with the children and was  supporting
    them.  No explanation for the absence of any such evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal or before the Upper Tribunal was proffered  at  the
    hearing before me.

15. I do not consider  that  a  consent  CAO  is  itself  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's contact with and involvement in the lives of his  children.
    It is merely evidence that the Family Court has made an order providing
    for the legal possibility of contact.

16. I am not satisfied  that  full  or  even  adequate  disclosure  of  the
    circumstances of the children has been made to the First-tier  Tribunal
    or to the Upper Tribunal.

17. The Appellant has not shown that the Judge's reasoning  was  irrational
    or inadequate. Consequently I conclude the First-tier Tribunal decision
    does not contain any material error of law and should stand.

18. I am concerned about the position of the children and note  that  their
    interests will inevitably feature largely in  the  appeal  which  their
    mother  has  lodged  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Doubtless,  the
    Appellant will wish to give evidence in that appeal.





Anonymity

19. There was no application for an  anonymity  direction  or  order.   The
    details of the children have  been  kept  sufficiently  vague  in  this
    decision such that I see no need for any further degree of anonymity or
    for anonymisation.


SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of  law  and  shall  stand.   The  appeal  of  the  Appellant  is
    dismissed.


    No anonymity order.

Signed/Official                                                        Crest
Date 11. v. 2017




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

