
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10502/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th January 2015                          |On 20th January 2015          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                   MS E M
                         (anonymity DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 5th June 1960 is  a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe.   The
    Appellant  who  was  present  was  represented  by  Mr  Hussain.    The
    Respondent was represented by Mr McVeety, a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had applied for a residence card as a family member of an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK.  That application  had
    been refused by the Respondent on 7th February 2014.  The Appellant had
    appealed the Respondent's decision and in the  Grounds  of  Appeal  had
    raised Article 8 of the ECHR  additional  to  matters  under  the  2005
    Regulations.

 3. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lloyd-Smith  sitting
    at Manchester on 8th July 2014.  She dismissed the appeal under the EEA
    Regulations but allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The Respondent made application for permission to appeal on  the  basis
    that the judge had not followed the  case  law  of  Gulshan  or  Nagre.
    Further it was said that there was no dependency between the  Appellant
    and adult children beyond the normal ties as  stated  in  the  case  of
    Kugathas.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pullig on 9th September 2014.  Essentially permission was granted
    on the basis that there was an arguable  error  of  law  in  the  judge
    allowing the appeal under Article 8 as there was  no  removal  decision
    but simply a refusal to issue a residence card.  Directions were issued
    for the Upper Tribunal firstly to consider whether or not an  error  of
    law had been made and directions  in  that  respect  bring  the  matter
    before me.



Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr McVeety accepted that Article 8 of the ECHR was a live issue and the
    judge was entitled to deal  with  that  matter.   He  made  no  further
    submissions in respect of Kugathas or other points  raised  within  the
    Grounds of Appeal.

 6. Having considered the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  I
    indicated to Mr Hussain I did not need to hear submissions from him and
    indicated that there was no error of law made but I  would  provide  my
    decision with reasons.  I now provide that decision.



Decision and Reasons

 7. The judge had noted at paragraph 5 of the determination at  the  outset
    of the hearing both parties had conceded that given the fact  that  the
    Appellant's son was not married to an EEA national there was  no  basis
    upon which the appeal could succeed under the  2006  Regulations.   The
    judge had therefore  properly  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  2006
    Regulations.

 8. She had also noted that Article 8 had been raised  in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal and the matter before the judge proceeded on that  basis  alone.
    The judge was entitled to deal with Article 8 that matter  having  been
    raised in the Grounds of Appeal and in accordance with the ruling in JM
    Liberia.  Had the judge not dealt with Article 8 at that stage it would
    simply  have  meant  the  case  would  not  have  been  concluded   and
    potentially the matter coming back before the Home Office and  possibly
    within the appeal system thereby wasting both time and public money.

 9. The judge had provided a clear and detailed analysis  of  the  evidence
    and there was much within that evidence that was  not  contested.   The
    judge had also found for proper  reasons  given  that  she  essentially
    found credible that the evidence provided by the Appellant supported by
    documentary evidence.  This was a case where  the  Appellant's  husband
    had been granted refugee status in the UK following his experiences  at
    the hands of ZANU-PF  in  Zimbabwe.   The  judge  had  found  that  the
    Appellant  herself  would  have  been  of  adverse  interest   to   the
    authorities in Zimbabwe from those who had persecuted her husband since
    his disappearance.  The judge had also noted  that  the  Appellant  had
    tried to regularise her stay and had it not  been  for  her  separation
    from her husband as a result of domestic violence she would  have  been
    entitled to settle in this country as the spouse  of  a  refugee.   The
    judge also noted that she was not afforded the protection as  a  victim
    of domestic violence as she was not here on a spouse visa  but  as  the
    spouse of a refugee.  She had also taken  account  of  the  Appellant's
    various and serious  medical  conditions  and  had  noted  the  medical
    evidence showing the improvement that had taken  place  since  she  had
    moved in with her son.  Contrary to the assertions made in the  Grounds
    of Appeal the judge had considered the family situation outlined in the
    case of Kugathas but found for proper reasons given that the  Appellant
    had a family life that goes above  and  beyond  the  normal  adult  son
    relationship.  She also found that because of the basis as to  why  her
    children were settled in this country it would not  be  an  option  for
    them to return to Zimbabwe to assist with the  care  of  their  mother.
    She also concluded that it would not  be  safe  for  the  Appellant  to
    return and be deprived of family support and care  for  her  precarious
    health condition.

10. The judge had carefully  considered  the  question  of  proportionality
    under Article 8 of the ECHR and even if it could be said  that  Gulshan
    remains good law she had set out  clear  reasons  why  the  Appellant's
    circumstances were both exceptional and  compelling  and  why  she  was
    therefore entitled to exercise  the  residual  judicial  discretion  in
    considering the Appellant's case  under  Article  8  on  the  basis  of
    proportionality.  She gave clear reasons for  finding  that  a  removal
    would be disproportionate, those reasons encapsulated within  paragraph
    15 of the decision.  She was not only entitled to reach the conclusions
    that she did  as  being  reasonable  conclusions  but  it  is  somewhat
    difficult to see how, when properly assessed,  a  different  conclusion
    could have been reached.



Notice of Decision

11. There was no error of law made by the judge and I uphold  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date 19th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

