


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10392/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Birmingham                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 24 June 2015                             |On 29 June 2015              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                         jacqueline venicia jackson
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Lane, instructed by Maurice Andrews Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 24 January 1976. She has
    been given permission to appeal against the determination of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Osborne, dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's
    decision to remove her from the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 17 May 2003 with  leave  to
    enter as a visitor until 17 November 2003. She did not leave the United
    Kingdom  at  the  end  of  her  visa  but  subsequently  made   various
    unsuccessful applications for leave to  remain,  in  April  2004  as  a
    student, in May 2004 to care for the child of Mr Don Brown, in  January
    2010 as the unmarried partner of Mr Leroy  Duquesnay  and  in  December
    2010 on the basis of marriage. In February 2011 the appellant  came  to
    the attention of the Home Office after using a  forged  or  counterfeit
    British passport in an attempt to gain employment and  she  was  served
    with papers as an overstayer. On 7 February 2011 she submitted a second
    marriage application and on 18 February  2011  she  submitted  a  third
    marriage application, both of which were rejected as invalid.

 3. On 24 October 2013 the appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain
    outside the rules on human rights grounds, on the basis of her marriage
    to, and family life with, Alton Derrick Powell and on the basis of  the
    best interests of  her  husband's  son  Tyrese  Bedward-Powell  from  a
    previous relationship.

 4. The appellant's  application  was  refused  on  29  January  2014.  The
    respondent found that her medical problems did not  give  rise  to  any
    Article 3 rights. As regards Article 8, consideration was given to  her
    family and private life under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  but  it
    was concluded that she could not meet the criteria in  either.  It  was
    considered that the numerous unsuccessful applications  she  had  made,
    and the fact that  she  had  attempted  to  gain  employment  when  not
    entitled to work, cast doubt on her credibility and it was not accepted
    that she had a genuine and subsisting relationship with her spouse.  It
    was considered that even if her relationship was genuine, there were no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing  in  Jamaica.  There
    was no evidence that she had  sole  responsibility  for  her  husband's
    child or that she was taking an active  role  in  his  upbringing.  The
    respondent  did  not  consider   that   there   were   any   compelling
    circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the rules.

 5. On 5 February 2014  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant.

 6. The appellant appealed against that decision.

 7. The appellant's appeal was heard on 16 May 2014 by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Osborne. The judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant,  her
    husband and her brother. On the basis of  the  oral  evidence  and  the
    letters of support from other family members, the judge  accepted  that
    the  appellant's  relationship  with  her  husband  was   genuine   and
    subsisting. She went on to consider whether the  appellant  could  meet
    the requirements of paragraph EX.1 of the Immigration Rules. She  found
    that the respondent  was  wrong  to  have  found  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles  to  the  appellant's  family  life  with  her
    partner and his child continuing in Jamaica, given that his  son  lived
    with his mother on a full-time basis, that he was a British citizen and
    was well settled at school and that his mother would  not  consent  for
    him to go to live in Jamaica. She accepted that the appellant's husband
    would have a difficult choice to  make  and  accepted  that  he  had  a
    genuine and ongoing relationship with his son, but she considered  that
    it was open to him to maintain contact with his son through visits  and
    that there were no insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing
    between the appellant and her husband in Jamaica. She  therefore  found
    that the requirements of the immigration rules could  not  be  met  and
    that there was nothing further to consider outside the rules  and  that
    no further assessment was required under  Article  8.  She  accordingly
    dismissed the appeal.

 8. Permission to appeal that decision was sought on the grounds  that  the
    judge had failed to give proper consideration to the best interests  of
    the appellant's husband's child and the impact upon him of his father's
    departure to Jamaica.

 9. Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused,  but  was  subsequently
    granted by myself on 30 October 2014 on the basis that the grounds were
    arguable.

Appeal hearing and submissions

10. The parties made submissions before me on the error of law.

11. Mr Lane submitted that the judge had erred by failing to  consider  the
    questions  of  insurmountable  obstacles  under  EX.1  and  exceptional
    circumstances outside the rules from the perspective of the appellant's
    husband's son. The effect of the decision was that the child  would  be
    separated from his father and that had only been  considered  from  the
    perspective of the  father  and  not  the  child.  There  had  been  no
    assessment of the best interests of the child and that was inconsistent
    with the guidance in LD (Article 8 best interests  of  child)  Zimbabwe
    [2010] UKUT  278  and  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting
    children; onward appeals)[2013] UKUT 00197. The respondent's  view,  as
    expressed in section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, was that a person's removal was not in  the  public  interest
    when they had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  British
    child. Mr Lane submitted that the judge had accordingly made a material
    error of law and her decision ought to be set aside and re-made.

12. Mr Mills submitted that the judge had considered the best interests  of
    the child in substance if not in form, and that even if it was  in  his
    best interests for his father to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  that
    would not amount to insurmountable obstacles, such as to meet the  high
    test identified in Agyarko & Ors, R  (on  the  application  of)  v  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  440.  With
    regard to the judge's consideration of Article 8 outside the rules, she
    was correct to consider that all relevant matters  had  been  addressed
    under the rules, and in any event Agyarko made it clear that  if  there
    was any gap between EX.1 and the requirements of Article 8, it would be
    very small in precarious family life cases.

13. Mr Lane, in response, reiterated the submissions previously made.

Consideration and findings

14. Having now, since the grant of permission, had the benefit of  detailed
    submissions from both parties and an opportunity thoroughly to consider
    the evidence before the judge in the First-tier Tribunal, it  seems  to
    me that there was no error of law in her decision.

15. I find myself in agreement with Mr  Mills  that,  whilst  there  is  no
    explicit reference to  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009  in the judge's decision, it  is  clear  from  her
    findings that she gave careful consideration to the  circumstances  and
    interests of the appellant's husband's son.  There  was  no  suggestion
    that it would not be in the best interests of Tyrese for his father  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and the relevant consideration before  the
    judge was, therefore, whether  those  best  interests  amounted  to  an
    insurmountable obstacle to the appellant being  able  to  maintain  her
    family life with her husband in Jamaica.  Plainly  she  concluded  that
    they did not. She noted at paragraphs 30 and 34 that  Tyrese  was  well
    settled in the United Kingdom with his mother and would not  leave  the
    United Kingdom if his father did and  that  his  father  was  therefore
    faced with a difficult choice, but she concluded at paragraph  35  that
    their relationship could continue by way of visits by the father to his
    son and vice versa.

16. Mr Lane relied on section 117B as expressing the respondent's  view  of
    the public interest not requiring removal where a person has a  genuine
    and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  child  and  where  it  was  not
    reasonable for that child to leave the  United  Kingdom.  He  submitted
    that that provision applied equally to the partner of the person  being
    removed and that it was relevant  to  the  question  of  insurmountable
    obstacles. However I do not agree. The appellant's husband is not being
    required to leave the United Kingdom and  has  an  element  of  choice,
    albeit a difficult one, as the judge accepted at paragraph  34.  If  he
    chooses to remain with his wife and accompany her back  to  Jamaica  he
    has the choice to return to the United Kingdom whenever  he  wants  and
    for as long as he wishes to see his son, a matter  also  considered  by
    the judge, at paragraph 35. Further, it is not the case that the  child
    lives with his father on a full-time basis and the evidence before  the
    judge as to the nature of the  contact  was  not  entirely  consistent,
    although she accepted at paragraph 30 that it  was  frequent.  Clearly,
    those were all matters taken into consideration by the judge.

17. What is also of particular  significance  in  considering  the  judge's
    assessment of the impact on the question of "insurmountable  obstacles"
    of Tyrese's best interests, is the  evidence  that  had  actually  been
    produced before her in order for her to  conduct  such  an  assessment.
    That evidence was conspicuously limited, a matter not  acknowledged  by
    Mr Lane. There was no statement from Tyrese  as  to  how  he  would  be
    affected by his father's departure. His mother's very  brief  statement
    did not give any indication of the affect of separation. Other than the
    appellant's husband's statement, that his son would  be  devastated  by
    the loss of his father from his life, there was no evidence to  suggest
    that that would be the case or that he would be adversely  affected  to
    any material extent. Indeed, although the judge found that there was  a
    genuine and ongoing relationship between father and son and that  there
    was frequent  contact  between  them,  the  evidence  before  her  from
    Tyrese's mother was that he only occasionally spent weekends  and  time
    during  school  breaks  with  his  father  and  step-mother   and   the
    appellant's evidence in her statement was that Tyrese  stayed  only  on
    occasional  weekends  and  during  school  holidays.  That   conflicted
    somewhat with his father's statement that he came to stay almost  every
    weekend, suggesting his  account  of  the  level  of  contact  was  not
    entirely reliable. There was  no  mention  of  Tyrese  in  any  of  the
    supporting letters from the appellant's family members and the  letters
    from Tyrese's school made only a vague reference to his involvement  in
    his schooling.

18. Accordingly there was nothing in the  way  of  supporting  evidence  to
    suggest  that  Tyrese's  best  interests   constituted   insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant being able to maintain her family life  with
    her husband in Jamaica.

19. For all of those reasons I find that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    question of insurmountable obstacles under EX.1.(b) was one  that  took
    account of all relevant factors and that her conclusion in that respect
    was entirely open to her on the evidence before her.

20. Turning to the second ground relied upon by Mr Lane, namely the judge's
    approach to Article 8 outside the rules, I would again agree  with  the
    submissions made by Mr Mills. As Mr  Mills  acknowledged,  the  judge's
    observation that the immigration rules were a complete  code  and  that
    there was a "gateway test" as established in Gulshan (Article 8  -  new
    Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 was not a  correct  statement
    of the law. However that was not a material error given  that  she  was
    entitled to conclude, on the evidence before her, that  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the  rules
    on wider Article 8 principles.

21. The Court of Appeal found, in Agyarko, (paragraph 30) that:

    "In relation to precarious family life cases, as I observed in Nagre at
    para. [43], the gap  between  section  EX.1  and  the  requirements  of
    Article 8 is likely to be small"

22. The appellant's case was clearly a precarious family life  case,  given
    that she had been in the United Kingdom unlawfully and had entered into
    her relationship whilst she had no basis of stay here. Her husband  had
    entered into the relationship  in  the  knowledge  that  she  could  be
    removed to Jamaica at any time. She had a terrible immigration history,
    having overstayed for many years and used a forged British passport  to
    find employment when she  was  not  entitled  to  work.  Whilst  it  is
    asserted that the judge failed to consider the best interests of Tyrese
    as part of a wider Article 8 assessment,  I  would  repeat  my  earlier
    observations that she had considered his  interests  and  circumstances
    and that, furthermore, the evidence in that  respect  was  particularly
    lacking. As the judge said at paragraph 41, there was no need  for  her
    to conduct a further Article 8 assessment since all  matters  had  been
    full considered, but in  any  event  and  taking  account  of  Tyrese's
    interests in a proportionality balancing exercise, it is clear that the
    appellant's interests were  far  outweighed  by  the  public  interest,
    particularly in light of the above factors and considering section 117B
    of the 2002 Act. There was clearly no basis upon  which  the  appellant
    could hope to succeed outside the rules and the judge was  entitled  to
    conclude as she did.

23. Accordingly, I find no errors of law in the judge's findings on Article
    8, either within or outside the immigration rules,  and  I  uphold  her
    decision.

DECISION

24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    an error on a point of law. I  do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
    decision to dismiss the appeal stands.



Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated:
