
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10111/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 March 2016                       |On 22 August 2016                   |
|And 27 July 2016                       |                                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                SABIRA RAHIMI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:             Mr N Ata (Ata and Co, and then Duncan Lewis
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:         Mr L Tarlow and Mr P Deller (Home Office
Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of Sabira Rahimi, a citizen of Afghanistan  born  5
      January 1942, against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  of  26
      August 2015 dismissing her appeal against the removal directions  made
      against her under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.


   2. Her claim to remain arises from the difficulties she would face  on  a
      return to Afghanistan given her long residence in the United  Kingdom,
      much of its post-dating the failure of her appeal on asylum grounds to
      the Tribunal in November 2005.


   3. The application leading to this appeal was made on  10  February  2015
      and was based on Ms Rahimi having now lived and been cared for by  her
      immediate family members here for the last ten years, a period  mostly
      post-dating her failed asylum application  made  over  a  decade  ago,
      combined with the risks she faced from  indiscriminate  violence  from
      the internal armed conflict in Afghanistan. Support evidence  included
      a report, Women in Afghanistan in the Post-Taliban Era,  stating  that
      once a girl was married she became her new family's property  and  had
      little or no control over her situation; her mother-in-law and husband
      would have the most control over her, to whom it was expected that she
      would be totally obedient. Generally medical services  were  extremely
      undeveloped and lacked basic  cleanliness,  diagnostic  and  treatment
      equipment and even the most common medications; private  clinics  were
      often operated without licences or medical degrees.


   4. That application fell to be assessed  in  the  light  of  the  earlier
      appellate findings on her case, for, having arrived here on  2  August
      2004, an asylum application of 1  December  2004  was  refused  on  27
      September 2005, leading to an appeal that was dismissed  by  the  then
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal on 30 November 2005.


   5. Part of the Appellant's claim as then put was that she would lack  the
      resources that would be essential for her to survive  in  Afghanistan.
      The Immigration Judge who heard her appeal found that she had lived in
      Afghanistan with her children and stepchildren, though her  four  sons
      and one of two daughters had left the country; the remaining  daughter
      remained there with  her  husband  and  children.  The  Appellant  had
      claimed that after her children left the country she went to live with
      her brother, who was subsequently killed after having  approached  the
      government for protection in relation to attempts  made  to  take  his
      property; she herself was subsequently threatened. Although  she  said
      that she had sold her own land to provide funds to enable her  to  pay
      an agent to obtain a passport and documents  to  come  to  the  United
      Kingdom, her Sponsor (her son Wahid Rahimi) and stepson Abdul  Mahbook
      Rahimi both said that it was income from the land that had funded  her
      journey here. This, combined with her late  asylum  claim,  undermined
      her claim to maintain fears from  non-state  actors.  The  Immigration
      Judge did not accept that there would be no remittances of funds  made
      by her family in this country. There  was  no  exceptionality  present
      (applying the then governing test set out in  Huang  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
      105) that could support a finding that there  was  a  disproportionate
      interference with her rights protected under Article 8 ECHR.


   6. Her most recent application was refused on 24 February  2015  because,
      applying the findings from the earlier appeal, whilst she was suitable
      for the private life route under the Rules, it was not  accepted  that
      there were significant obstacles to her  integration  in  Afghanistan:
      she had a daughter there, Nouna, and two step  daughters  (Salima  and
      Halima), and had been receiving an income from  land  and  a  vineyard
      there before leaving the country, and at her hearing in 2005  she  had
      stated that she was close to  her  children  and  stepchildren  before
      leaving the country. Her  medical  conditions  (hypertension,  type  2
      diabetes  mellitus,  bronchial   asthma,   hyperthyroidism,   multiple
      arhalgia, osteoporosis, ulna nerve neuropathy  with  wasting  of  left
      hand muscles and  hyperlipidaemia)  were  not  shown  by  any  current
      medical evidence as requiring treatment in this country and there  was
      a system of healthcare  provision  in  Afghanistan.  Previous  medical
      evidence had recorded that  her  bronchial  asthma,  hypertension  and
      diabetes was well controlled, that  her  hyperthyroidism  was  out  of
      control and being  treated  by  thyroxine;  in  general  her  problems
      appeared to be treatable in Afghanistan given the  list  of  essential
      drugs published by the Ministry of Public Health.


   7. The Appellant's witness statement for the appeal set out that she  had
      no family members remaining in Afghanistan: daughters blended into the
      extended families of their husbands  and  could  not  care  for  their
      parents, particularly when it was known that  she  had  her  own  sons
      living in the United Kingdom and  Germany.  She  needed  her  family's
      daily support as she could not cook or even prepare tea as she  lacked
      control and strength in her hands to hold a kettle; she could not wash
      her clothes; she never stepped outside the house alone; and she relied
      on them to guide her with taking the  wrong  medication,  as  she  was
      illiterate in both Farsi and English.


   8. Wahid Rahimi wrote that there was nobody else in their family to  care
      for her as she could not travel to other European countries where  his
      brothers lived without immigration status,  she  could  not  care  for
      herself, particularly given the importance of maintaining control over
      her medication for thinning blood which regard to which there might be
      fatal consequences if things went wrong, and she needed help to  cook,
      prepare tea, wash or cook, or attend hospital, or  to  walk  for  more
      than a few yards. There were  no  care  homes  or  government  support
      available in Afghanistan and the prevailing cultural norm held that it
      was the responsibility of sons to look after the elderly. All  of  his
      full siblings had left Afghanistan, and his two half-sisters lived  in
      Mazar-e-Sharif with their respective families, who would take the view
      that her care needs were to be wholly a matter for her sons abroad  to
      resolve. She was  very  attached  to  his  own  family  including  his
      children.


   9. The problems in Kabul would be a barrier  to  her  receiving  adequate
      medication there. Kabul was full of premises associated  with  foreign
      entities and it was there that doctors' clinics would be likely to  be
      found: so his mother would be in danger of being  a  casualty  of  the
      insurgent attacks that focussed on those areas.


  10. A report from Dr Fagbohungbe of May 2012 recorded  that  her  diabetes
      mellitus was only moderately controlled and she was beginning to  show
      early  signs  of  renal  complications   which   combined   with   her
      hypertension and high lipids raised the possibility of her suffering a
      stroke, heart attack or kidney failure.


  11. A  further  report  from  him  of  February  2015  set  out  that  her
      hypertension remained well controlled but she continued to suffer from
      multiple health problems including Type 2 diabetes mellitus, bronchial
      asthma, hypothyroidism (all of which had responded well to treatment);
      she also suffered from multiple joint pain  and  osteoporosis  of  the
      ankle joint, but the symptoms of the latter  ailments  persisted   and
      she had been referred to a specialist; she had wasting  of  the  small
      muscles of  her  left  hand.  She  was  at  high  risk  of  developing
      cardiovascular events ranging from stroke to heart  attack  or  kidney
      failure. She needed ongoing  support  with  her  medications  and  her
      condition would deteriorate if she lost her present treatment regime.


  12. Noting that the Sponsor's case was essentially  that  she  now  needed
      care on a return to Afghanistan rather than simply financial  support,
      the First-tier Tribunal took the findings of its predecessor  Tribunal
      as its starting point. Absent corroborative evidence of her daughter's
      asserted departure, together  with  her  husband  and  children,  from
      Afghanistan to Pakistan pending the resolution of her  application  to
      relocate to Canada, it could not be accepted that she  was  no  longer
      available to support her, given that premise. The Appellant's evidence
      as  to  the  incompatibility  with  custom  of  the  proposed  support
      arrangements was unsustainable given that she had good relations  with
      her own stepson who was her stepdaughter's brother  in  this  country.
      The First-tier Tribunal did not accept that  her  stepdaughters  would
      reject her "without further evidence" given the prior finding that she
      had been close to them in the past. As she had close relatives to whom
      to turn in Afghanistan, she could not show an inability  to  integrate
      in Afghanistan. That inevitably meant that her appeal failed under the
      Immigration Rules.


  13. Evaluating the human rights claim outside the  Rules,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal  found  that  the  Appellant  spoke  no  English,  and  would
      foreseeably be a burden on taxpayers given her  reliance  on  the  NHS
      here. The private life that she had established here had been based on
      her residence being precarious:  more  than  that,  it  was  built  on
      obfuscation, prevarication and delay, though those criticisms  lay  at
      both her door and that of the Secretary of State. Any family life that
      existed between her and her  family  here  had  developed  whilst  she
      lacked lawful status here. Whilst account was  taken  of  her  medical
      conditions and  the  fact  that  treatment  in  Afghanistan  would  be
      significantly worse than here, there was nothing  in  the  authorities
      including MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279 to suggest that this was a
      ground-breaking case such as would engage Article 8  ECHR  "simply  by
      reason of her poor health". Accordingly  the  decisions  made  by  the
      Secretary of State were proportionate and  involved  no  unjustifiably
      harsh consequences.


  14. Grounds  of  appeal  argued  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
      Appellant's continued presence in this country was down to  delay  for
      which she was responsible, as opposed to being due to the Secretary of
      State's long-standing policy not to remove vulnerable  individuals  to
      Afghanistan. This  consideration,  it  was  argued,  impacted  on  the
      general proportionality of removing her as well as on  the  extent  to
      which her residence in this country could be considered  "precarious".
      It was also argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
      failing  to  evaluate  any  risks  she  faced  as  a   civilian   from
      indiscriminate violence there, and in failing to appreciate  that  the
      volatility of conditions in Afghanistan arguably brought into play the
      exceptions to the  general  high  threshold  in  a  "health"  case  as
      identified in GS and EO India, because any absence of resources  arose
      from civil war or similar human agency.  Additionally  it  was  argued
      that  evidence  had  been  overlooked  regarding  the  likelihood   of
      daughters in Afghanistan looking after their elderly parents.


  15. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal in respect
      of all the grounds pleaded. A Rule 24 response from the  Secretary  of
      State argued that the findings of the First-tier Tribunal were  within
      the legitimate range of responses to the evidence and were in  no  way
      perverse or irrational.


  Findings and reasons - Error of law hearing


  16. Having heard submissions from both sides, I accepted  that  there  was
      one patent error of law in the decision, namely that  the  application
      had been based partly (indeed significantly)  on  a  deterioration  of
      country conditions in Afghanistan since  the  Appellant's  appeal  was
      last determined in 2005. Those arguments were pleaded with  regard  to
      multiple dimensions of her case: as to the risk she would  face  as  a
      civilian facing return to  an  internal  armed  conflict,  as  to  the
      proportionality of her removal when balanced against the private  life
      she had established here, and as to the extent  to  which  any  health
      problems she faced fell to be  measured  against  the  high  threshold
      established in N v United Kingdom 2008 47 EHRR 885  or  via  a  lesser
      benchmark. However the country evidence in relation to Afghanistan had
      simply received no attention whatsoever from the First-tier Tribunal.


  17. This was a patent error of law in relation to the failure to determine
      the Humanitarian Protection ground of appeal. The test for whether the
      level  of  violence  may  call  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
      Directive  into  play  is   essentially   whether   "the   degree   of
      indiscriminate  violence  which  characterises  those   confrontations
      reaches such a high level  that  substantial  grounds  are  shown  for
      believing that a civilian, if returned to the relevant country or,  as
      the case may be, to the relevant region, would - solely on account  of
      his presence in the territory of that country or region - face a  real
      risk of being subject to that threat", see for example Diakite  [2014]
      WLR(D) 37. However that test was not  applied.  Nor  was  the  country
      evidence assessed in relation to the proportionality of  her  removal.
      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was clearly flawed  for  those
      reasons.


  18. I also accepted the force  in  the  Appellant's  submission  that  the
      dominant reason for non-return  was  the  Respondent's  stance  as  to
      vulnerable individuals. An Operational Guidance Note from  2015  cited
      in HN & SA (Afghanistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 123 at paragraphs 6.1 and 6.4
      records:


           "6. Returns
           6.1 There is no policy which precludes the  enforced  return  to
           Afghanistan of failed asylum seekers who have no legal basis  of
           stay in the United Kingdom.
                 ...
           6.4 The preferred option for repatriating  those  Afghan  asylum
           applicants who having exhausted the independent appeal  process,
           are found not  to  need  international  protection  is  assisted
           voluntary return. This policy is in  line  with  the  Tripartite
           Memorandum of Understanding on Voluntary Return, between the UK,
           the UNHCR and the Afghan Transitional  Administration.  However,
           as agreed with the Afghan authorities, from April 2003 those not
           choosing voluntary return and found to be without protection  or
           humanitarian  needs  have  been  liable  to  be  considered  for
           enforcement  action  although  those   individuals   or   groups
           identified as vulnerable are  excluded  from  the  programme  of
           enforced returns. All Afghans returned by charter operation from
           the UK are given immediate  post  arrival  assistance  including
           temporary accommodation and onward transportation  if  required,
           and offered access to a reintegration programme  which  includes
           vocational training and business support options."

  19. It was accordingly clear  that  enforced  returns  were  not  possible
      during the period that the Appellant has stayed in this country.  This
      did not necessarily immunise her  from  her  residence  being  thought
      precarious, but was plainly relevant to  the  character  of  her  stay
      here, given the statement by Lord Bingham in EB (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL
      41 at [15]: "But if months pass without a  decision  to  remove  being
      made, and months become years, and year succeeds year,  it  is  to  be
      expected that this sense of impermanence will fade and the expectation
      will grow that if the authorities had intended to remove the applicant
      they would have taken steps to do so. This result depends on no  legal
      doctrine but on an understanding of how, in some cases, minds may work
      and it may affect the proportionality of removal."


  20. I also noted that the Appellant would  only  fall  to  be  treated  as
      vulnerable, so as to fall within the scope of this  guidance,  if  she
      had no relatives to whom to  return.  So  the  question  arose  as  to
      whether this issue was adequately dealt with. The starting  point  was
      Devaseelan (D (Tamil)) [2002]  UKIAT  00702):  in  short  the  earlier
      determination of the issue was the authoritative  historic  resolution
      of  the  matter,  subject  to  the  subsequent  developments  and  the
      availability of further evidence;  whilst  the  adduction  of  further
      evidence relating to the historic situation  should  be  treated  with
      circumspection, absent good reason to the contrary.


  21. The Respondent's own guidance at Chapter 8 Section 6 Annex  5  to  the
      Immigration Directorate Instructions  provides,  in  relation  to  the
      question of "No other close relatives to turn to" that the  assessment
      of potential support "will  largely  depend  on  their  culture.   For
      example, in the Indian subcontinent, married women are unlikely to  be
      able to provide support." As a published statement of the Home Office,
      this plainly deserved attention as a matter  potentially  calling  for
      departure from the conclusions on the availability of support made  in
      2005, whether or not it was expressly relied on by the Appellant,  for
      as was stated in Mandalia [2015] UKSC 59  at  [19]:  "irrespective  of
      whether the specialist judge might reasonably be expected  himself  to
      have been aware of it, the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  clearly
      failed to discharge his duty to draw it to the tribunal's attention as
      policy of the agency which was at least  arguably  relevant  to  [the]
      appeal".


  22. The First-tier Tribunal was  accordingly  required  to  evaluate  this
      guidance from the  Secretary  of  State,  taken  with  the  consistent
      witness statement evidence provided by the Appellant and  her  Sponsor
      that the only relatives in Afghanistan fell into that  category.  This
      point was not met by the First-tier Tribunal's  observation  that  she
      was cared for by a daughter's husband in this country: it may well  be
      the case that the prevailing cultural considerations are different for
      Western emigr�s, particularly those who have  resided  in  the  United
      Kingdom for more than a decade, to those  extant  amongst  communities
      remaining in their country of origin.


  23. I accordingly found that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      contained material errors of law and I  set  the  matter  down  for  a
      continuation hearing in the Upper Tribunal.


Continuation hearing


  24. In her supplementary witness statement for the  adjourned  hearing  in
      the Upper Tribunal, Ms  Rahimi  set  out  that  her  daughter  Nouna's
      efforts to leave India for Canada had failed, and the agents they were
      using had told them to return Afghanistan for alternative arrangements
      to be made. Her son-in law-was had  been  forced  into  hiding  having
      twice been  kidnapped,  his  release  being  secured  by  his  father.
      Eventually the family moved to Turkey where they had sought protection
      under the UNHCR Resettlement Scheme. Accordingly she  would  now  have
      nobody to look after her in Afghanistan.


  25. Her stepdaughters never called her: Halima in Mazar-e-Sharif was of  a
      similar age to herself and it was unlikely  that  she  or  her  family
      would want to care for her; Salima was in poor health and  elderly  by
      Afghan standards.


  26. Further evidence provided in the helpful consolidated bundle  included
      passport stamps and visas recording Nouna  being  admitted  to  Turkey
      following the grant of a visa to enter the country from 19 June 2016.


  27. The Appellant and Mr Rahimi  gave  evidence,  adopting  their  witness
      statements: they were not cross examined.


  28. For the Secretary of State, Mr Deller  helpfully  indicated  that  the
      Home Office position as expressed in the guidance on  extended  family
      members in the subcontinent cited above remained relevant, though this
      should be seen as  a  starting  point  rather  than  representing  the
      inevitable conclusion in any particular  case.  He  acknowledged  that
      there was a respectable argument under Rule 276ADE that there might be
      serious integration obstacles posed to an elderly lady in  ill  health
      whose assertions as to her lack of  family  remaining  in  Afghanistan
      were plausible and effectively unchallenged.


  29. Mr Ata submitted that the Appellant was plainly at  elevated  risk  of
      serious harm from the internal armed conflict in Afghanistan,  placing
      particular weight on the Afghanistan mid-2015 report on protection  of
      civilians from UNAMA, the EASO  report  on  the  Afghanistan  security
      situation, and the Human Rights Watch Report on the country for  2016,
      in the context of the findings of the Upper Tribunal in HN & Ors (IJR)
      [2015] UKUT 437 (IAC). Alternatively her vulnerability and  age  meant
      that she would face very significant obstacles to her  integration  in
      Afghanistan,  and/or  that  her  return  there   would   represent   a
      disproportionate interference with her private and family life.


Decision and reasons - Continuation hearing

International protection claim

   30. For reasons that can be seen below, I allow  this  appeal  under  the
       Immigration Rules, as  the  Appellant  would  face  very  significant
       obstacles to integration in Afghanistan. However, she is entitled  to
       a finding on her claim for international protection,  as  that  would
       reflect rights potentially conferred under international and European
       Union law which are of a higher order than the grants of  leave  that
       would follow a finding that she  was  entitled  to  leave  under  the
       Immigration Rules, whether or  not  reflective  of  her  private  and
       family life rights under the Human Rights Convention.


   31. The Appellant's evidence is that she would face  serious  harm  on  a
       return  to  Kabul,  the  only  part  of  Afghanistan  where  she  has
       previously lived.  Her  claims  turns  entirely  on  risks  from  the
       indiscriminate violence emanating from the internal  armed  conflict:
       she does  not  argue  that  she  faces  any  individualised  risk  of
       persecution.


   32. Relevant extracts of the most recent UNAMA report include these:


           "Suicide attacks targeting civilian locations had a particularly
           harmful impact on women and their families. For example, on 19
           May, Taliban conducted a suicide attack against the Ministry of
           Justice in Kabul city, killing three women - all prosecutors -
           and injuring four women. ...
           ... a suicide attack against a shuttle bus of the Attorney
           General's Office on 10 May 2015 that killed five civilians and
           injured 10 others in Kabul city. The Taliban claimed
           responsibility for the attack. ...
           Suicide and complex attacks carried out in urban areas caused
           extreme harm, particularly in urban areas, mainly in Kabul city,
           Lashkar Gah city, Helmand province, and Jalalabad city,
           Nangarhar province. Twelve incidents in Kabul city caused 302
           civilian casualties (42 deaths and 260 injured); ...
           in their claim of responsibility for the 19 May suicide attack
           on the Ministry of Justice in Kabul city, they stated that they
           would continue to target, "judges, prosecutors, the personal of
           Ministry of Justice and the likes". ...
           On 19 May, a suicide attacker detonated a VB-IED at the entrance
           to the parking lot of the Ministry of Justice in Kabul city,
           killing five civilians and injuring 47 others. The Taliban
           claimed responsibility for the attack via twitter accounts
           linked to the group."


   33. These extracts from the EASO Country of  Origin  Information  Report:
       Afghanistan - Security Situation also give a flavour of the  evidence
       placed before me:


           "1.3.3 High-profile attacks
           Insurgents continued to conduct high-profile  attacks  in  Kabul
           and other main urban centres in order to  get  media  attention,
           intimidate and create fear. Such attacks  are  mainly  aimed  at
           government or international forces, but the highest  numbers  of
           casualties inflicted by them concern civilians. In a  series  of
           attacks in Kabul between 7 and 10 August 2015, 55  persons  were
           killed and more than 330 injured. ...
           In the first half of 2015, 12 incidents in Kabul city caused 302
           civilian casualties; eight incidents in Lashkar Gah city  caused
           171 civilian casualties ...
           Regarding daily  life  in  Kabul,  the  same  Afghan  journalist
           explained:
                 "People  have  limited  their  movements  and  they  do  so
                 especially after a bombing. For a few days or weeks  people
                 try avoiding going out too much, but at the end of the  day
                 you have to come out, you will have to go  to  the  market.
                 But, as an example, the incident in  which  more  than  200
                 people were wounded, many of them had scratches from  glass
                 etc... It happened at 1am and  most  of  the  injured  were
                 sleeping at home. From now, we do not  feel  safe  even  at
                 home anymore. We  feel  like  there  could  be  a  bomb  or
                 incident at any time that happens in a residential area."
            According to Edinburgh International: (225)
                 "Desiring to maintain the pace of high profile  attacks  in
                 the city yet failing to inflict major  damages  to  Kabul's
                 secure ISAF  or  international  facilities,  militants  are
                 instead increasingly turning towards softer  targets  where
                 heavy casualties can be inflicted with minimal expenditure.
                 Attacks on ANSF transport vehicles have historically proven
                 an attractive target for this reason, with roadside IEDs or
                 single SVEST bombers able to deliver the same impact as the
                 more meticulously planned complex attacks."
           ...
           Another wave of attacks hit Kabul in August 2015. On  7  August,
           three attacks resulted in 368 victims. Fifty two were killed and
           316 injured, of whom 355 were civilians;  42  of  the  civilians
           were killed and 313 injured. UNAMA counts the 28 killed  and  29
           injured, all police cadets, in the second attack  as  civilians,
           as they did not take part in any hostilities. The  first  attack
           was a detonation of an explosive-laden truck in the area of Shah
           Shahid, the second targeted a police academy. The  third  attack
           targeted a base for  US  Special  Forces  in  the  Qasaba  area,
           outside the  city  centre  and  did  not  include  any  civilian
           casualties."


   34. The test for whether a particular level of violence may call  Article
       15(c) of the Qualification Directive into play is essentially whether
       "the degree of  indiscriminate  violence  which  characterises  those
       confrontations reaches such a high level that substantial grounds are
       shown for believing that a civilian,  if  returned  to  the  relevant
       country or, as the case may be,  to  the  relevant  region,  would  -
       solely on account of his presence in the territory of that country or
       region - face a real risk of being subject to that threat",  see  for
       example Diakite [2014] WLR(D) 37.


   35. In AK Afghanistan the Tribunal records at [46] civilian casualties as
       given by Farrell and Schmitt in their March 2012 study for  UNHCR  as
       rising to over 2,700 in 2010, and rising further thereafter, UNAMA in
       its July 2011 having noted that "the  rising  tide  of  violence  and
       bloodshed in the first half of  2011  brought  injury  and  death  to
       Afghan civilians at levels without recorded precedent in the  current
       armed conflict". Nevertheless its  conclusions  at  B(ii)-(iii)  were
       that


           "(ii) Despite a rise  in  the  number  of  civilian  deaths  and
           casualties  and  (particularly  in  the  2010-2011  period)   an
           expansion of the geographical scope of  the  armed  conflict  in
           Afghanistan,  the  level  of  indiscriminate  violence  in  that
           country taken as a whole is not at such a high level as to  mean
           that, within the meaning of Article 15(c) of  the  Qualification
           Directive, a civilian, solely by being present in  the  country,
           faces a real risk which threatens his life or person.
           (iii) Nor is the level of indiscriminate violence, even  in  the
           provinces worst affected by the violence (which may now be taken
           to include Ghazni but not to include Kabul), at such a level."


   36. The August 2015  Country  Information  and  Guidance  -  Afghanistan:
       Security and humanitarian situation (August 2015) relied upon by  the
       Appellant, itself citing the UNAMA, Afghanistan Annual  Report  2014,
       reports at 4.1.1 that


           "The United Nations Assistance Mission  in  Afghanistan  (UNAMA)
           documented 47,745 civilian casualties (17,774 deaths and  29,971
           injuries), as a result of conflict related violence,  between  1
           January 2009 and 31 December 2014. Whilst injuries to  civilians
           steadily increased between 2010 and 2014, the number  of  deaths
           fluctuated, increasing in 2011 compared to 2010,  then  reducing
           in 2012 and 2013 before rising again in 2014 to a record  10,548
           civilian  casualties  (3,699  deaths  and  6,849  injured),  the
           highest number of civilian deaths and injuries in a single  year
           since recording began in 2009, marking a 25 per cent increase in
           civilian deaths, a 21 per  cent  increase  in  injuries  for  an
           overall increase of 22 per cent in civilian casualties  compared
           to 2013. [1] Note that UNAMA  does  not  claim  that  statistics
           presented in its report are complete and that there may be under-
           reporting civilian casualties given limitations inherent in  the
           operating environment. [2] UNAMA attributed 72 per cent  of  all
           civilian casualties in 2014 to [anti-Government elements] and 14
           per cent to Pro-Government Forces. Ten per  cent  of  casualties
           were attributed  to  ground  engagements  in  which  a  civilian
           casualty could not be attributed to a specific party."


   37. It goes on to state that the withdrawal of international  forces  and
       their replacement by national  security  forces  resulted  in  a  54%
       increase in the  civilian  casualty  rate  from  2013  to  2014,  the
       majority  of  these  casualties  resulting  from  the  proximity   of
       civilians to ground engagements.


   38.  The  country  evidence  regarding  Kabul  paints   an   increasingly
       depressing picture. Media reports that post-date the  more  panoramic
       country reports from reliable rapporteurs indicate that the situation
       continues to deteriorate, though I note that  significant  atrocities
       that have taken place in  2016  are  still,  to  some  extent,  often
       targeted, for example the attack on a military headquarters in  April
       2016 and on a Hazara demonstration more recently. However,  I  cannot
       accept that there is sufficiently cogent evidence before me  to  show
       that the prevailing Country Guidelines in AK  Afghanistan  should  be
       revisited. UNAMA states that "Currently, the population of  Kabul  is
       estimated to be 3,678,034 inhabitants ... Other estimates run as high
       as 7 million." The fact remains that  most  civilian  casualties  are
       incurred outside of the capital city, and the  insurgent  attacks  in
       Kabul are largely targeted  against  official  or  military  targets,
       often involving the justice system. There would be no  real  risk  of
       the Appellant facing those dangers. Beyond those kinds of  collateral
       damage, one could not reasonably say that the  tragic  and  murderous
       murder of civilians on an indiscriminate basis is at  a  level  where
       one could reasonably say that any civilian is at such risk.


   39. Nor do I accept that  the  Appellant  as  an  elderly  woman  without
       relatives to support her would be at any elevated  risk  such  as  to
       fall  within  the  exceptional  category  recognised  as  potentially
       meriting a grant of international protection  in  decisions  such  as
       Elgafaji. Her  witness  Mr  Waheed's  assertion  that  her  need  for
       medication would require her to make journeys to medical centres that
       are likely to be in the vicinity of the  kinds  of  Western  enclaves
       that are at the centre of insurgent assaults was undisputed. However,
       if she was returned to Kabul, I think it likely that the family would
       make arrangements, for which they could doubtless pay, to ensure that
       she received her medicine without having to expose herself  to  risks
       by  attending  medical  centres  which  might  be  situated  near  to
       potential targets. Additionally,  aside  from  occasional  relatively
       isolated incidents of medical  facilities  being  damaged  in  Kabul,
       there is no objective evidence to support  the  assertion  that  such
       facilities are in general at real risk of attack or collateral damage
       from terrorist activities.


  Appeal under the Immigration Rules

  40. The relevant Immigration Rule is Rule 276ADE:

           "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to  remain  on
           the grounds of private life
           276ADE
           (1). The requirements to be met by an  applicant  for  leave  to
           remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
           date of application, the applicant:
           (vi) ...  is aged 18 years or above, has lived  continuously  in
           the UK for  less  than  20  years  (discounting  any  period  of
           imprisonment) but there would be very significant  obstacles  to
           the applicant's integration into the country to which  he  would
           have to go if required to leave the UK."

   41. It seems to me that there would indeed be very significant  obstacles
       to the Appellant's integration in Afghanistan,  because  she  has  no
       living relatives remaining in  the  country  who  can  reasonably  be
       expected to care for her; I  accept,  on  balance  of  probabilities,
       bearing in mind the Home Office guidance on prevalent  social  mores,
       that the families of her stepdaughters would not perceive her welfare
       as their responsibility. It is clear that Nouna,  whose  presence  in
       Afghanistan has previously represented an obstacle to  the  Appellant
       establishing that she would be alone there on a return, has now  been
       admitted to Turkey with a view to resettling there.


   42. The Appellant is 74 years of age. She has no close or extended family
       to support her in Afghanistan. Although I have dismissed  her  appeal
       on  international  protection  grounds,  I  consider  that  he  UNHCR
       Eligibility Guidelines for  Assessing  the  International  Protection
       Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Afghanistan may still be relevant in  so
       far as they give some indication  of  the  situation  facing  a  lone
       elderly woman on a return to Afghanistan:


           "Women without male support and  protection,  including  widows,
           are at  particular  risk.  They  generally  lack  the  means  of
           survival, given existing social norms imposing  restrictions  on
           women living alone, including limitations on  their  freedom  of
           movement and on their ability to earn a  living.  ...  Detention
           for  breaches  of  customary  or  Sharia  law  is  reported   to
           disproportionately  affect  women  and  girls,   ...   including
           detention on the ground of  perceived  "moral  crimes"  such  as
           being improperly unaccompanied. ...
           Among IDPs, women, children, elderly persons  and  persons  with
           disabilities are especially vulnerable. ...
           In  assessing  the  reasonableness  of  an  IFA/IRA,  particular
           attention should be paid to  the  circumstances  of  individuals
           with specific needs, including persons living with  disabilities
           and elderly persons, in terms of food insecurity,  the  lack  of
           access to livelihoods opportunities, and the lack of  access  to
           essential   services,   including   appropriate    social    and
           psychosocial support as well as health care."

   43. Given that material, I accept that there would  be  very  significant
       obstacles  to  the  Appellant's  integration  back  in   Afghanistan.
       Remittances of funds might pay for her access to such  medication  as
       would alleviate her need to travel to dangerous parts of the  capital
       city, as I have indicated above. But I accept  that  they  could  not
       secure her ongoing physical and moral integrity, given the  need  for
       careful attention in the administration of her  medicine,  which  can
       only reasonably be expected to be provided by family members who have
       a genuine emotional concern for her welfare. I accept that she  falls
       into the most vulnerable class of  return,  being  an  elderly  woman
       without any male protection.


   44. Accordingly I accept that the Appellant's appeal succeeds  under  the
       Immigration Rules.


Signed:                                            Date: 18 August 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeals based on material that is very  similar  to  that
which was before the Respondent and accordingly make a full fee award.


Signed                            Dated 18 August 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes



