
S-T
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10364/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 30 January 2015                            |On 13 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                              RAJA MOHAMMAD TAJ
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1 January 1953. He has
       appealed with the permission of the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
       decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Devittie, promulgated on
       3 November 2014, dismissing his appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
       respondent, dated 10 February 2014, to remove him to Pakistan  having
       refused his application for leave on human rights grounds.


    2. The background is that the appellant last arrived in the UK in August
       2003 with leave to enter as a visitor. His application  to  vary  his
       leave as a work permit holder was refused on 15 December 2004. He did
       not appeal against that decision. A similar application  was  refused
       with no right of appeal on 18 July 2005. On 17 October  2012  he  was
       served with a notice of liability to removal as an overstayer. He was
       found to have been working illegally as a  butcher.  On  13  November
       2012 he submitted an application for a derivative right of  residence
       card and this was refused on 25 March 2013. On 17 September 2013  his
       solicitors submitted the application which led to  the  decision  now
       appealed. In his application the  appellant  explained  he  had  been
       closely involved in the upbringing of his niece, Naeem Akhtar.  Naeem
       came to the UK to marry in 2002. She has six  children  born  between
       2002 and 2009. Her marriage broke down and she is separated from  her
       husband, Ahtiq Raja. The appellant has lived with  her  and  supports
       her and her children.


    3. The reasons for refusal letter, dated 10 February 2014, explained the
       appellant did not meet the requirements  of  the  rules.  The  letter
       noted the appellant had caring responsibilities for his niece's  son,
       Owais, who has serious health problems.  However,  Naeem  Akhtar  had
       access  to  assistance  from  social  services  so  alternative  care
       arrangements could be put in place. The best  interests  of  all  the
       children required them to remain in the UK with their  mother,  which
       they could do. There were insufficient  factors  justifying  allowing
       the appellant to remain in the UK.


    4. At his appeal it was  conceded  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
       requirements of the Immigration Rules. The Judge recorded that  there
       was no dispute as to the appellant's personal circumstances,  as  set
       out in the report of the independent social worker,  Peter  Horrocks,
       and the report by Owais's consultant, Dr Grunewald. The  Judge  found
       the appellant had established family and private life in the UK.  The
       determinative issue was the proportionality of removal.  He  accepted
       Naeem Akhtar had very onerous  responsibilities  in  maintaining  and
       looking after six young children some of whom have  conditions  which
       require her regular attention.


    5. Finally, the Judge said this at paragraph 14:


           "(ii) ... However, in my view Dr Grunewald's  report  is  to  be
           seen in the context  of  the  appellant's  immigration  history,
           which demonstrates a number of failed attempts  to  acquire  the
           right to work in the United Kingdom. It seems  to  me  that  the
           appellant's niece's objective needs have provided the  appellant
           the opportunity to meet the evidential challenges  he  has  been
           facing in seeking leave to  remain,  and  that  it  is  in  that
           context that the appellant has been providing active support for
           his niece in caring for her children. I do not doubt that he has
           provided that support and that he has a genuine concern for  the
           welfare of his niece.


           (iii) I do not however accept that the appellant has a long term
           commitment to serving as a full-time assistant  to  his  niece's
           children. I do not accept that if granted leave,  the  appellant
           would in the long term regard it as his vocation to provide care
           and support to his niece and her children. As I have  indicated,
           the appellant's immigration  history  reinforces  my  conclusion
           [in] that regard.


           (iv) It has not  been  demonstrated  that,  in  the  appellant's
           absence, social services would not be able to increase the level
           of support provided to the appellant's niece and  her  children.
           Furthermore,  the  evidence  clearly   demonstrates   that   the
           appellant's niece has an effective network of family support. It
           was disclosed in oral evidence that, although she  is  estranged
           from the father of her children, he does visit the children on a
           fairly regular basis,  and,  it  would  appear,  that  he  is  a
           practising lawyer who  therefore  has  the  financial  means  to
           support the appellant's niece. The appellant's niece's mother-in-
           law is her aunt, and  she  lives  within  close  proximity;  she
           visits the appellant's niece on a regular basis. She has regular
           contact with her aunt and her cousins. There was  no  suggestion
           in the evidence of the appellant or his niece, that her aunt and
           cousins lack concern for her personal circumstances."


    6. The Judge concluded in paragraph  15  that  the  appellant's  removal
       would not have sufficiently serious consequences for  the  well-being
       of his niece's children  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  the
       maintenance of effective immigration control.


    7. The appellant submitted grounds seeking permission to appeal  drafted
       by counsel who had represented him before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
       There are three grounds:


           (i)    Having made  no  adverse  credibility  findings,  it  was
           irrational and perverse for the Judge to find the appellant  had
           been providing care in order to furnish himself with  the  means
           of seeking leave to remain;
           (ii)   The Judge failed to have regard to section  117C  of  the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  which  supported
           the appellant's case; and
           (iii)  The Judge had misdirected himself in the  proportionality
           assessment.


    8. Permission to appeal on all grounds was granted by Judge of the First-
       tier Tribunal Andrew with particular reference to the second ground.


    9. The respondent filed a response  opposing  the  appeal,  arguing  the
       Judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the   conclusion   he   reached   on
       proportionality and that the grounds were merely an  attempt  to  re-
       argue the case.


   10. I indicated to the representatives that my preliminary view was  that
       it was difficult to find in the decision any reasons for the  Judge's
       adverse credibility finding with regard to the appellant's long  term
       commitment to his niece and her children. In the early  part  of  his
       decision he set out uncritically the evidence of  the  appellant  and
       his niece and also the views of the social worker and consultant.  He
       stated  in  paragraph  10  that  the  appellant's  niece's   personal
       circumstances were not contested. He  recorded  that  the  consultant
       regarded the appellant's continued presence as  absolutely  essential
       for the well-being of Owais. He then reached the conclusion  set  out
       in paragraph 14(ii) without giving any reasons. Whilst much might  be
       inferred from the appellant's immigration history, I do not think the
       Judge has given adequate reasons in his decision to  explain  how  he
       came to the view he did.


   11. It is also clear the Judge failed to consider section 117C in  making
       his proportionality assessment, as he was required to do.


   12.  Mr Walker did not argue the decision was not flawed and  he  pointed
       out another deficiency in that  the  Judge  had  not  considered  the
       appellant's relationship with his wife, who passed away in July 2014,
       and his own children, who remained in Pakistan.


   13. Mr Nasim asked me to record that he had submitted to  Judge  Devittie
       that the decision made by the respondent was not in  accordance  with
       the law because she had not considered the carer's policy. He did not
       have a copy of that policy to show me and there is  no  copy  in  the
       file.


   14. I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  it
       contains inadequate reasoning. If the appellant is to be told  he  is
       not believed to hold a genuine long-term commitment to his niece  and
       her children, he must be told why.


   15. After hearing submissions on the issue, I  decided  that  the  appeal
       required hearing de novo on article 8 and the best interests  of  the
       children. I identified some areas about which there was  insufficient
       evidence, such as: (i) the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  own
       family in Pakistan; (ii) the true extent  of  Mrs  Naeem's  husband's
       involvement with the children and (iii) the appellant's work history.
       On that last point, Mr Nasim said there was no  evidence  to  support
       the assertion  in  paragraph  20  of  the  refusal  letter  that  the
       appellant had  been  encountered  working  in  a  butcher's  shop  as
       recently as 17 October 2012.


   16. Given these gaps in the evidence and findings it appeared appropriate
       to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing with  the
       following directions:


           1.  The appeal shall be heard again by the  First-tier  Tribunal
           by any judge other than Judge Devittie;
           2.  The issues are limited to article 8, it having been accepted
           the appellant does not meet  any  of  the  requirements  of  the
           Immigration Rules;
           3.  The parties may file  additional  evidence  provided  it  is
           filed and served at least 10 days before the date of hearing;
           4.  The appellant may argue the decision is  not  in  accordance
           with the carer's policy but he must produce a copy of it to  the
           Tribunal;
           5.  There are no preserved findings of fact;
           6.  The time estimate for the hearing is 2 hours; and
           7.  The Tribunal shall provide a Mirpuri/Pahari interpreter.



NOTICE OF DECISION

       The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law and
       his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside.


       Anonymity direction not made.






                               Signed   Date 30 January 2015


                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
