
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10177/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 July 2016                        |On 11 October 2016                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mrs Rajdeep Kaur
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Jones, Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against a  decision
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Monson dated 19 November 2015.  For
    clarity, we shall refer to the parties as they were  before  the  First
    tier. The judge had allowed the appeal of the Appellant, a national  of
    India, against the Respondent's decision of 25 February 2015 to  remove
    her administratively under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act
    1999.

2.   There is  a  slight  inaccuracy  in  the  judge's  first  paragraph  in
    suggesting that the appeal brought  by  the  Appellant  was  against  a
    decision to refuse to vary  her  leave  to  remain,  but  in  fact  the
    Appellant's immigration history is  as  follows.   She  obtained  entry
    clearance to enter the United Kingdom as a fianc�e of her  then  future
    spouse, Mr Gurjinder Singh, on 8 August 2011.  She entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 17 November 2011.  They were married in the  United  Kingdom
    on 6 January 2012 and she subsequently applied for and  obtained  leave
    to remain under Part 8 of the Immigration Rules of 17  September  2012,
    the application having been made prior to the introduction of  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules.  Her limited leave to remain as  a  spouse
    ran until 17 September 2014.

3.   In the Respondent's bundle before the First-tier is a letter  from  the
    Appellant's former representatives who we shall refer to as  I  &  Co.,
    dated 23 September 2014, which accompanied her application for leave to
    remain.  It is to be noted that the application for  further  leave  to
    remain was made on 24 September 2014, therefore  approximately  a  week
    after her leave to remain had expired.  The letter of I  &  Co.  states
    that: "She has instructed us that she got mixed up with  the  leave  to
    remain dates and thought that her leave to remain  expires  in  October
    2014, therefore, her ILR application is late."

4.   The Respondent's decision of 25 February 2015  refusing  her  leave  to
    remain and issuing the Section 10 removal decision was  preceded  by  a
    letter from the Respondent to I &Co dated 21  January  2015  requesting
    further documentary evidence in support of the  application,  including
    wage slips for the spouse, bank statements, council  tax  bills  and  a
    Life in the UK test pass for the Appellant, and required such  evidence
    to be provided by 14 February 2015.  No response was given by I  &  Co.
    to the Respondent in response to that letter.

5.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's application on  the  basis  that
    the Appellant had not provided  adequate  evidence  of  satisfying  the
    maintenance requirements set out in paragraph 287(v) of Part 8  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Nor had she provided evidence  satisfying  paragraph
    287(vi) demonstrating her sufficient knowledge of the English  language
    or about life in the UK, in accordance with Appendix KoLL in the UK  of
    the Immigration Rules. In her decision, the Respondent  refers  to  the
    requirement under paragraph 2.3(a) of Appendix KoLL to have passed  the
    'Life in the UK test' administered by Learn Direct limited as the 'KOL'
    test (which is not to be confused with knowledge of language).

6.   We pause to note that it is not in fact a requirement of paragraph  287
    that an applicant have current leave under Part 8  of  the  Immigration
    Rules; only that they have at some point  prior  to  their  application
    been granted a period of leave to remain under paragraphs 281  and  286
    of the Rules.  Her overstaying was therefore not in itself a reason for
    her application for indefinite leave to remain to  have  been  refused,
    rather, the substantive requirements of 287 were said not to have  been
    satisfied.

7.   The Appellant and her new solicitors Farani  Javid  Taylor  prepared  a
    bundle of evidence which was provided to the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     Additional to that bundle was a separate document  which  was  a  test
    demonstrating  that  she  has  sufficient  knowledge  of  the   English
    language, that document being provided two days before the hearing.

8.   On the basis of the financial  evidence  which  was  contained  in  the
    Appellant's bundle and on the basis of the language test results  which
    had been provided, the judge held  that  all  of  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 287 of Part 8 of the Immigration Rules were  satisfied,  save
    for  the  requirement  that  the  Appellant   demonstrates   sufficient
    knowledge of life in the UK.

9.   The  judge  held  as  follows  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  non-
    production of a Life in the UK test result:

         "Discussion and Findings

         10.  The Appellant's application was prepared by a  different  firm
             of solicitors, and insofar as it is material it  appears  they
             let her down by not advising her as to the documents which she
             need to produce in order to ensure that  her  application  was
             successful and in not letting her know when  the  Home  Office
             asked the firm for further documents.

         11.  As this is an in country and non-PBS appeal I am not  confined
             to the circumstances appertaining at the date of  the  refusal
             decision or to the evidence that was before the  SSHD  at  the
             date of decision.

         12.  On the evidence as it now stands and as is  properly  conceded
             by Ms Murphy the  Appellant  meets  all  the  requirements  of
             paragraph 287 - with one minor exception.

         13.  The minor exception is that the  Appellant  has  not  sat  and
             passed a KOL test.  She was not able to address this  omission
             following the refusal, as her passport  was  retained  by  the
             Home Office following the decision to refuse her ILR,  and  to
             make directions for her removal.

         14.  I cannot allow the appeal against the  refusal  of  ILR  as  I
             cannot rewrite the Rules.  To obtain ILR, the  Appellant  will
             have to sit the KOL test, and pass it.

         15.  But I can allow the appeal  against  removal,  and  I  do  so.
             There are not insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  being
             continued  abroad,  but  there  are  compelling  circumstances
             justifying  the  Appellant  being  granted  Article  8  relief
             outside the Rules.

         16.  Questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test fall to  be  answered  in
             favour of the Appellant, and questions 3 and  4  of  the  test
             must be answered in favour of the Respondent.

         17.  Turning to question 5, it  would  be  wholly  disproportionate
             from both a family and private life perspective to remove  the
             Appellant, and it would also be contrary to the best interests
             of her British national child.  The Appellant  is  financially
             independent and has sufficient knowledge of English.  There is
             no reason to suppose that she will not be able to pass the KOL
             test if now given the opportunity to do so.  No useful  public
             purpose  would  be  served  by  removing  her  to  India,  and
             requiring her to apply for entry clearance after she  has  sat
             the KOL test abroad (if indeed that is possible).  The massive
             disruption to her  life,  and  the  lives  of  her  child  and
             partner, which would ensue upon her removal would represent an
             unjustifiably harsh outcome for all concerned."



    The appeal was allowed under Article 8.


10.  The Respondent sought permission to appeal  against  that  decision  in
    concise grounds dated 24 November 2015, as follows:

         "The Appellant applied for ILR as a spouse of a settled  person  in
         29 September 2014 and had been in the UK with limited  leave  as  a
         spouse since 17  November  2011.   It  is  not  explained  why  the
         Appellant  did  not  take  the  KoLL  test  prior  to  making   her
         application,  as  would  normally  be  expected,  and  it  is   not
         adequately explained why the Appellant's failure to ensure that she
         complied with the Rules renders the decision disproportionate.   It
         is respectfully submitted that Judge Monson has impermissibly  used
         Article 8 as a general dispensing power."

    Permission was initially refused on those grounds, but granted by Upper
    Tribunal Judge Keki? on 31 May 2016,  finding  that  the  grounds  were
    arguable.


11.  We have heard today from Ms Isherwood for the Respondent.  In  addition
    to relying upon the grounds as prepared, Ms Isherwood points out to  us
    that in the application form accompanying the  Appellant's  application
    for leave to remain, there  are  entries  at  page  A11,  question  5.2
    indicating that the Appellant did in fact have a Life in  the  UK  test
    pass, the question specifically reading as follows:

         "5.2 Have you obtained the following to show that you have met  the
             Knowledge of Language and Life in the UK requirement."

    There is then a cross next to the Life in the UK test pass.


12.  Further, at page A26 at Section 11 on the form applicants are  reminded
    what documents must be submitted with an application, and at the bottom
    of that page under the heading "Knowledge of language and life  in  the
    UK" applicants are reminded that "if you are aged  18  -  64  you  must
    provide the following: ... "  There are  then  a  series  of  items  of
    evidence, the first  of  which  being  a  Life  in  the  UK  test  pass
    notification letter, which has been crossed,  the  natural  meaning  of
    which we take to be that the Appellant was asserting in her application
    form that she possessed such a document.

13.  However, it is clear that no such Life in the  UK  test  pass  document
    was submitted with the application.  We see  from  the  passage  quoted
    above from the judge's decision that the judge seemed to be of the view
    that the Appellant's previous representatives appeared to have let  her
    down by not advising her as  to  the  documents  which  she  needed  to
    produce with her application and did not let her  know  when  the  Home
    Office asked for further documents.

14.  On that point it is illuminating to see an exchange  of  correspondence
    which passed between the Appellant's current  representatives  and  her
    former representatives, that being a letter from  Farani  Javid  Taylor
    Solicitors  dated  7  October  2015  appearing  at  page  124  of   the
    Appellant's bundle, essentially putting the issue to I & Co.  that  the
    Respondent had on 21 January 2015 requested further evidence from  I  &
    Co. and that no response had resulted.  I & Co. replied  on  8  October
    2015 in what might be described  as  somewhat  intemperate  terms,  but
    making the assertion that the Respondent's letter had  been  passed  to
    the Appellant's husband.

15.  The Appellant's husband in  his  witness  statement  prepared  for  the
    purposes of the First tier appeal hearing simply  makes  the  assertion
    that neither he nor the Appellant had been informed by  their  previous
    representatives of the existence  of  the  Respondent's  letter  of  21
    January.  He does not deal specifically with I & Co.'s  assertion  that
    they had passed the letter to him because, as Ms Jones  points  out  to
    us, his witness statement was prepared before I & Co.'s letter had been
    received.  That was the evidence which was  before  the  judge  on  the
    issue  of  the  potential  culpability  of   the   Appellant's   former
    representatives for failing to inform the Appellant of the Respondent's
    letter of 21 January 2015.

16.  We heard from Ms Jones  for  the  Appellant,  who  submitted  that  the
    decision was open to the judge on the evidence  before  him,  and  that
    there was no misdirection in law in the decision.

     Discussion - error of law

17.  We find that there was no clear explanation provided by  the  Appellant
    as to why she had  not  provided  a  KOL  test  pass  result  with  her
    application, and there was  no  adequate  consideration  given  to  the
    Appellant's failure to meet the immigration rules  within  the  judge's
    proportionality assessment. There is no clear finding at  paragraph  10
    as to whether or not I & Co. Solicitors were actually at fault  in  any
    particular way at the time of the Appellant's  application.   Also  not
    discussed by the judge at  paragraph  10  are  the  matters  which  are
    pointed out to us by Ms Isherwood which was that  it  appears  to  have
    been positively asserted within the application form that the Appellant
    was in possession of a KOL test pass result.  We find that although the
    Appellant may have been unable to undertake a KOL test between the date
    of the Respondent's decision and the date of the appeal because she did
    not possess her passport and she was therefore unable  to  register  to
    undertake a KOL test, that provides no explanation at all as to why the
    Appellant did not undertake a KOL test prior  to  her  application  for
    leave to remain being made.

18.  We find that applicants for  leave  to  remain  under  the  Immigration
    Rules can be expected to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Ms Jones argues that when considering the proportionality of  a
    proposed removal due to non-satisfaction of the  immigration  rules,  a
    more flexible approach should be adopted  where  leave  to  remain  was
    sought under Immigration Rules related to private and family  life,  as
    opposed to applications under  the  points-based  scheme  unrelated  to
    private and family life matters. We do not find it  necessary  to  rule
    upon that as a general principle but we find that  in  this  particular
    case the judge has not given adequate consideration as  to  the  reason
    why this Appellant did not provide the relevant  KOL  evidence  at  the
    time of her application.

19.  We  also  raised  with  the  parties  the  Respondent's  invocation  of
    paragraph 322(9) of  the  Immigration  Rules  falling  within  Part  9,
    General Grounds for Refusal, on the basis that the Appellant had failed
    to produce within a reasonable time  information,  documents  or  other
    evidence required by the Respondent to establish her  claim  to  remain
    under the Immigration Rules.  Although at paragraph 10 of the decision,
    the judge suggested that it 'appears' that the  former  representatives
    had let the Appellant down, not only do we find that there is no  clear
    finding as to  that  representative's  culpability,  but  there  is  no
    acknowledgement that such a failure not only resulted in the  rejection
    of the Appellant's application on substantive  grounds,  but  that  the
    Respondent had invoked a general ground for refusal. Ms  Jones  pointed
    out that the judge recorded at paragraph 12 that: "On the  evidence  as
    it now stands, and as is properly  conceded  by  Ms  Murphy  [the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer] the Appellant meets all the requirements  of
    paragraph 287, with the minor exception  of  the  absence  of  the  KOL
    certificate".  However, it is not  clear  to  us  that  the  Presenting
    Officer had at that point  specifically  abandoned  reliance  upon  the
    322(9) issue.

20.  We find that the lack of consideration by the judge as  to  why  a  KOL
    certificate was not obtained at the time of application, together  with
    his failure to address adequately the  322(9)  issue,  results  in  his
    later assessment of the proportionality of the proposed removal of  the
    Appellant being inadequate.  We also have concerns that  the  reasoning
    set out at paragraph 17 was not adequate in demonstrating that it would
    be  wholly  disproportionate  both  from  a  family  and  private  life
    perspective to require the Appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

21.  For those reasons we find that there is a material error of law in  the
    judge's decision and we set it aside.

    Remaking the Decision

22.  We now turn to the parties to invite them  to  address  us  on  further
    steps in this matter.

23.  Ms Jones stated that she would wish to rely  upon  further  documentary
    evidence which was relevant to  remaking  the  decision,  but  not  yet
    before the Tribunal. For example, we have referred to  an  exchange  of
    correspondence between the Appellant's current and former solicitors as
    to whether the latter had informed the Appellant  of  the  Respondent's
    request of 21 January 2015 for further documentary evidence.  Ms  Jones
    tells us that further  correspondence  was  entered  into  between  the
    Appellant's current and former representatives on that  issue  and  she
    wished for that correspondence to be placed before the Tribunal.

24.  Further there was evidence in the form of a letter from the  Respondent
    from September 2015 (after the refusal) which evidenced the  fact  that
    the Respondent  had  provided  a  certified  copy  of  the  Appellant's
    passport to the Appellant for the purpose of enabling the Appellant  to
    undertake a  KOL  test.   There  would  be  further  witness  statement
    evidence which Ms Jones said that she would like to rely upon, bringing
    the Tribunal up-to-date with the personal matters of the family.

25.  Ms  Isherwood  objected  to  an  adjournment  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant ought to have prepared for the hearing anticipating that  the
    Tribunal may proceed to rehear the case if an error of law  was  found.
    For our part we reminded Ms Jones of the content of  directions  issued
    by Principal Resident Judge Dawson dated 16 June 2016 which  forewarned
    the parties that any further evidence that was to be relied  upon  must
    be the subject of an application under Rule 15(2A)  and  such  evidence
    must be filed with the Tribunal ahead  of  today's  hearing.  Ms  Jones
    suggested that it  was  a  reasonable  approach  for  a  party  who  is
    respondent to an appeal to the Upper Tribunal to await the  outcome  of
    the error of law hearing, and then to make representations as  to  what
    further evidence may be required to re-make a  decision  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, rather than anticipating that an error of law may  be  found,
    and submitting evidence which may not need  to  be  considered  if  the
    First tier decision is upheld.

26.  We refused the Appellant's application to adjourn.  No adequate  reason
    has been given for non-compliance with directions. Burdensome though it
    may be to prepare and submit evidence  relevant  to  re-making  to  the
    Upper Tribunal seized initially  with  deciding  whether  a  First-tier
    decision contained a material error of law, the good governance of  the
    Upper Tribunal is not assisted when parties fail to observe directions.
    Further, compliance with directions in this case would  not,  we  find,
    have represented a disproportionate effort for the Appellant; a  bundle
    of correspondence could readily have been provided, and  the  Tribunal,
    if deciding to rehear a case involving the giving of oral evidence,  is
    likely to be amenable to exercising its case  management  functions  to
    permit examination-in-chief on matters arising  since  the  First  tier
    hearing. Further, we wished to hear more  about  the  circumstances  in
    which the application for leave to remain was initially  made,  and  we
    were not given  to  understand  that  the  correspondence  between  the
    current and former representatives shed any  more  light  on  that.  We
    indicated that  we  would  be  prepared  to  consider  a  copy  of  the
    Respondent's letter of September 2015 and to hear  oral  evidence  from
    the Appellant and her  husband  on  matters  deemed  relevant  for  the
    remaking of the appeal.

27.  For those reasons we indicated that  we  wished  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing.

28.  We therefore heard oral evidence from the Appellant herself.  She  gave
    evidence directly and without the use of an interpreter.  She confirmed
    that the contents of the witness statement contained in the Appellant's
    bundle at pages 10 to 13 were true.  She confirmed  that  her  daughter
    was now 17 months old.  Her mother-in-law was in the United Kingdom and
    was here today at the hearing centre.  She said that her  daughter  was
    close to her own parents although it transpired  that  the  Appellant's
    parents had not yet met the Appellant's daughter in  person,  they  not
    having visited the United Kingdom and the Appellant not being  able  to
    leave the United Kingdom during these proceedings.

29.  The Appellant was asked whether it may be  possible  for  her  and  her
    daughter to travel to India for the purposes of the Appellant making an
    application for entry clearance to re-enter the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Appellant stated that she did not want to go back to  India.   She  did
    not want to leave her husband.  She was also asked whether it would  be
    possible for her to return to India alone and  to  leave  her  daughter
    with her husband in the United Kingdom whilst she made  an  application
    for entry clearance in India.  The Appellant said that that  would  not
    be possible.  These questions were put to  the  Appellant  again  on  a
    number of occasions in order to elicit from her any more detail  as  to
    her reasons as to why neither of these scenarios was possible.

30.  It is fair to say that the Appellant seemed to be quite anxious  during
    the hearing.  We ensured that she fully understood the  questions  that
    were being put to her in English and she confirmed that  she  did.   We
    gave due allowance for the way in which the Appellant gave her evidence
    as she was clearly nervous.  She explained to us that her parents lived
    in India but that it would be difficult for her to  take  her  daughter
    there.  The Appellant did not in fact appear  to  have  considered  the
    possibility that she may have to return to India even for  a  temporary
    period to make an application for entry clearance.  In relation to  the
    scenario of the Appellant's daughter remaining in  the  United  Kingdom
    with her husband she said that  this  would  not  be  possible  as  her
    husband worked full-time.

31.   The  Appellant  was  asked  about  the  circumstances  in  which   her
    application for leave to remain was made.  She stated that  her  former
    representative at I & Co. had not told her about what  documents  would
    be needed in support of the application.  A friend had  told  her  that
    she may need a KOL test  certificate.   The  Appellant  said  that  she
    therefore asked her solicitor about this, and he informed her that  she
    did not need such a certificate.  The Appellant said that she had asked
    her solicitor about this after the application had been made.

32.  The Appellant was asked about the Respondent's  letter  of  21  January
    2015 requesting further documents in support of the  application.   She
    was shown the document.  She stated that she was not familiar with  it.
    She said that she had not been shown it at  the  time.   She  explained
    that when she learned that  she  required  a  KOL  test  certificate  a
    request was made to the Home Office asking for her passport to be  sent
    back to her so that she could use this as a form of identity to sit the
    test.  The certified copy was sent  to  her  in  September  2015.   She
    explained that when she went to the test centre they  would  not  allow
    her to sit the test with only the certified copy of her passport.  They
    required  the  original.   She  said  that  she  approached   different
    organisations in an attempt to sit that test,  each  of  which  refused
    without an original passport.

33.  She stated that she had not completed the box at page A11  Section  5.2
    of the application form for leave to remain which appeared to  indicate
    that she possessed a KOL test pass.

34.  Cross-examined by Ms Isherwood, the Appellant confirmed  that  she  had
    read some of the parts of the form before she had signed  it,  but  not
    all.   She  accepted  that  she  was  personally  responsible  for  the
    information contained within the form and said that next time she would
    definitely ensure that she reads the  whole  of  such  document  before
    signing it.

35.  The Appellant was asked why, if she was ignorant of  the  need  for  an
    English language test certificate and a  KOL  test  certificate  to  be
    submitted with  her  application  form,  did  she  submit  the  English
    language test certificate dated  12  July  2013  with  her  application
    appearing at  page  G1  of  the  Respondent's  bundle.   The  Appellant
    explained that she had simply handed over a number of documents in  her
    possession to I & Co. Solicitors  without  knowing  which  specifically
    would be required.  She repeated that she had become  aware  through  a
    friend of  the  requirement  for  a  KOL  test  certificate  after  the
    application had been submitted.  She could not recall at what point  in
    time between the date of application and the date of  refusal  she  had
    become aware of that requirement.

36.  She was asked again about the possibility of  her  returning  to  India
    for a temporary period.  She said that it would take too  long  for  an
    application to be made.  We ensured that the Appellant  understood  the
    difference between the suggestion that she permanently return to  India
    on the one hand, and on the other to temporarily  return  to  India  to
    make an application  for  entry  clearance.   She  confirmed  that  she
    understood the difference between the two and stated that it would  not
    be possible for her to travel temporarily to India.   She  stated  that
    she could not stay without her daughter.  They wanted to stay together.
     They loved each other.  She confirmed that her husband's parents lived
    in Romford.  She herself lives in Beckton,  East  London.   She  denied
    that the writing on the application form was  hers  or  her  husband's.
    She did not know who had put the cross at page A11 question 5.2.

37.  Re-examined, the  Appellant  said  that  they  had  decided  to  change
    solicitors because they had asked I  to  provide  the  Respondent  with
    evidence of the birth of their child but I had said that this could  be
    done later.  They were  not  content  with  his  response  and  changed
    solicitors.

38.  The  Appellant's  husband,  Mr  Gurjinder  Singh,  gave  evidence.   He
    confirmed the contents of his witness statement contained at  pages  15
    to 17 of the Appellant's bundle.  He stated that he did  not  recognise
    the letter of 21 January 2015 from the Respondent and that it  had  not
    been given to him by I  & Co.  He did not recall I  &  Co.  making  any
    requests for extra documents after the application had been made.

39.  Mr Singh was asked whether it would be possible for  the  Appellant  to
    return to India for a temporary period for her to make  an  application
    for entry clearance either with or without their  daughter.   Mr  Singh
    was emotional in his evidence in considering these questions.  He  said
    that he could not stay without either of them.  He  confirmed  that  it
    was not too far to his mother's house.

40.  Cross-examined, Mr Singh confirmed that the application form  had  been
    completed by I & Co.  He had given the solicitor the documents that  he
    had been asked for.  He assumed it was the solicitor's writing  on  the
    form.  He had attended the solicitor's office  with  the  Appellant  on
    occasions.  Sometimes his wife had attended by  herself.   All  of  the
    forms had been completed by the solicitor. He did not think that he and
    the Appellant had read through the form before the Appellant had signed
    it.  He said that he was not legally savvy.

41.  He stated that he became aware of the need for a  KOL  test  after  the
    Respondent's decision was made.  He recalled that he had asked for  the
    Appellant's passport to be returned and that they had provided  instead
    a certified copy.  He  had  learnt  from  a  family  friend  about  the
    possible need for a KOL test certificate.  He did not remember  exactly
    when he became aware of this.  He thought it was after the decision had
    been taken.  He and his wife had not discussed what they may do if this
    appeal were refused or considered whether she could return to India for
    a temporary period.

42.  He could not go to India because he had a home and a job in the  United
    Kingdom.  He was in the process of trying to  find  a  school  for  his
    daughter.  When it was suggested that his wife's family in India  could
    help support the Appellant and daughter if they travelled to  India  Mr
    Singh said that his wife's family were not very  financially  well-off.
    He was not sure that they  could  look  after  the  Appellant  and  his
    daughter during any trip.  He himself  had  no  family  in  India.   He
    confirmed that his mother was present here today at the hearing centre.

43.  When it was suggested that if the Appellant returned  to  India  for  a
    temporary period to apply for entry clearance his mother could help him
    to look after his daughter he stated that she was  an  old  lady.   She
    could not manage with his daughter, who is  at  an  age  where  she  is
    constantly  running  around.   He  works  as  a  site  manager  in  the
    construction business, working in the London area.  He typically worked
    between 7.30am and 5.30pm, sometimes not getting home  until  7pm.   He
    could not look after his daughter whilst working.   He  did  not  think
    that his mother could spend all day looking after his daughter.

44.  He has two sisters and one brother. One of the sisters lives in  Ilford
    and their brother lives in Leytonstone, both in East London.   However,
    he did not really have a good relationship with them.  His  mother  has
    contact with his daughter when he brings his daughter around  to  visit
    his mother.  This is about three to four times a month.

45.  The Appellant was not working at the  moment.   She  had  been  working
    before giving birth, then went on maternity leave and she has not  been
    able to work recently because of not having leave to remain.   She  has
    been the primary carer of their daughter whilst he works  but  he  sees
    her every morning and evening.  He  could  not  think  of  what  caring
    arrangements could be put in place to look after their daughter  if  he
    continued to work whilst  the  Appellant  was  outside  of  the  United
    Kingdom for a temporary period.  He did not  think  that  his  daughter
    could spend  any  significant  time  in  India  because  she  has  skin
    conditions and cannot tolerate heat.  His  parents-in-law  lived  in  a
    rural area of India about four hours away from the nearest  major  city
    which was Amritsar.

46.  Re-examined by Ms Jones, Mr Singh confirmed that they had attempted  to
    register the Appellant for a KOL test but she could not  undertake  the
    exam because of lack of the passport.  He spontaneously  apologised  if
    his dates may be vague.  He said that he had paid solicitors to  manage
    the application and trusted them to do so.  If he had known that  there
    may be problems with the application he would  have  made  records  and
    kept a diary of all the events.

47.  That was the evidence to which we referred in relation to the appeal.

48.  Submissions made by Ms Isherwood on behalf of the  Respondent  were  to
    rely upon the refusal letter dated 23 February 2015.  She asserted that
    Immigration Rule paragraph 287 was not satisfied  because  of  lack  of
    possession of a KOL test certificate but she submitted that it was  the
    Appellant's responsibility to ensure that  the  relevant  documentation
    was submitted with the application.  There was no clear evidence  about
    who had completed the application form.  There had  been  contradictory
    evidence about when the Appellant and her husband had first  found  out
    about when a Knowledge of Life in the UK test was  needed.   They  were
    vague with their dates.

49.  Considering Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act') Ms Isherwood argued  that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable to expect the Appellant's British national child to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  The Appellant had said that the child had  a  good
    relationship with her parents in India.  No clear reason had been given
    as  to  why  there  were  compelling   circumstances   preventing   the
    Appellant's departure from the United Kingdom, and particularly why the
    Appellant and her daughter could not temporarily travel to India.

50.  The First-tier Judge had held at paragraph  15  of  the  decision  that
    there were "not insurmountable obstacles to family life being continued
    abroad" and that was a finding which had not been vitiated by the error
    of law ruling.  The Appellant was  aware  of  the  requirement  of  the
    Knowledge of Life in the UK test and had simply failed to  comply  with
    the requirement.  There were  no  sufficiently  compelling  reasons  to
    allow the appeal under Article 8.

51.  Ms Jones for the Appellant accepted that the  Appellant  did  not  meet
    the Rules for indefinite leave to remain under  the  Immigration  Rules
    but relied upon Article 8 ECHR.  She argued that Section 117B(6) of the
    2002 Act was satisfied in that the Appellant  had  a  genuine  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child, being their daughter,  a  British
    national, and that it would not be reasonable to require that child  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

52.  The Appellant is the child's primary carer but the father was  involved
    in the child's care every day  and  was  clearly  concerned  about  the
    welfare of his daughter.  It would not be reasonable to bring the child
    to a rural part of India for an indeterminate period which could be six
    months or more.  The child would be in an environment where  she  would
    be being cared for by the Appellant, who would  be  distressed  by  the
    situation that she faced.  This would not be in the best  interests  of
    the child.

53.  The alternative scenario that the Appellant's daughter  remain  in  the
    UK was not plausible.  The Appellant's mother-in-law currently sees the
    daughter three to four times a month when the child is brought  to  her
    house.  That arrangement is entirely different from the suggestion that
    the husband's mother care for the  daughter  for  twelve  hours  a  day
    whilst the Appellant's husband was out at work.

54.  Both witnesses had given evidence in a straightforward  manner.   There
    was no reason to doubt their credibility or good faith.  She reiterated
    the  submission  that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect   the
    Appellant's daughter to leave the United Kingdom.

     Discussion - re-making

55.  We consider those submissions and find  as  follows.   The  application
    for leave to remain was defective in a number  of  respects.   We  have
    heard from the Appellant and her husband  about  the  circumstances  in
    which that application was made.  Although it was at times difficult to
    elicit from the Appellant any reasoned basis  as  to  why  she  or  her
    daughter ought not to be expected to return to India  for  a  temporary
    period we do not find that the  Appellant  was  being  evasive  in  her
    evidence.  Rather, she could simply not contemplate that possibility.

56.  We found both witnesses to be honest and credible in the way that  they
    gave evidence.  We also accept that they placed reliance upon I  &  Co.
    at the time that the application for leave to remain  was  made.   Even
    without  considering  the  exchange  of  correspondence   between   the
    Appellant's current and former  solicitors  it  is  apparent  that  the
    application  that  was  made  was  missing  a  variety   of   important
    documentation.

57.  Under paragraph 287 the Appellant was required to demonstrate that  she
    could be adequately maintained in the  United  Kingdom.   There  is  no
    'specified  evidence'  required  to   demonstrate   the   adequacy   of
    maintenance available to her, as this was not an application made under
    Appendix FM.  However, it is obvious that in order for an applicant  to
    demonstrate that they are adequately  maintained  they  would  need  to
    provide evidence of their financial situation.  Relevant  evidence  was
    not provided with the original application.   That  evidence  was  only
    forthcoming at the appeal stage when the Appellant was  represented  by
    different solicitors.

58.  It is difficult to determine why the application  form  was  marked  at
    page A11 Section 5.2 so as to suggest that the Appellant had a KOL test
    result.  Clearly she  did  not  at  that  time.   We  accept  what  the
    Appellants say, which is that they were not advised by their  solicitor
    that a KOL test pass result would specifically be required  to  support
    the application for indefinite leave  to  remain.   Although  Mr  Singh
    indicated that he became aware of the requirement in that regard  after
    the decision was given whereas the Appellant had said that  she  learnt
    before the date of decision, they may have heard from different friends
    at different times.

59.  Additionally we find Mr Singh's evidence telling when he said  that  he
    could not be confident about the dates that he had given because he had
    entrusted the solicitor to assist them with the application and  if  he
    had known that there were going to be problems he  would  have  made  a
    better note of all of the dates and events.  To the extent  that  their
    evidence differed about when they found out about the requirement of  a
    KOL test pass result we do  not  find  that  that  difference  strongly
    militates against their credibility.

60.  We have also had regard to the exchange of correspondence  between  the
    Appellant's current solicitors, who wrote to I & Co. on 7 October  2015
    asking why the letter of the Respondent of 21 January 2015 had not been
    passed on to the Appellant.  In the response  from  I  &  Co.  dated  8
    October 2015 the following passage is included:

         "1   We put your client to prove that she would have been  able  to
             provide the documents requested by the Home Office which is we
             understand the principle of prospective complaint that  is  to
             say had she only known, she would have done all that was asked
             but she did not know.  We submit she constructively  knew  and
             did not believe she could have done  what  was  demanded  even
             assuming her knowledge was not actual."

61.  We find that the remainder of the  letter  from  I  &  Co.  is  equally
    obscure and unhelpful. Whilst there is an assertion that they gave  the
    Appellant's husband a copy of  the  letter  of  the  Respondent  of  21
    January 2015, we have little confidence  of  the  reliability  of  that
    assertion. We accept the evidence of the Appellant and her husband that
    they were not informed of the existence of the Respondent's  letter  of
    21 January 2015.

62.  We find that the Appellant was poorly served by those  who  represented
    her at the application stage.  Although applicants for leave to  remain
    have a responsibility to make sure that they are able  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  we  take  into  account  as  a
    relevant factor the fact that I & Co. do not appear  to  have  assisted
    her well, and we find that the Appellant was  not  informed  adequately
    about what evidence would be required to support  her  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain.

63.  That explains in more detail perhaps than was set out by the  judge  in
    his  decision  about  the  background  circumstances  as  to  how   the
    application was made without a KOL pass result being included with  the
    application.  We have also  seen  evidence  of  the  efforts  that  the
    Appellant and her husband made for her to take the KOL test between the
    date of decision and the date of appeal.   We  accept  what  they  say,
    which was that the certified copy of her passport which was provided to
    her was not accepted by a number of different test  centres.   We  find
    that the Appellant has made a genuine effort  to  gather  the  evidence
    which was required to support her application.

64.  We turn to the issues raised in Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act.   Section
    117B(6) provides that the public interest does not require the  removal
    of an individual if they have a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to  expect  that
    child to leave the United Kingdom.

65.  We have considered the best interests of the Appellant's  daughter.  In
    Zoumbas v SSHD [2013]  UKSC  74,  it  was  agreed  that  the  following
    principles as to the determination of the best  interests  of  children
    could be derived from three decisions of the Supreme Court,  namely  ZH
    (Tanzania) (above), H v Lord Advocate [2012] SC (UKSC) 308 and  H(H)  v
    Deputy Prosecutor of the Italian Republic [2013] 1 AC 338:

         "(1) The best interests of a child are  an  integral  part  of  the
             proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;


         (2)  In making that assessment, the best interests of a child  must
             be a primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the  only
             primary consideration; and the child's best interests  do  not
             of themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;


         (3)  Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by
             the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no  other
             consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;


         (4)  While different judges might approach the question of the best
             interests of a child in different ways, it is important to ask
             oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in  order  to
             avoid the risk that the best interests of  a  child  might  be
             undervalued when other important considerations were in play;


         (5)   It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of   a   child's
             circumstances and of what  is  in  a  child's  best  interests
             before one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed
             by the force of other considerations;


         (6)  To that end there is no substitute for a  careful  examination
             of all relevant factors when the  interests  of  a  child  are
             involved in an article 8 assessment; and


         (7)  A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is
             not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."


 66.     We have heard evidence about the circumstances in India and in  the
    UK in which the Appellant's daughter may find herself if the  Appellant
    travelled to India.  The rural setting in which the Appellant's parents
    live would not by itself be sufficient to demonstrate that it would not
    be reasonable to expect the child to live there and we do not have  any
    evidence of any  particular  ill  health  or  skin  conditions  of  the
    Appellant's daughter demonstrating that travelling to  a  warm  climate
    would be unreasonable.


66.  However, we approach this matter at a more straightforward  level.   By
    requiring the Appellant to travel to India with her daughter so  as  to
    retain their relationship, this will create a break in the relationship
    between the Appellant's daughter  and  the  Appellant's  husband.   The
    Appellant's daughter is currently 17 months old.  A  child's  focus  at
    this sort of age is very much on its parents (Azimi-Moayed  and  others
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013]  UKUT  197,  para
    13(iv)), and E-A (Article 8 - best interests of child)  Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 315 (IAC), paras 40-41. Further, paragraph 35 of EA provides  that
    the  correct  starting  point  in  considering  the  welfare  and  best
    interests of a young child would be that it is in the best interests of
    a child to live with and be brought up by his or her  parents,  subject
    to any very strong contra-indication.  The Appellant's daughter  is  at
    an age when she is still in the  process  of  forming  important  bonds
    between the persons around her. We find that to require the Appellant's
    daughter to live separately from her  father  for  a  prolonged  period
    would be likely to cause a deterioration in the bond between that child
    and her father, at a sensitive time in the child's development.

67.  Further, if the Appellant's daughter  were  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom whilst the Appellant travelled to India  for  the  purposes  of
    making an application for entry clearance we find that there  would  be
    significant problems in facilitating day-to-day  care  for  the  child.
    The Appellant's husband works out of the home for up to twelve hours  a
    day.  The Appellant currently provides care for their daughter.  We  do
    not  think  it  would  be  reasonable  or  practicable  to  expect  the
    Appellant's husband's mother to provide  day-to-day  care  for  such  a
    prolonged period.  She lives in a different part of East  London.   The
    Appellant's husband gets home regularly only at 7pm and caring for  her
    daughter would be equivalent to more  than  a  full-time  job  for  his
    mother, who he says has difficulty coping with an energetic toddler  as
    the Appellant's child now is.

68.  We do not think it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  Appellant's
    husband to give up employment in the United Kingdom in  order  to  care
    for their daughter.  Also, any period where the Appellant would  travel
    to India to make an application for entry clearance whilst her daughter
    remains in the United Kingdom would cause a  disruption  to  the  bonds
    between the Appellant and her daughter. We find that it would not be in
    the best interests of the Appellant's daughter  to  be  separated  from
    either  parent  at  the  present  time,  even  for  a  temporary,   but
    indeterminate period.

69.  In Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT  674  (IAC)  the
    President of the Upper Tribunal held  that  where  Section  117B(6)  is
    satisfied then the answer to the question as to whether  there  is  any
    public interest in requiring the removal of the Appellant  is  answered
    straightforwardly  in  the  negative.   Ambiguity  there  is  none,  he
    observed. Considerations such as  the  importance  of  maintenance  and
    immigration  control  emphasised  in  Section  117B(1)  are   therefore
    superseded by positive satisfaction of Section 117B(6). We come to  the
    conclusion that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  Appellant's
    daughter to leave the United Kingdom at the present time,  even  for  a
    temporary period of indeterminate length, whilst the Appellant makes an
    application for entry clearance to re-enter the UK.


70.  If it were necessary to consider other factors  potentially  justifying
    an interference with the family life of the Appellant, her husband  and
    their  daughter,  we  find  that  there  is  no   significant   adverse
    immigration history on the Appellant's part.  We noted above  that  her
    short period of overstaying would not have disqualified her for a grant
    of leave to remain under Part 8 in any event. She  entered  the  United
    Kingdom lawfully and has made  valid  applications  for  extensions  to
    leave to remain.  She satisfies all of the requirements for  indefinite
    leave to remain save for the requirement to possess a KOL pass  result.
    The Appellant's daughter is a British national.

71.  We note that the Appellant failed to reply to the  Respondent's  letter
    of 21 January 2015 requesting further evidence, and that this  resulted
    in the Respondent  invoking  para  322(9)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    However, we note that this is a discretionary power, falling within the
    categories of behaviour set out  at  para  322(2)-(13),  compared  with
    certain other categories at  para  322(1)  which  result  in  mandatory
    refusal. We find that, considering the range of behaviour  set  out  in
    322(2)-(13) which may result in a discretionary  refusal  of  leave  to
    remain (which  includes  making  false  representations;  the  conduct,
    character and associations of the applicant making it undesirable  that
    they be granted leave to remain; engaging in offending that has  caused
    serious harm, or being a persistent offender  who  shows  a  particular
    disregard for the law), failing to answer a letter is fairly  low  down
    in the order of behaviour warranting a  refusal  of  leave  to  remain.
    Further, we have found that the Appellant was unaware of the  existence
    of that letter.

72.  In the light of our findings on the application of section  117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Act, and in all the circumstances, it is  not  in  the  public
    interest to require the removal of the Appellant.   We  find  that  the
    removal of the Appellant consequent to the decision dated  25  February
    2015  would  amount  to  a  disproportionate  and  therefore   unlawful
    interference with her private and family life which she enjoys with her
    daughter and husband in the United Kingdom.

73.  For those reasons we allow the appeal.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds


    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                       Date 20 August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date 20 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
