
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/10030/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18th May 2016                          |On 6th June 2016                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              MR SUKHDEV SINGH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Ms P Yong, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to Mr Singh as the Claimant.  His appeal  to  be  allowed
    leave to remain here  was  allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8 ECHR by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moller  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 29th October 2015.

 2. Essentially the judge found that the Appellant was homosexual and  that
    there would be very significant obstacles to his integration in  India;
    it was concluded that he succeeded under the Rules and also  Article  8
    ECHR.

 3. The Secretary of State lodged grounds of application.  The first ground
    was that the judge had relied in essence on the perceived  risk  it  is
    said the Appellant would face on return due to his sexual  orientation.
    In those circumstances it was incumbent on the judge  to  consider  the
    country guidance of MD (same-sex oriented males; risk) India CG  [2014]
    UKUT 65 and the judge had not done that.   Given  that  the  judge  was
    relying on the Claimant's sexuality as an obstacle  to  integration  he
    should have engaged with the decision in MD and considered the issue of
    relocation outside of the home area.  Furthermore India had a large and
    accessible LGBTI activist and support network.

 4. Permission to appeal was duly granted with Judge  Parkes  pointing  out
    that the absence of family support or friends were  problems  routinely
    faced by individuals who go and live in a new place and  could  not  be
    said to be very significant obstacles.  Furthermore it was difficult to
    see how the Appellant would have lost all cultural ties to India  after
    less than eight years in the UK particularly when he had  requested  an
    interpreter for the hearing.

 5. Solicitors acting for the Claimant lodged a Rule  24  notice  it  being
    said that what was in issue was whether  his  sexuality  had  caused  a
    severance of cultural, social and family ties in India.  Reference  was
    made to MD.

 6. For the Secretary of State Mr Walker relied on the grounds.  The option
    of internal relocation was clearly an important one and the  judge  had
    failed to consider that.  Given what was said in MD there was  a  clear
    error in law with no need  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I should therefore set the decision aside and dismiss  the
    Claimant's appeal.

 7. For the Claimant Ms Yong indicated that the appeal had never  been  put
    on asylum or Article 3 grounds and was always under Article 8  grounds.
    Although the judge had not referred to MD she  had  looked  at  whether
    there were significant obstacles to the Appellant returning  there  and
    had accepted the evidence of  the  Appellant  who  had  given  credible
    evidence on all key points (paragraph 74).  Unlike the Appellant in  MD
    the Claimant had no support  from  anyone  in  the  UK.   As  noted  at
    paragraph 174 of MD support from and LGBT network would be unlikely  to
    be available for more than six months.  It is noted  at  paragraph  192
    that circumstances for gay persons in India must be a  relevant  factor
    in the determination of an Appellant's Article 8  rights  even  if  the
    Article 3 threshold was not met.

 8. If there was an error of law because of  the  failure  to  mention  and
    consider MD then Ms Yong argued that the appeal should be sent back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal as there was a psychological report  which  the
    Appellant was about to produce and  that  would  be  material  evidence
    which the Tribunal should have the ability to consider.

 9. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

10. Country guidance cases are, by definition,  authoritative  and  binding
    and not to refer to a relevant  country  guidance  case  is  usually  a
    material error in law.  The  judge  found  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the Claimant's integration in India as  he  no
    longer had social, cultural or family ties there; the reason  for  this
    is that he intends to live openly  as  a  homosexual  man  and  had  no
    continuing connection to life in India and no support.  The judge  says
    nothing about Article 3 which was not argued before her and it  can  be
    taken that whatever difficulties the Appellant faced in India they  did
    not reach the high threshold of Article 3.

11. Given that the judge was relying on the  Appellant's  sexuality  as  an
    obstacle to integration she should have considered whether this applied
    to India as a whole and  not only certain parts  of  India  namely  the
    Appellant's home area.  Head note (e) of MD says that it would not,  in
    general,  be  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  for  an  open  same  sex
    orientated male who is able to demonstrate a real risk in his home area
    because of his particular circumstances to  relocate  internally  to  a
    major city within India.  By  implication  the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant would not be able to return to his home area because  of  his
    lack of ties there but what she should have  done  was  to  go  on  and
    consider there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his  returning
    elsewhere in India - which the judge simply did not do.  By failing  to
    refer to what was said in MD in any way the judge materially  erred  in
    law and the decision must therefore be set aside.

12. In my view fairness demands that  the  Appellant  be  allowed  to  give
    evidence on the issue of relocation which is central to the outcome  of
    the appeal.  I am therefore persuaded to send the matter  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and given the material errors  in  the  decision  I
    have concluded that none of the factual findings should stand.

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the cause
    to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

15. I set aside the decision.

16. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date: 6th June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
