
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10915/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2018                            |On 19 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                              mr Osasu Osasuyi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance and not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes back before me  after  a  hearing  on  23  June  2017
    following which I decided that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    ("FtT") in relation to the appellant's  appeal  against  a  refusal  of
    further leave to remain must be set aside for error of law.

 2. The appeal was listed before me again on  29  September  2017  but  the
    appellant did not appear.  No explanation was offered by him and he was
    not legally represented.  Giving him the  benefit  of  the  doubt,  and
    erring on the side caution, I  decided  to  adjourn  the  hearing.   My
    reasons for having done so will be  apparent  from  what  follows.   In
    order to set out the context for this appeal, I reproduce the error  of
    law decision, described as  a  Decision  and  Directions,  in  full  as
    follows:

         "1.  The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  in  1965.   He  is
             said to have arrived in the UK under a  different  name  as  a
             visitor on 21 September 1989.

         2.   In February 2013 he made an application for  leave  to  remain
             which was refused with no right  of  appeal.   Thereafter,  in
             April 2014 he made the application for further leave which  is
             the subject of the decision in this appeal.

         3.   On 1 May 2014 the respondent refused the application  and  the
             appellant's appeal against that decision came before a  First-
             tier Tribunal Judge ("the FtJ")  on  13  June  2016  following
             which the appeal was dismissed.

         4.   The appellant's appeal  is  based  primarily  on  his  medical
             condition, about which I shall refer in more detail below.  He
             also relies on his length of residence in the UK.

         5.   In the grounds of appeal in relation to the FtJ's decision, it
             is argued, in summary, that the  FtJ  failed  sufficiently  to
             engage with the appellant's health condition, either in  terms
             of Article 8 or Article 3.  The appellant would  be  returning
             to Nigeria without any family support or without any means  of
             earning a living.   It  is  asserted  that  his  condition  is
             progressive and will  ultimately  be  fatal.   His  return  to
             Nigeria would accentuate the degree  of  physical  and  mental
             suffering that he would experience  prior  to  the  inevitable
             conclusion of the disease, such  that  it  would  breach  both
             Articles 3 and 8.  Various authorities in relation to  Article
             3 are referred to in the grounds.  Reference is also  made  to
             what is described as the palliative care that he requires.

         6.   The renewed grounds, after permission was  initially  refused,
             contend that it was argued before the FtJ that his removal  to
             Nigeria would separate him from his support network in the UK,
             and  the  FtJ  had  failed  to  consider  the  issue  of   the
             appellant's physical and moral integrity and  his  ability  to
             meet his death in a dignified manner.

         7.   It is further contended that  the  FtJ  "wholly  ignored"  the
             arguments put forward and instead  relied  on  the  concession
             that the appellant's death was not  expected  immediately  and
             could  not  therefore  meet  the  Article  3  threshold,  thus
             disregarding  the  argument  made  under   Article   8.    The
             additional grounds also make  reference  to  the  decision  in
             Paposhvili v Belgium [2016] ECHR 1113 (which was  handed  down
             after the FtJ's decision was promulgated).

             Submissions

         8.   Mr Wells submitted  that  the  argument  before  the  FtJ  was
             advanced purely on medical grounds under both Articles  3  and
             8, in terms of the appellant's physical and  moral  integrity.
             He suggested that there was perhaps a misunderstanding on  the
             part of the FtJ in terms of Article 3 not being relied on.  In
             any event, the FtJ's consideration of Article  8  outside  the
             Rules was wholly inadequate.

         9.   The appellant's condition is a deteriorating one.   There  was
             only very brief consideration of his medical condition and  of
             the very serious and  grave  difficulties  that  he  faced  on
             return to Nigeria.  The FtJ was wrong  to  conclude  that  the
             appellant would be able to find an occupation on return there.
              There was similarly no consideration of the issue of  a  lack
             of family ties there.  There  was  evidence  of  support  from
             friends in the UK helping him with cooking and shopping.

         10.  Mr Melvin submitted that  it  is  clear  that  Article  3  was
             conceded before the FtJ.  Furthermore, it was  very  difficult
             to succeed under Article 8 if the Article 3  claim  could  not
             succeed.  It was not suggested in the appellant's grounds that
             he could succeed under the Article 8 Rules.  He was unable  to
             show very significant obstacles to integration.   He  was  not
             receiving much by way of medical care.

         11.   In  reply,  Mr  Wells  submitted  that  if  the  decision  in
             Paposhvili was available at the time of the hearing, Article 3
             would not have been conceded.  At the time the  threshold  was
             as set out in N v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
             [2005] UKHL 31 and N v United Kingdom [2008] 47 EHRR 39.

             Conclusions

         12.  Notwithstanding that it was suggested that the FtJ had  failed
             to take into account  arguments  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
             appellant, nothing  was  provided  to  me  on  behalf  of  the
             appellant in terms of what arguments were  actually  advanced.
             For  example,  Mr  Wells'  own  notes  of  the  hearing   were
             apparently not available, and it appears that  no  effort  had
             been made to  obtain  an  agreed  note  of  any  arguments  or
             submissions  advanced  before  the  FtJ.   That   is   plainly
             unsatisfactory.

         13.  Mr Melvin was able to provide a typed minute  in  relation  to
             the  proceedings  prepared  by  the  Presenting  Officer   who
             appeared.  However, that note is not of particular  assistance
             in terms of  what  was  advanced  before  the  FtJ.   That  is
             unsurprising in a sense, since it was  the  appellant's  case,
             not  the  respondent's,  that  arguments  advanced  were   not
             considered by the FtJ.

         14.  Furthermore, the FtJ's decision makes it  clear  that  it  was
             accepted on behalf of the appellant that he was  not  able  to
             succeed under Article 3.  However, it was suggested before  me
             that this was perhaps based on a misunderstanding by the  FtJ.
             Again, in that respect it would have been helpful if any notes
             of the hearing prepared by Mr Wells had been provided. In  any
             event, the submissions on behalf of the  appellant  before  me
             were obviously inconsistent in terms of whether or not it  had
             been accepted that the Article 3 claim could not succeed.

         15.  Although the grounds in support of the appeal before the Upper
             Tribunal refer to the issue of physical  and  moral  integrity
             under Article 8, no such argument is reflected  in  the  FtJ's
             decision.  Again, the absence of any note from  the  advocate,
             or any agreed note, hampers the assessment  of  the  merit  of
             that contention.  Likewise, in terms of what is  suggested  as
             to the FtJ's failure  to  take  into  account  submissions  in
             relation to separation  of  the  appellant  from  his  support
             network in the UK.

         16.  It seems to me to be essential that if grounds are advanced on
             the basis of a failure on the part of  an  FtJ  to  take  into
             account submissions,  or  indeed  evidence,  advanced  at  the
             hearing before the FtJ, such a contention  needs  to  be  made
             good with reference to any notes of the  hearing  prepared  by
             the advocate, preferably supported  by  a  witness  statement.
             Efforts should be made to obtain the respondent's agreement as
             to what was or was not argued or conceded before the  FtJ,  in
             advance of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal.   Otherwise,
             the scenario of the Upper Tribunal Judge having to have resort
             to  the  FtJ's  (usually)  manuscript  record  of  proceedings
             arises.

         17.  That is unsatisfactory for three immediately obvious  reasons.
             In the first place, whilst the FtJ can  be  expected  to  have
             made a note of the main submissions, it will not always be the
             case that everything that was said  in  submissions  would  be
             recorded.  Secondly, it may not even be possible to read  what
             the FtJ  has  written  in  manuscript.   Thirdly,  seeking  to
             establish what was advanced in submissions with  reference  to
             the FtJ's record of proceedings is not a process  that  should
             be undertaken during the hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
             with the Upper Tribunal Judge either reading  out  or  showing
             the parties the FtJ's  notes.  That  sort  of  'on  the  hoof'
             consideration of what may be a significant  issue  is  plainly
             undesirable.

         18.  In this case, the FtJ concluded that  the  appellant  was  not
             able to succeed under the Article 8 Rules  with  reference  to
             paragraph 276ADE, stating that the appellant did not claim  to
             come  within  any  aspect  of  the  Rules.   He  concluded  in
             particular, that the appellant had failed to show  that  "even
             with his condition" he would face very  significant  obstacles
             to integration in Nigeria.  He went on to state that there was
             no evidence that the healthcare system available  in  Nigeria,
             coupled with his resources and  friends'  evident  generosity,
             would leave him "so bereft of ability to occupy  himself  that
             he would suffer at a level envisaged by engagement and  breach
             of article 2 and 3".  He concluded that his condition did  not
             prevent a private or family life.

         19.  When considering Article 8 more widely, he concluded that  all
             the appellant's circumstances are "covered by the Rules".   In
             the alternative, he  found  that  the  appellant  did  have  a
             private life by reason of being able to live in the UK  for  a
             time, but he had not been in the  UK  continuously  since  his
             arrival, the  evidence  not  supporting  that  contention.  He
             concluded that the appellant had not been truthful on where he
             has spent all his time, referring to some of  the  documentary
             evidence that he had before him in this context.

         20.  Apparently in that same context, although it is  not  entirely
             clear, the FtJ then said as follows at [10]:

                  "Medical records only go so far and the medical profession
                  are not here as policemen for the funds of the NHS and  so
                  did not know in reality if someone is here lawfully or not
                  when administering or delivering  care.   The  point  that
                  they should do so according to their  contract  terms  and
                  the laws governing such care is redundant in the  face  of
                  actual practice in the NHS."

         21.  At [12] he found that the appellant's removal "would  plainly"
             amount to a breach of his  private  life.   In  the  following
             paragraph, referring to the balancing exercise that he had  to
             undertake, he said that the respondent had  established  on  a
             balance of probabilities that the decision  was  proportionate
             taking into account all factors relied on by the parties.

         22.  At [14] he said as follows:

                  "The  appellant  relied  on  a   series   of   unfortunate
                  circumstances as somehow providing him with a legal  claim
                  on the basis of compassionate circumstances.  The lack  of
                  criminal convictions and not being a burden on  the  State
                  are matters which I would have thought any  decent  person
                  in a foreign country would endeavour to achieve.  They  do
                  not provide a case for him remaining in the UK."

         23.  Finally, he said at [15] that:

                  "The respondent has the  sometimes  onerous  and  to  some
                  unpopular but respected duty of upholding the law in terms
                  of immigration.  The economic wellbeing of the UK and  the
                  enforcement of law depend in part upon it.   I  find  that
                  the rule of law and economic wellbeing is however  not  so
                  firmly in favour of not [sic] allowing  the  appellant  to
                  remain.  The respondents [sic] have been able to establish
                  that in this  particular  case  their  decision  has  been
                  proportionate and therefore I  find  it  lawful  in  their
                  refusal."

         24.  Whilst  it  is  evident  that  the  FtJ  recognised  that  the
             appellant's health was the foremost argument in support of the
             appeal, that seems to me to make it all the more striking that
             there is no reference whatever to any  particular  feature  of
             the medical evidence.  There is no assessment of it  in  terms
             of the nature or seriousness  of  the  appellant's  condition.
             There is no appraisal of the extent to which the appellant  is
             reliant on assistance in the UK from  friends.   There  is  no
             apparent consideration of how his health would affect  him  on
             return to Nigeria in terms of the progression of his illness.

         25.  It also seems to me that the lack  of  any  reference  to  the
             specifics of the medical evidence, combined with some  of  the
             phraseology used by the FtJ,  gives  the  impression  of  some
             cynicism in the FtJ's approach.  It is not that the FtJ should
             be expected to express sympathy for  the  appellant,  and  the
             decision of a judge must plainly  be  based  on  the  evidence
             within a sound appreciation of the relevant  legal  framework.
             However, if a lawful assessment of the merits of an appeal  in
             an Article 3 or Article 8 case on medical  grounds  is  to  be
             made, some recognition of the appellant's situation  in  terms
             of his health should be evident.

         26.  In the appellant's bundle before the  FtJ  there  was  medical
             evidence specific to him extending over about 25  pages.   The
             following is a summary of some of it.  In a  report  from  the
             Department  of  Neurogenetics  at  University  College  London
             Hospitals, dated 6 January 2015 by Professor Wood, a Professor
             of Clinical Neurology and Neurogenetics, it  states  that  the
             appellant was referred to the hospital by  his  GP  in  August
             2014.  The report refers to a diagnosis of autosomal  dominant
             cerebellar ataxia.  The additional features, for  example  the
             neuropathy, are said to  put  his  case  in  the  "complicated
             group".  It then states as follows:

                  "Unfortunately these  forms  of  ataxia  are  progressive,
                  disabling and incurable.  There are  in  fact  no  disease
                  modifying  treatments  and  the  prognosis   is   one   of
                  relentless decline...

                  As the examination  summary  above  reveals,  he  is  very
                  severely disabled and I am afraid there is no prospect  of
                  any substantial  improvements.   In  fact  his  swallowing
                  function will continue to deteriorate and his  limbs  will
                  become  slowly  but  steadily  more  ataxic.    Supportive
                  therapies  such  as  physiotherapy,  speech  and  language
                  therapy  are  attempted  to  help  mitigate  some  of  the
                  symptomatology but do not alter  the  natural  history  or
                  course of the disease.

                  In  addition,  as  has  been  witnessed  in  other  family
                  members, this is a disease of the severity  that  shortens
                  lifespan and I am afraid to say that  it  is  very  likely
                  indeed that this man's life expectancy  will  be  severely
                  reduced as a result of his ataxia.  It is  very  difficult
                  to be precise about the exact course of  the  disease  but
                  one would anticipate that within the  next  4-5  years  he
                  will become wheelchair-bound absolutely and then  survival
                  is really dependant on  additional  concommital  illnesses
                  such as pneumonias."

         27.   A  further  medical  report  from  the  same   hospital   and
             department, dated 30 December 2015 states that  the  appellant
             was seen on that day, having attended  in  a  wheelchair.   He
             reported that he had been using the wheelchair  regularly  for
             the past year.  Indoor, he used a frame but said that he found
             it very difficult to mobilise.  To summarise, under  the  sub-
             heading "Impression" it states that the appellant was "clearly
             experiencing worsening symptoms  in  terms  of  his  mobility,
             swallowing and speech together with a polyneuropathy".

         28.  Finally, in a report dated  15  January  2016  from  Professor
             Wood, it states that in the last year the  appellant  had  had
             worsening balance and limb coordination, resulting in  several
             falls.  He reported having difficulty swallowing and  frequent
             episodes  of  regurgitation  and  choking.   His  speech   was
             reported as being worse  and  more  difficult  to  understand.
             Professor Wood stated that those are compatible with the known
             diagnosis and the  underlying  cause.   At  the  time  of  the
             examination the appellant was said to have a very ataxic  gait
             and was very unsteady.  The report  states  that  the  overall
             impression was that  he  was  clearly  experiencing  worsening
             symptoms as regards mobility, swallowing and speech.

         29.   The  FtJ's  decision  does  not  identify   the   appellant's
             condition; does not describe it; and does not  refer  to  even
             one of the several medical reports put before him.

         30.  As far as can be deduced from the record of  proceedings  made
             by the FtJ, submissions were made in terms of the  appellant's
             condition being a deteriorating  one,  his  being  wheelchair-
             bound, and with reference being made  to  the  manner  of  his
             death  and  the  inevitability  of  it  as  a  result  of  his
             condition.

         31.  There is merit  in  the  submission  made  on  behalf  of  the
             respondent before me in terms of the difficulty in  succeeding
             in an Article 8 health case where the Article 3  threshold  is
             not met.  Furthermore, the arguments advanced on behalf of the
             appellant before me, both in submissions and  in  the  written
             grounds,  suffer  from  the  deficiencies  to  which  I   have
             referred.  Nevertheless, I am satisfied that the FtJ erred  in
             law in his assessment of the appeal under Article 8 because of
             the evident lack of engagement with the medical evidence.

         32.  That is so, even accepting the Article 3/Article 8 interaction
             in terms of health cases.  There is no reference by the FtJ to
             the issue of physical and moral integrity, which it  seems  to
             me is an obvious matter to have been considered in an  Article
             8 case of this nature.   The  proportionality  assessment  was
             manifestly lacking.

         33.  Accordingly, the FtJ's decision must be set aside.  I  do  not
             consider that it is appropriate for this appeal to be remitted
             to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  having  regard  to  the  Senior
             President's Practice  Statement  at  paragraph  7.2.   Such  a
             course was not suggested on behalf of  the  appellant;  indeed
             the contrary was suggested.

         34.  The only findings of fact that can be preserved, which are not
             infected by the error of law, relate to the FtJ's  conclusions
             at [10] in terms of the appellant's  continuous  residence  in
             the UK since 1989.

         35.  In the light of the decision  in  Paposhvili,  the  re-hearing
             will have to include a reappraisal of the case with  reference
             to Article 3.

         36.  The appellant's representatives in  particular,  are  to  have
             careful regard to the directions set out below.

                                 DIRECTIONS

             1.   No later than 7 days before the next date of hearing, the
                  appellant  is  to  file  and  serve   up-to-date   medical
                  evidence, which must include an  assessment  of  prognosis
                  and life expectancy.

             2.   In relation to any additional further evidence relied on,
                  such evidence must be filed and served  no  later  than  7
                  days before the next date of hearing.

             3.   In relation to any witness whom it is  proposed  to  give
                  oral evidence, there must be a witness statement drawn  in
                  sufficient detail to stand as evidence-in-chief, such that
                  there will be no need for any examination-in-chief  beyond
                  the adopting of any witness statement.

             4.   The appellant is to file and serve  a  skeleton  argument
                  setting out precisely the basis upon which the  appeal  is
                  advanced,  and  including  specific   reference   to   any
                  background material relied on."

 3. In the Further Directions dated 29 September 2017, in  respect  of  the
    adjourned hearing I said as follows:

         "Today's hearing on 29 September 2017  was  adjourned  because  the
         appellant did not  attend.  His  solicitors  have  written  to  the
         Tribunal stating that they have not been able to contact  him,  and
         asking to come off the record. It appears that  the  appellant  has
         had notice of the hearing. To my knowledge, he  has  not  contacted
         the Tribunal to say that he was unable to attend.

         However, as is clear from my Decision and Directions, the appellant
         has  a  serious  medical  condition   that   is   progressive   and
         deteriorating. For the moment, I cannot rule  out  the  possibility
         that his condition has  prevented  him  from  attending  or  giving
         instructions. Hence, I have  adjourned  the  hearing.  I  make  the
         directions below, taking into account  that  the  appellant  is  no
         longer represented, but also catering for the possibility  that  he
         may make contact with his former solicitors who may  then  continue
         to represent him.

         1.   No later than 7 days before the  next  date  of  hearing,  the
             appellant is to file and serve an up-to-date  medical  report,
             which must include a prognosis.

         2.    If  the  appellant's  former  representatives  again   become
             instructed to represent the appellant, the directions included
             in the Decision and Directions  must  be  complied  with  (and
             which will supersede direction 1. above)."

 4. As is apparent from those further directions I was  concerned  that  in
    the light of the appellant's serious medical condition there  was  some
    reason as to why he was unable to attend  the  hearing  and  unable  to
    communicate his inability to attend.

 5. However, in relation to the hearing before me on 18 January  2018,  the
    re-listed hearing, I decided that the time had come to proceed with the
    appeal notwithstanding the appellant's non-appearance.  I was satisfied
    that he had been given notice of the time and place of the hearing  and
    that there was no satisfactory explanation for his absence.  I did  not
    consider that it was appropriate to speculate in terms of his health as
    to why he had not appeared, although of course I sincerely hope that it
    is not his condition which has prevented his attendance. There  was  no
    explanation from him and there had been  no  explanation  from  him  or
    contact with the Tribunal after the hearing was adjourned on  the  last
    occasion and after he had  received  my  Further  Directions.   In  the
    circumstances, I proceed to re-make the decision on the  basis  of  the
    information presently before me.

 6. Given that I have set out in its entirety the  error  of  law  decision
    which fully explains the background to the appeal and  the  appellant's
    circumstances, no further context needs to be provided.

    Submissions

 7. Mr Bramble relied on the decision in EA & Ors (Article 3 medical cases -
     Paposhvili not applicable) [2017] UKUT 00445  (IAC),  submitting  that
    the threshold for the assessment of an Article 3 case remains  that  as
    set out in N v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  2  AC
    296 and GS (India) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 40.

 8. Although there was an issue under Article 8 in terms of the appellant's
    physical and moral integrity, it was for the appellant to establish his
    case.

 9. I was referred to some aspects  of  the  evidence  in  the  appellant's
    bundle in terms of relationships or support in the UK and  his  ability
    to be able to fund treatment should he be returned to Nigeria.  It  was
    submitted that the evidence in various respects was conflicting.

10. It was further  submitted  that  the  respondent's  decision  sets  out
    background material indicating that there  is  treatment  available  in
    Nigeria for the appellant's conditions.

11. It was argued that the appellant's circumstances do not meet  the  high
    threshold required for an Article 3 case to succeed  and  similarly  in
    terms of his health in relation to Article 8.

12. So far as private life under the Rules is concerned, the  evidence  did
    not establish that he had been in the UK for the  requisite  period  of
    twenty years.  He had been in the UK unlawfully for the duration of the
    time that he has been here, which is a factor which would weigh against
    him in the proportionality assessment outside the Rules.

13. The evidence did not establish any firm ties to the UK.   Even  if  the
    appellant was unable to attend the hearing, there was no evidence  from
    any other witness in support of his appeal.

    Assessment

14. The European Court of Human Rights in Paposhvili v Belgium, 13 December
    2016, ECtHR (Application No. 41738/10)  modifies  the  approach  to  be
    taken to Article 3 health cases.  However, it is clear from  EA  &  Ors
    that the ECtHR departed from the clear and consistent case law that  it
    identified in its own decision in stating at [181] that:

         "The Court concludes from this recapitulation of the case-law  that
         the application of Article 3 of the Convention only in cases  where
         the person facing expulsion is close to death, which has  been  its
         practice since the judgment  in  N.  v.  the  United  Kingdom,  has
         deprived aliens who are seriously ill, but whose condition is  less
         critical, of the benefit of that provision."

15. It was decided in EA & Ors that  the  decision  in  Paposhvili  is  not
    consistent with United Kingdom case law.   The  Tribunal  concluded  at
    [31] that it was not permissible for the Tribunal to  depart  from  the
    domestic authorities it cited.  Thus, in that paragraph,  the  Tribunal
    said that:

         "It is not  permissible  for  the  Tribunal  to  depart  from  this
         authority and, in particular, cannot do so  by  reliance  upon  the
         Paposhvili enlargement set out in  paragraph  183  of  the  ECtHR's
         judgment (see paragraph 6 above).  Hence, the recasting of  Article
         3 to include 'situations involving the removal of a  seriously  ill
         person in which substantial grounds have been shown  for  believing
         that he or she, although not at imminent risk of dying, would  face
         a real risk, on account of the absence of appropriate treatment  in
         the receiving country or the lack of access to such  treatment,  of
         being exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline  in  his
         or her state of health resulting  in  intense  suffering  or  to  a
         significant reduction in life expectancy' is  not  part  of  United
         Kingdom domestic law."

16. Having considered the decision in EA & Ors with care, I agree with  its
    reasoning and adopt it (and now see also the decision of the  Court  of
    Appeal in AM (Zimbabwe) & Anor v The Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 64).

17. It is not necessary for me to do other than refer to my summary of  the
    medical evidence set out in the error of  law  decision  at  [26]-[28].
    The appellant's condition is progressive, disabling and  incurable  and
    the prognosis is one  of  relentless  decline.   He  is  very  severely
    disabled and there is no prospect of any substantial improvements.

18. I do not say that there may  not  come  a  time  when  the  appellant's
    condition reaches the point where it can justifiably be said  that  his
    case meets the very high Article 3 threshold.  However, assessing  that
    aspect of the appeal on the basis of  the  evidence  before  me,  there
    being no further evidence beyond that to which I have  referred,  I  am
    not satisfied that the appellant has established that the  respondent's
    decision amounts to a breach of his rights under Article 3.

19. So far as Article 8 is concerned, I  consider  the  matter  first  with
    reference to the relevant Immigration  Rules.   Under  para  276ADE(1),
    aside from the suitability requirements of the Rules and  the  need  to
    have made a valid application, the appellant needs to  establish  under
    para 276ADE(1)(iii) that he has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  at
    least twenty years (discounting any period of  imprisonment).   He  has
    not been subject to any period  of  imprisonment,  indeed  no  criminal
    offences are recorded against him.  However,  as  I  indicated  in  the
    error of law decision, the FtJ found at [10] that the appellant had not
    established continuous residence in the  UK  since  1989.   That  is  a
    finding that, as I also indicated, can be preserved, it not having been
    infected by the error of law.  The evidence  before  the  FtJ  did  not
    establish continuous residence since 1989.

20. The appellant would then only be able to establish that  he  meets  the
    requirements of para 276ADE if he can establish under subpara (vi) that
    he has lived continuously in the UK for less  than  twenty  years,  but
    there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into
    Nigeria.  In this context I bear in mind the length of  time  that  the
    appellant has been in the UK, but he came here as an adult, aged  about
    24 years.  He has been in the UK, even if not continuously, since 1989,
    about 28 years.  However, that alone does not establish that  he  would
    have very significant obstacles to integrating  in  his  home  country,
    where he spent his youth and formative years.

21. In addition, regardless of his illness and whatever private life he has
    established in the UK, in his witness statement at [2] he  states  that
    his father is still alive in Nigeria, albeit  that  he  does  not  have
    contact with him.  He does not suggest that there is any reason  as  to
    why he could not re-establish contact with  him,  or  indeed  with  any
    other relatives, even if distant ones, on  his  return.   However,  the
    question  of  integration  does  not  actually  depend  on  his  having
    relatives there in any event.

22. I am not satisfied that the evidence establishes that  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in Nigeria.

23. It is however, necessary on  the  facts  of  this  appeal  to  consider
    Article 8 outside the confines of  the  Article  8  Rules.   There  are
    compelling circumstances which plainly require such an assessment.

24. S.117A-B of the 2002 Act provides as follows:




         "117A    Application of this Part

                (1)    This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                    required to determine whether a decision made under  the
                    Immigration Acts-

                    (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for  private
                        and family life under Article 8, and

                    (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6  of
                        the Human Rights Act 1998.

                (2)    In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the
                    court or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                    (a)    in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in
                        section 117B, and

                    (b)    in cases concerning the  deportation  of  foreign
                        criminals, to the considerations listed in  section
                        117C.

                (3)    In subsection (2),  "the  public  interest  question"
                    means the question of whether  an  interference  with  a
                    person's right to respect for private and family life is
                    justified under Article 8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
                cases

                (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                    in the public interest.

                (2)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,  because
                    persons who can speak English-

                    (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (3)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
                    persons-

                    (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (4)    Little weight should be given to-

                    (a)    a private life, or

                    (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                    that is established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the
                    person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

                (5)    Little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person's
                    immigration status is precarious.

                (6)    In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                    deportation, the public interest does  not  require  the
                    person's removal where-

                    (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental
                        relationship with a qualifying child, and

                    (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the United Kingdom."

25. The appellant has a private life in the UK, inevitably given the length
    of time that he has been here and what is indicated in the evidence  in
    terms of the treatment he has been receiving, apart from anything else.
     The respondent's decision would amount to an  interference  with  that
    private life, and that interference  will  have  consequences  of  such
    gravity as potentially to engage  the  operation  of  Article  8.   The
    decision is in accordance with the law and pursues  a  legitimate  aim,
    namely the maintenance of effective  immigration  control  which  is  a
    feature of the economic wellbeing of the country.

26. The appellant has been in the UK without leave since his arrival, or at
    least since the expiry of the leave to enter granted to him as a result
    of the entry clearance as a visitor. The decision letter states that he
    was subject to criminal proceedings in relation to his  entry  using  a
    passport in another  name,  although  also  states  that  there  is  no
    information in relation to whether there was any conviction. There  are
    clearly  public  interest  considerations  at  play  in  terms  of  the
    maintenance of  effective  immigration  control  being  in  the  public
    interest.  The evidence as to the appellant's financial independence is
    uncertain for reasons given below.  However, it is the case that little
    weight can be attached to his private life established when  he  is  in
    the UK unlawfully, as provided for in  s.117B(4).   The  appellant  can
    plainly speak English but he can obtain no positive advantage from that
    fact (see AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC).

27. His serious, progressive and incurable illness is plainly a  factor  to
    be considered.  Some  limited  information  in  relation  to  treatment
    available in Nigeria is referred to in  the  respondent's  decision  at
    [24]-[25].  The appellant has not adduced any evidence which  indicates
    that treatment is not available for him.  In any event, without  up-to-
    date medical evidence, which it is the  appellant's  responsibility  to
    provide, it is difficult to see how he can establish that he would  not
    have access to treatment in Nigeria.  The medications he is  receiving,
    or was at the time of  the  respondent's  decision,  do  appear  to  be
    available, and he is able to access physiotherapy on his  return.   The
    respondent's decision refers to the Nigeria - Medical Issues  Bulletin
    produced by the Home Office.

28. At page 14 of the appellant's bundle that was before the FtJ, there  is
    a letter from AXA PPP Healthcare, dated 15 January 2016,  referring  to
    the appellant having private healthcare.   That  is  some  evidence  to
    suggest that the appellant has  some  means,  although  there  is  very
    little other evidence of what his means are.   It  is  highly  unlikely
    that he is in employment, but nevertheless, it does appear that he  has
    private medical insurance.  On that basis,  there  is  some  reason  at
    least to believe that he has means to pay for treatment  on  return  to
    Nigeria should he need to.

29. The appellant's witness statement  refers  to  various  family  members
    being deceased, referring to them as  having  suffered  from  the  same
    condition as he does.  He refers to being wheelchair bound which  would
    make it difficult for him to  obtain  employment  in  Nigeria,  and  he
    states that his life would become very difficult as a result of his ill-
    health.  That much is probably indisputable.

30. He refers to two friends in the UK, the Rev  Divine  Josephs-Ayela  and
    Olukayode  Belo-Osagie,  and  both  have  provided  statements.   Those
    statements are dated 2 February 2016 and 28 January 2016, respectively.
     The former states that he has known the appellant since childhood  and
    that he is a personal friend of his.  He states  that  as  an  ordained
    evangelical minister he has endeavoured  to  assist  the  appellant  by
    supplying him with day-to-day  items,  groceries,  toiletries  and  the
    like.  He also states that he has  provided  support  in  the  form  of
    prayers and counselling.  Mr Olukayode Belo-Osagie stated he has  known
    the appellant for over 35 years.  He states that he has visited him  as
    often as he can and refers to the appellant's illness and his  previous
    good health.  Mr Bramble did raise the question about how the  Reverend
    Divine could be said to have known the appellant since childhood,  when
    the appellant only arrived in the UK in 1989 and  the  Rev  Divine  was
    born in Moseley in 1966.  However, the  appellant's  witness  statement
    says that Reverend Divine was born in the UK but spent his childhood in
    Nigeria.

31. I accept therefore, that the appellant has some limited private life in
    the UK in terms of his relationship with those friends, and, of course,
    in terms of the medical treatment he has been receiving and the support
    inevitably provided by those caring for  him.   However,  that  private
    life is not such as to mean that the  respondent's  decision  requiring
    him to return to Nigeria, he having no lawful basis of stay in the  UK,
    is a disproportionate interference with his private life.

32. As indicated in the decision in GS (India), it is rare for an Article 8
    case to succeed where it cannot succeed on Article 3 grounds.  The same
    considerations apply in terms of the  appellant's  physical  and  moral
    integrity as they do in relation to Article 3.  For example,  he  would
    be able to obtain treatment on return to Nigeria, and the evidence does
    not establish that he could not re-establish contact with  his  father,
    or indeed in fact any other more distant relatives or people  known  to
    him or associated with his family.

33. The appellant's circumstances in terms of his health inevitably attract
    a considerable degree of  sympathy.   However,  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence adduced by the appellant  in  support  of  his  appeal  it  is
    impossible to conclude that the respondent's decision to  refuse  leave
    to remain amounts to a breach of Article 3 or Article 8.  In  terms  of
    Article 8, I am satisfied that the respondent has established that  the
    decision is a proportionate response to the legitimate aim pursued.

34. In those circumstances, this appeal must be dismissed.







    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set aside, the decision is
    re-made dismissing the appeal under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.


Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek                                   15/03/18


