
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10793/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21st August 2014                             |On 11th September 2014     |
|Prepared 21st August 2014                       |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                           Mr muhammad israr butt
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z. Nasim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 17th January  1987.   He
    appealed against two decisions of the Respondent  dated  10th  February
    2014: (i) to refuse his application for leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and (ii) to give directions for  this  removal  under
    Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.   The  Appellant
    appealed on two grounds.  The first was that the Respondent's  decision
    breached the Immigration Rules Section E-LTRPT.2.4 which sets  out  the
    relationship requirements  the  Appellant  must  meet  to  qualify  for
    limited leave to remain as a parent.  The second ground  was  that  his
    removal would breach this country's obligations under Article 8  (right
    to respect for private and family life) of the Human Rights Convention.



2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 15th May  2006  with  entry
    clearance as a spouse extended until 19th January 2013.  An application
    outside the Immigration Rules made on 13th September 2013  was  refused
    on 19th November 2013 with no right of appeal.  A  further  application
    was made under Article 8 on  31st  January  2014.   The  basis  of  the
    Appellant's claim was that he had two British children by his wife from
    whom he was separated but had access rights to  the  children  and  was
    taking and intended to  continue  to  take  an  active  role  in  their
    upbringing.

3.   The refusal of the January 2014 application gave rise  to  the  present
    appeal which came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Stott sitting
    at Birmingham on 30th May 2014.  He dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    under  the  Rules  finding  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of  Section  E-LTRPT.2.4  but  allowed  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 on the grounds  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with the family life which the  Appellant
    had with his children.

4.   Both parties appealed that decision, the Respondent appealed  first  in
    time arguing that the Judge's analysis of Article 8 was flawed. It  did
    not take into account  that  the  appeal  on  immigration  grounds  had
    failed. The Judge who had made no reference to cases  such  as  Gulshan
    [2013] UKUT 00640 should have afforded weight  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant was seeking to be granted leave outside  the  Rules.  Shortly
    thereafter the Appellant cross-appealed on the basis that the Judge was
    wrong to have dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.   There
    was no separate Rule 24 notice by the  Appellant  in  relation  to  the
    Respondent's appeal under Article 8.


Immigration Law and Rules Relevant to the Appellant

5.   Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules sets out the  requirements  to  be
    met by a person seeking limited leave  to  remain  as  a  parent.   The
    burden of proof of showing that the requirements of the  paragraph  are
    met rests upon the Appellant and the standard of  proof  is  the  usual
    civil standard of  balance  of  probabilities.  Section  E-LTRPT.2.4(a)
    provides that the Appellant must provide evidence that they have either
    sole parental responsibility for the child  or  access  rights  to  the
    child and must provide evidence that they  are  taking  and  intend  to
    continue to  take  an  active  role  in  the  child's  upbringing.  The
    Appellant was not refused under any other provision of the  Immigration
    Rules for example financial requirements.

The Refusal

6.   The Respondent was satisfied that the Appellant  was  no  longer  in  a
    relationship  with  the  children's  mother  but  did  not  feel   that
    sufficient evidence had been provided to show that  the  Appellant  had
    access rights to the children or was taking an  active  role  in  their
    upbringing.  He had provided a typed and signed statement from his wife
    stating  that  he  had  regular  contact  with  the  children  but  the
    Respondent did not consider that that was  sufficient  evidence  of  an
    active role in the children's lives.   No  further  evidence  had  been
    provided and the Respondent was  not  satisfied  the  Appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the  children  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

7.   The Respondent found that the Appellant  failed  to  meet  the  private
    life considerations in  paragraph  276ADE  not  least  because  of  the
    relatively short period of  time  that  he  had  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Appellant had overstayed for a period of fourteen  months
    between the expiry of his entry clearance in 2008 and  the  application
    date of his first leave to remain application in the UK  on  16th  June
    2009.

The Proceedings at First Instance

8.   Judge Stott noted that there was no formal court order  in  respect  of
    the contact the Appellant  had  with  his  children  but  the  evidence
    indicated an informal arrangement whereby access was  granted  provided
    the Appellant paid some maintenance.  The Appellant told the Judge that
    he was now paying his wife regularly either every  week  or  every  two
    weeks whatever money he could afford.  Access would be  denied  to  him
    should he fail to provide such funding.

9.   The Judge commented at paragraph 10 of  his  determination  that  there
    was no guidance on what constituted taking and intending to continue to
    take an active role in the children's  upbringing.   Access  alone  was
    insufficient.  The Judge wrote:

         "I consider that for him to satisfy that particular aspect he needs
         to provide evidence that he is involved in  joint  decision  making
         with his estranged  wife  in  respect  of  medical  or  educational
         matters or  other  issues  directly  affecting  the  lives  of  his
         children.  No such evidence has been produced and because  of  that
         lack of  evidence  I  do  not  find  that  he  has  satisfied  that
         particular provision."

10.  The Judge dismissed the appeal under the Rules and went on to  consider
    the appeal under Article 8.  It was not an option for the  children  to
    return to Pakistan with the Appellant.   They  were  British  citizens,
    their mother was the prime carer and they lived with her  but  saw  the
    Appellant on a regular basis.  The best interests of the  children  who
    had a strong attachment to their father  meant  that  the  relationship
    could not be continued by other  means  of  communication  such  as  by
    telephone or internet.   The  relationship  needed  to  be  of  a  more
    personal nature.  The Judge concluded at paragraph 15:

         "Although not  amounting  to  playing  an  active  role  in  their
         upbringing for the  purpose  of  the  Rules  I  consider  that  his
         presence and their ability to continue to be with him on a  regular
         basis is in their best interests and as that is a primary factor to
         be taken into account I give it due weight."

The Hearing Before Me

11.  What the Judge did not do was to weigh in the  balance  the  respective
    rights of the parties including the  best  interests  of  the  children
    against the fact  that  the  Appellant  had  no  leave  to  remain  and
    according to the Judge could not satisfy the Immigration Rules.   As  I
    explained during the hearing, had the  matter  turned  on  the  Judge's
    treatment of Article 8 I would have found a material error  of  law  in
    the determination.  The Judge did not take the balancing exercise  into
    account when coming to the decision he did under  Article  8.   If  the
    determination was set aside the proportionality of the interference  in
    the relationship between the Appellant and his children would  need  to
    be reassessed. However if the Appellant was right and he  was  entitled
    to succeed under the Immigration Rules the question of Article 8 became
    irrelevant.

12.  In submissions to me Counsel for the Appellant argued  that  the  Judge
    had made two errors in his assessment of whether  the  Appellant  could
    come within Section
    E-LTRPT.2.4.  The first was to  assume  that  the  Rules  required  the
    Appellant to have joint decision making with his estranged wife and the
    second was to assume that access alone was insufficient.  The  evidence
    received by the Judge was that the daughter had stayed  overnight  with
    the Appellant.  The contact the Appellant  was  having  was  more  than
    merely contact  at  a  contact  centre.   He  was  providing  financial
    support.  This was not a case  where  the  Judge  had  found  that  the
    Appellant was using the children as a vehicle to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Judge had erred in law since he had  in  effect  required
    the Appellant to show that he had joint responsibility.  The  Appellant
    had parental responsibility.  The evidence that the Appellant had taken
    the children to school, picked them up, took them to  the  mosque,  the
    park, shopping and staying overnight was unchallenged and  showed  that
    the Appellant was actively involved in his children's upbringing.

13.  Guidance issued by the Respondent to Immigration Officers "Family  Life
    as a Parent of a Child in the UK Version 10" stated that the purpose of
    this route (which replaced the old paragraph 248) was to allow a parent
    with access rights to continue to live in the United Kingdom.   It  was
    not intended to be relied upon by a person who remained  in  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with the  other  parent,  it  was  to  help
    parental access to children when the parental relationship  had  broken
    down.  It was aimed at single parents who did not live with  the  child
    but had access rights to that child.  The  expression  "access  rights"
    used in the Immigration Rules simply meant a right to enjoy access,  it
    was not necessary to produce a formal contact order.  In any  event  if
    the  parties  had  agreed  contact  between  themselves  the  no  order
    principle under the Children Act 1989 would apply and there would be no
    contact order as one would not be necessary.

14.  For the Respondent it was queried what the expression  "access  rights"
    meant.  It could not be the case that one was  entitled  to  stay  here
    just because one had fathered a child.  This was an application made on
    form FLR(O) outside the Rules.  It was not an application made  on  the
    basis of Section E of Appendix FM but the Respondent  had  nevertheless
    agreed to consider the application on that basis.   The  Appellant  had
    been found by the  Judge  not  to  be  playing  an  active  role.   The
    relationship between the Appellant and his wife appeared to be somewhat
    confrontational.  The Appellant only saw the children when he had  some
    money to give.

Findings

15.  I have to decide whether the Judge made a  material  error  of  law  in
    relation to either of his two findings. I deal first with  his  finding
    that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the  Immigration  Rules.    The
    difficulty with Section E-LTRPT.2.3  is  that  there  is  a  dearth  of
    authority on what these provisions mean in practice.  The Appellant can
    clearly satisfy sub-paragraph (b) since the children are residing  with
    their mother who is a British citizen and as she and the Appellant  are
    not in a relationship she is not the  Appellant's  partner.   Next  the
    Appellant must provide evidence  that  he  has  access  rights  to  the
    children and that he is taking and  intends  to  continue  to  take  an
    active role in the children's upbringing.  The Judge found at paragraph
    9 that the Appellant was enjoying  access  to  the  two  children.  The
    Children Act 1989 enshrines the "no order"  principle  and  given  that
    both parents are content for access to continue as  at  present  it  is
    difficult to see why a court would feel the need to make an order.  The
    absence of an order is thus not a  bar  to  an  application  under  the
    Section.

16.  The issue before the Judge  was  whether  the  Appellant  had  provided
    evidence that he was taking and intended to continue to take an  active
    role in the children's upbringing.  The Judge recorded the  Appellant's
    evidence on his involvement with the children and did not find  against
    that.  What the Appellant described was taking place such  as  that  he
    collected the children from school.  Was what the  Appellant  described
    sufficient to amount to taking an active role in their  upbringing  and
    did he evidence an intention to continue to take such a role?  For  the
    Appellant Counsel urged me to find that the Appellant could demonstrate
    this.  For the Respondent it was urged upon me that the Judge was right
    in saying that was not enough.

17.  The  difficulty  in  this  case  is  that  there  is  no  authority  or
    explanation of what is meant by  the  phrase  "taking  and  intends  to
    continue to take an active role in the children's upbringing".  In  the
    absence of that it has to be given a commonsense meaning.  A father who
    has contact including  staying  contact  which  is  beneficial  to  the
    children and thus is in their best interests (which the Judge found  it
    to be) is  in  my  view  playing  an  active  role  in  the  children's
    upbringing.  He is taking them  to  activities  which  will  help  them
    develop as individuals.  The Judge found that the best chance  for  the
    children to develop was for their relationship with the Appellant to be
    of a more personal nature that is direct face to  face  contact  rather
    than indirect contact.  That would also suggest that it should be  more
    than merely seeing the  children  from  time  to  time.   Even  if  the
    Appellant is  not  involved  in  significant  decisions  regarding  the
    upbringing of the children he is involved and intends  to  continue  to
    take an active role in their upbringing.  Some weight has to  be  given
    to the Appellant's evidence that he  was  paying  maintenance  for  the
    children.

18.  On the facts as found by the Judge, the Appellant was able  to  satisfy
    Section E of Appendix FM although I accept that it would be helpful for
    some clearer guidance on what is meant by the phrase "taking an  active
    role in the  children's  upbringing"  in  the  context  of  immigration
    control.

19.  There were two errors in the  Judge's  determination.   The  first  was
    material, the second as it turned out was not.  The material error  was
    to find that the Appellant could not satisfy the Immigration Rules when
    I find that he could on the basis  of  the  evidence  received  by  the
    Judge.  The second error which turns out not  to  be  material  is  the
    Judge's finding that if the Appellant could  not  meet  the  Rules  the
    appeal  should  be  allowed  under  Article  8  given  there   was   no
    consideration of the weight  to  be  attached  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had no leave to remain in this country and (as the Judge  had
    found) did not succeed under the Immigration Rules.  As  the  Appellant
    did succeed under the Rules I do not need to assess the proportionality
    of interference since there will be  none.  I  set  aside  the  Judge's
    determination and remake  the  decision  by  allowing  the  Appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside.  I have remade the  decision  by  allowing  the
Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

I do not disturb the decision of the Judge not to make a fee award  in  this
case.

Signed this 10th day of September 2014


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


