
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/10921/2013
     IA/10923/2013
     IA/10791/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  17 December 2013                          |On 8 April 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     MR C.M.G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          BALA KRISHNA PARVATANENI
                           NAGA VEYKATA MOTAPARTHI
                        BHARAT KUMAR REDDY ANDAPALLY
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the appellant: Mr P. Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondents: Mr A. Mehta, Malik & Malik Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State.  For
       clarity,  in  the  body  of  this  determination  we  refer  to  the
       respondents as the Claimants.

    2. Thus, the Claimants are citizens of India born on 2 August 1984,  15
       February 1990 and 15 May 1986. The first and third  Claimants  ("the
       main Claimants") are  joint  applicants  as  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
       Migrants. The second Claimant is the wife of the first Claimant  and
       thus a dependant in the application for further leave to remain.

    3. The main Claimants applied for further leave to  remain  as  Tier  1
       (Entrepreneur) Migrants. In  decisions  dated  20  March  2013,  the
       applications were refused on the basis that the main Claimants  were
       not entitled to the necessary points for Attributes under Appendix A
       in terms of advertising, evidence in the form of a  Companies  House
       Current Appointment report and correspondingly in relation to funds.
       Their appeals against the refusal of their applications were allowed
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox in a determination  promulgated  on
       24 September 2013.

    4. At [13] Judge Fox stated that he could  find  no  reference  in  the
       Immigration Rules to advertising. At [15]-[16] he referred  to  what
       could be described as inadequacies in the evidence provided  by  the
       Claimants. At [14] he concluded that the appropriate course was  for
       the  matter  to  be  remitted  to  the  Secretary   of   State   for
       consideration in the light of  the  evidential  flexibility  policy,
       citing Rodriguez (Flexibility Policy) [2013] UKUT  00042  (IAC).  At
       [18] he expressed the view that the Secretary of  State's  decisions
       appeared to be "ambiguous  in  relation  to  the  substance  of  the
       Immigration Rules" and ultimately he allowed the appeals  so  as  to
       allow the Secretary  of  State  to  reconsider  her  decisions.  The
       appeals in so far as they concerned  the  decisions  to  remove  the
       Claimants  under  section  47  of  the   Immigration,   Asylum   and
       Nationality Act 2006 were also allowed on the basis that the removal
       decisions being made contemporaneously with  the  refusals  to  vary
       leave to remain were not in accordance with the law.

    5. Mr Mehta accepted that there was an error  of  law  in  Judge  Fox's
       decision in so far as he found that there were no requirements as to
       advertising when it  is  clear  from  Appendix  A  that  there  are.
       Nevertheless, he  submitted  that  there  was  advertising  evidence
       before Judge Fox which he should have taken into account. He further
       contended that when the joint  application  was  made  by  the  main
       Claimants there was confusion as to whose name to provide. The  name
       is mentioned on the 192.com name creation. It was however,  accepted
       that the leaflets and cards that were before the judge were not  put
       before the Secretary of State as they came into existence after  the
       appeal. He relied on 'evidential flexibility'.

    6. Mr Deller accepted that if the issue of advertising had been decided
       in favour of the appellants, the other requirements of Appendix A in
       terms of finances under Attributes would have allowed the  Claimants
       to secure the requisite points.

    7. At issue was whether the Claimants had met the Rules in relation  to
       advertising, although as explained  below,  that  is  not  the  only
       relevant requirement in these appeals. The requirements of paragraph
       245DD relating to entry clearance as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur),  as
       they applied at the dates of these  decisions,  and  in  so  far  as
       relevant, provide as follows:

           245DD Requirements for leave to remain
           To qualify for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
           Migrant under this rule, an applicant must meet the requirements
           listed below. If the applicant meets these  requirements,  leave
           to remain will be granted. If the applicant does not meet  these
           requirements, the application will be refused


           Requirements:


           (a) The applicant must not fall for refusal  under  the  general
           grounds for refusal, and must not be an illegal entrant.


           (b)  The applicant must  have  a  minimum  of  75  points  under
           paragraphs 35 to 53 of Appendix A.


           (c)  The applicant must  have  a  minimum  of  10  points  under
           paragraphs 1 to 15 of Appendix B.


           (d) The applicant  must  have  a  minimum  of  10  points  under
           paragraphs 1 to 2 of Appendix C.

    8. Under Appendix A, paragraph 36 under  the  subheading  "Attributes",
       provides that available points  for  entry  clearance  or  leave  to
       remain are to be found in  Table  4.  These  amount  to  75  points.
       Appendix A at 41SD(c) provides that if the   applicant  is  applying
       under the provisions in (d) in Table 4, which these Claimants  were,
       he must also provide:

          "...
           (iii) one or more of the following specified documents:

          (1) Advertising or  marketing  material,  including  printouts  of
          online advertising, that has been published locally or nationally,
          showing the applicant's name (and the  name  of  the  business  if
          applicable) together with the business activity.

          (2) Article(s) or online links to article(s)  in  a  newspaper  or
          other publication showing the applicant's name (and  the  name  of
          the business if applicable) together with the business activity,

          (3) Information from a trade fair(s), at which the  applicant  has
          had a stand or  given  a  presentation  to  market  his  business,
          showing the applicant's name (and the  name  of  the  business  if
          applicable) together with the business activity, or

          (4) personal registration with a  UK  trade  body  linked  to  the
          applicant's occupation; and


    9. In relation to the second Claimant, the  decision  in  her  case  is
       entirely dependant on the success or otherwise of the appeals of the
       main Claimants. Paragraph 319C governed her application  but  it  is
       not necessary for us to set out its terms.

   10. It is clear that there are requirements as  to  advertising  and  Mr
       Mehta was correct to concede that there was an error of law in  this
       respect. Given that it is established that there is an error of  law
       in the decision of the First-tier judge, we set aside  his  decision
       and proceed to re-make it. The question is whether, as was submitted
       on their behalf, the Claimants met the requirements of the Rules  in
       terms of advertising.

   11. In support of  their  application  the  Claimants  produced  to  the
       Secretary  of  State  leaflets  advertising  their  business,   Bakt
       Services Ltd, seemingly offering support  services  for  businesses.
       They also produced an on-line  print  out  from  192.com,  again  in
       relation to Bakt Services Ltd, this time relating to an off-licence.
       Neither of these pieces of advertising material had  the  Claimants'
       names on them, as the Rules require.

   12. The skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
       dispute what is said in the notice of decision about the failure  to
       comply with the rules in terms of the Claimants' names not being  on
       the advertisements, but  stating  that  they  had  advertised  their
       business in more than one place and that the Respondent should  have
       requested further evidence or done an on-line check.

   13. In submissions Mr Mehta said that there had been  other  advertising
       material before the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  accepted  that  this
       material was not sent in support of  the  applications  for  further
       leave. In the bundle that was before the First-tier  Tribunal  is  a
       copy of a business card in the name of Bakt Services Ltd, a  further
       192.com printout and the same type  of  leaflet  that  was  sent  in
       support of  the  application,  this  time  with  the  names  of  the
       Claimants on all the material. There was also what purported to be a
       copy of a customer survey but none of this material was submitted in
       support of the application.

   14. Mr Mehta explained that because the Claimants were  making  a  joint
       application they were confused as to whose name should be  provided.
       We are rather sceptical about that  explanation.  If  the  Claimants
       knew that a name had to be provided on the advertising  material  it
       is unlikely that they would have chosen to put no name  rather  than
       the name of one or other of the main Claimants. In  any  event,  the
       explanation takes the Claimants' case no further. Nor does the other
       explanation for the failure to comply with the  Rules,  namely  that
       because they were starting a new business they were unfamiliar  with
       the Rules, particularly bearing in mind that on the application form
       the Claimants stated that their application was being dealt with  by
       legal representatives, Malik  and  Malik,  a  well-known  specialist
       immigration firm of solicitors. They are also named on the notice of
       appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

   15. The Claimants rely  on  evidential  flexibility,  specifically  with
       reference to Rodriguez (Flexibility Policy) [2013] UKUT 00042 (IAC).
       However, that decision was overruled  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
       Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2. Mr Mehta was not able to  refer  us  to
       the terms of any evidential flexibility policy which existed at  the
       time of these decisions, or to explain the basis  on  which  such  a
       policy ought to have been applied to the specific  circumstances  of
       the Claimants' case. We have considered  evidential  flexibility  as
       set out in the Immigration Rules at paragraph 245AA but its terms as
       they applied at the relevant time do not assist the Claimants.

   16. Even if the evidential flexibility policy could be said to have been
       applicable in terms  of  the  missing  information  (the  Claimants'
       names) on the advertising material, the application could  not  have
       succeeded in any event  because  they  did  not  provide  a  Current
       Appointment report, a matter raised in the notice  of  decision  and
       not disputed by the Claimants as being a  necessary  requirement  of
       the Rules which they needed to have  satisfied  (under  Appendix  A,
       paragraph 46-SD(f)(ii)).

   17. The skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal refers  to  the
       Current Appointment report which it states was  submitted  with  the
       application, referring to the report created on 18 January 2013  and
       which is in the appellants' unpaginated  bundle.  There  is  another
       Current Appointment report dated 4 April 2013,  and  a  further  one
       dated 13 June 2013 on the Tribunal file, sent on 18 June 2013 to the
       Tribunal. Although the First-tier judge referred to the  18  January
       and 4 April reports,  the  Secretary  of  State's  bundle  does  not
       contain any copy of a Current Appointment report submitted with  the
       application and there is no evidence that it was submitted. Although
       the  application  forms  in  respect  of  the  main  Claimants  have
       indicated that a printout of the  Current  Appointment  report  from
       Companies House was submitted with the application, we think it more
       likely that this is a reference to the  application  to  register  a
       company, a copy of which is in the respondent's bundle. It would  be
       surprising if a Current Appointment report had been  submitted  with
       the application given that the Secretary of State gave  its  absence
       as one of the reasons for refusal.

   18. Although  the  Claimants'  skeleton  argument  states  that  anyone,
       including the Home Office and the  judge,  can  obtain  the  Current
       Appointment  report,  that  does  not  absolve  the  Claimants  from
       providing the required documents in order to discharge the burden of
       proof which is on them. The  comment  about  anyone  being  able  to
       obtain a Current Appointment report  rather  belies  the  suggestion
       that it was sent with the application.

   19. The resolution of this appeal does not however, depend on whether or
       not a Current Appointment report was submitted with the  application
       given the failure of the Claimants to meet the requirements  of  the
       Rules in terms of advertising  and  that  the  Claimants  have  been
       unable to point us to the terms of the evidential flexibility policy
       which is said to have applied at the relevant time.

   20. We are not satisfied that the Claimants have established  that  they
       meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for leave  to  remain
       as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants. Consequently, the  appeals  under
       the Immigration Rules are dismissed.

   21. Although the grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  raise
       human rights  in  general  terms,  neither  those  grounds  nor  the
       Claimants'  skeleton  argument  contain  any  detailed  argument  in
       relation to Article 8 of the ECHR.

   22. We re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal of  each  Claimant.



Decision

   23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
       set aside and re-made, dismissing the appeal of each respondent.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 7/04/14
