
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA104002015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11 March 2016                         |On 23 May 2016                    |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                   Mr MOHAMED MAHMOUD FARAG MOHAMED SULTAN
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Counsel. No5 Chambers (Instructed on
                    a Public Access Basis)
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy  dated  11
    November 2015.  The appeal relates to a decision and reasons of  First-
    tier Tribunal Alis promulgated on 6 July 2015. The Judge had  dismissed
    the appeal based on the Immigration Rules  and  on  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

2.    The background the appeal is that the  Appellant  is  married  to  Mrs
    Susan Collins. They had met online and then later married  in  2010  in
    Egypt. They have no children together but  Mrs  Collins  has  an  adult
    daughter who lives with the couple.

3.    The Appellant's grounds of appeal against  the  Judge's  decision  had
    contended:

   1) There was an error of law in respect of the  insurmountable  obstacles
      test relating to EX.1 and EX.2 of the Immigration Rules.
   2) The wrong question was asked/there was a  failure  to  apply  the  law
      relating to insurmountable obstacles. The Judge  had  to  ask  himself
      whether Mrs Collins was afraid of being killed and whether  that  fear
      itself constituted an insurmountable obstacle; and
   3) The Article 8 case outside of the Rules was not properly assessed.

4.    When granting permission  to  appeal  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McCarthy observed that the grounds were of some length  but  that
    there was merit in the central premise that the Judge may have erred in
    his understanding of the meaning  of  "insurmountable  obstacles".  The
    references to the case law from the Article 8 cases was used instead of
    the specific provision in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM  regarding  how
    that phrase is to be interpreted as used in paragraph EX.1.

5.    At the hearing before me Mr Nicholson explained his grounds of  appeal
    in further detail. In reality the submission comes to  this,  when  one
    looks to section EX to Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  and  when
    accepting that this is a case in which the Appellant is  in  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship  with  a  British  partner  in  the  United
    Kingdom, then insurmountable obstacles test has  to  be  considered  in
    accordance with EX 1 and EX.2.  That provides,


      EX.1. This paragraph applies if

      (a)......
      (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
      partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in the UK
      or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and there
      are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
      continuing outside the UK.

      EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable
      obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would be
      faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their family
      life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would
      entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.



6.    It is asserted that one has to  take  into  account  the  difficulties
    which would be faced by the Appellant or his wife.  In  particular  the
    Appellant's wife's fear of going to Egypt because of what she has  seen
    happen in  Tunisia,  Egypt  and  other  places  as  identified  in  the
    Government's travel advice and indeed what she has seen in  the  up-to-
    date travel advice about staying away from such  places.  Mr  Nicholson
    says that the simple point was that this was capable  of  amounting  to
    insurmountable obstacles. He said that the Respondent's own guidance as
    referred to at paragraph 31(5) of the Judge's decision and  highlighted
    at paragraphs 16 and 17 of his grounds showed this was so. The test was
    'harsh' but there were limitations to it.  He  said  that  Mrs  Collins
    believes she will die if she goes  to  Egypt.  That  was  therefore  an
    insurmountable obstacle.

7.    Mr Nicholson submitted that this was very different  compared  to  the
    many people  who  go  on  holiday  each  year  to  Egypt  behind  gated
    communities whereas Mrs Collins   would have to live in  the  community
    there. She has a real fear of doing so. That was "very  real  hardship"
    for her which ought to have been properly taken into account  with  the
    definition set out in EX.2.

8.    Finally Mr Nicholson said that permission had  also  been  granted  on
    the basis of there being inadequate reasoning regarding the Appellant's
    witness statement at paragraph 40. The Judge had referred to a range of
    cases but did not set out why that evidence was not accepted.

9.    Mr Harrison in his submissions said that he  relied  on  the  Rule  24
    Reply and that specifically  stated  why  the  Respondent  opposed  the
    appeal. Mr Harrison said that at paragraph 39 the Judge said that there
    was a choice to be made as to whether Mrs Collins stayed in the  United
    Kingdom or went to Egypt. It was clear that the  Judge  had  identified
    and was cognisant that there were other remedies regarding Mrs  Collins
    going to Egypt. It was not clear if she had ever been  there.  Hundreds
    of thousands go on holiday to Egypt each year. They don't just go for a
    visit. They go for a holiday. The FCO says that there is no  danger  in
    the coastal areas.

10.   I heard from Mr Nicholson in reply who said that paragraph 39  of  the
    decision was the point picked up by Judge McCarthy when he had  granted
    permission. In respect of  holidaymakers,  there  were  guards  outside
    gated communities so that  was  not  an  answer.  This  case  was  fact
    specific. Mr Nicholson then took me through more of the case law. I was
    urged to allow the appeal. There were issues since the  hearing  before
    the Judge in respect of Mrs Collins' health.

11.   I had reserved my decision.

12.   I conclude that despite the careful and detailed decision and  reasons
    of the experienced Judge, there is a material error of law. I have come
    to this decision with some hesitation because I had  initially  thought
    that there was no material error of law. Mr Nicholson has persuaded  me
    that there is.
13.    EX.2.  does  indeed  make  it  clear  that  the   "very   significant
    difficulties" is assessed by reference to the  Appellant  but  also  by
    reference to the effect  on  Mrs  Collins.  I  accept  the  Appellant's
    argument that there is a difference in going on a holiday to one of the
    coastal areas in Egypt which has armed guards and  the  like,  compared
    with living in the community in a different  area.  The  risk  is  very
    different. Although it is possible that at least a  part  of  what  Mrs
    Collins' fears might not be objectively well founded, the fact is  that
    it appears she has a genuine subjective fear of going to Egypt.  In  my
    judgment, the fear has to have some objective basis, just as it does in
    a protection claim (absent some exceptional expert evidence  explaining
    the reasons why the subjective fear would cause harm) and Mr  Nicholson
    is correct that there does seem to be such fear in  this  case,  albeit
    the fear Mrs Collins has is a heightened fear over and beyond what some
    holidaymakers might feel.

14.    Therefore, I conclude that Judge McCarthy when he granted  permission
    correctly and appropriately  identified  the  material  error  of  law.
    Namely that the Judge erred by dismissing the appeal and  not  applying
    EX.2 in assessing whether family  life  could  continue  overseas.  The
    answer may well have been different if that test and question had  been
    applied in the particular context of this case. This appears  to  be  a
    relatively unusual case.

15.   As a consequence and despite Mr Harrison's  helpful  submissions  with
    his reliance on the Rule 24 Reply, I conclude that there is a  material
    error of law.

16.    Having  considered  the  grounds  of  appeal  as  a  whole  and   the
    submissions made in respect of the findings there will  be  a  complete
    rehearing at the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal  Judge  involved  the  making  of  a
material error of law.

The Appellant's  appeal  is  remitted  to  be  reheard  at  the  First  Tier
Tribunal.

An anonymity direction is not made.





Signed                                       Date: 11 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


