

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10720/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Determination Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2014                    |On 20 November 2014      |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MUDASSAR FAROOQ
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondents:    Dr Thorndike (Counsel)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant ('the SSHD') appeals against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge De Haney dated 14 July 2014 in  which  the  respondent's
    appeal was allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.




Background




 2. The background to this case can be summarised for the purposes of  this
    appeal.  The respondent entered the UK as a spouse in 2011  with  leave
    to remain until 10 February 2014.  In order to obtain  leave  to  enter
    the  respondent  relied  upon  an  English  language  test  certificate
    ('certificate') dated 24 April 2010.  In January 2014  he  made  an  in
    time application for further leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his
    marriage.  He deliberately did not apply for indefinite leave to remain
    because he knew that he did not have a current  English  language  test
    certificate, which he was working towards.  He did  have  and  included
    the older 2010 certificate (however this was only valid for two years).
     His application was refused for one reason -  he  did  not  provide  a
    relevant valid certificate.



 3. Judge De Haney heard evidence from the  respondent  and  his  wife  and
    found them to be entirely credible [11].  He noted that the  respondent
    met every aspect of the requirements of the Immigration Rules save  for
    the issue of the certificate [12].  The Judge accepted that as  at  the
    date of hearing but not at the date of decision the respondent had been
    able to produce a certificate with a level of proficiency that entitled
    him to indefinite leave to remain [15].  The Judge directed himself  to
    Gulshan (Art 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC)
    [18] and then went on to set out why he regarded this as a sufficiently
    compelling case to allow the appeal under Article 8 [19].


Procedural history


 4. The respondent appealed against this decision on  the  basis  that  the
    Judge failed to provide reasons why his circumstances are compelling or
    exceptional, and also failed to take into account that  the  respondent
    had the option of returning to Pakistan in order  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance, as opposed to permanently.


 5. When granting permission on 9 September 2014 Judge J M  Lewis  observed
    that whilst the  Judge  recognised  the  need  to  identify  compelling
    circumstances, he failed to do so.


 6.  The  matter  now  comes  before  me  to  decide  whether  or  not  the
    determination contains an error of law.


Error of law


 7. Ms Johnstone relied upon the SSHD's grounds of appeal.   She  submitted
    that the Judge erred in law in seeking to fill  a  lucana  he  believed
    existed within the Rules [17].  Dr Thorndike accepted  that  the  Judge
    had erred in law in this respect  but  submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    nevertheless identified other compelling factors to be found throughout
    the determination.


 8. I accept that the Judge has made reference to a number of factors  that
    may be viewed as compelling.  These  include  the  credibility  of  the
    witnesses, the fact that at all material times the respondent  had  the
    requisite language skills, even though there  was  a  period  when  the
    certificate was no longer valid this was cured by the date of  hearing,
    the impact of a refusal of the decision would have serious consequences
    upon the  respondent  and  his  wife  and  they  received  poor  advice
    concerning the need for an updated certificate.


 9. However the Judge focussed his decision upon a 'lacuna which should  be
    filled'.  The Judge was plainly unimpressed with  the  absence  of  any
    flexibility within the rules concerning this type of issue and he  made
    his position very clear [17 and 19].  The Judge seems to have  regarded
    this as a particularly compelling factor. Whilst the Judge was entitled
    to  allow  the  appeal  under  Article  8  if  there   are   compelling
    circumstances, in my judgment he was  not  entitled  to  predicate  his
    decision on his view that the Rules themselves were unreasonable.   The
    Judge also erred in law in failing to consider the possibility  of  the
    respondent applying for entry clearance in order to return to  the  UK.
    The Judge seems to have wrongly assumed that  the  respondent  and  his
    wife would have to give up everything  in  the  UK  in  order  to  live
    permanently in Pakistan or Abu Dhabi.


Re-making the decision


10. Both representatives agreed that I should re-make the decision.  It was
    also agreed that the  respondent  cannot  meet  the  Immigration  Rules
    because his certificate was not available when he made the application.




11. I accept that the respondent's removal  will  breach  his  private  and
    family life and that it will  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  to
    engage Article 8.    I  bear  in  mind  that  the  Judge  regarded  the
    respondent and his wife as credible.   Dr Thorndike asked  me  to  find
    that the consequences of not allowing  the  appeal  would  be  drastic.
    That is because he argued that the parties would not be  able  to  meet
    the relevant financial requirements under the current rules.  They were
    able to do so under the old rules but the transitional provisions would
    no longer apply (as they would have done for  the  extension  of  leave
    application).  I do not accept that I can make a clear finding on  this
    issue on the material available to  me.   I  have  been  provided  with
    mostly net figures when gross figures must be used.  It is very unclear
    whether or not the  respondent  will  be  able  to  meet  the  relevant
    threshold, although it seems likely that the wife's current income  may
    be just below the relevant threshold.  It is  however  undoubtedly  the
    case that the respondent has been in the  UK  for  a  number  of  years
    lawfully with his settled wife and to expect him to return to  Pakistan
    and therefore disrupt all that they have built  together  in  order  to
    make an application for entry clearance, when  the  prospects  of  that
    application being successful are unclear, will be an interference  with
    the family and private life that has been built in  the  UK  such  that
    Article 8 is engaged.


12. I also accept that the interference is in accordance with the  law  and
    necessary.  The Immigration Rules are an important starting  point  for
    where the public interest lies.  I must therefore consider whether  the
    interference with the public interest is proportionate.  I am  prepared
    to find that the respondent and his wife are financially independent as
    they have both been working for a number of years and  have  managed  a
    joint household in the UK on that income.


13. They have also demonstrated compliance with the  relevant  rules.   The
    fact that the respondent did not have a certificate  was  an  oversight
    but at all material times he spoke English to a high  standard  and  he
    has now demonstrated this through two certificates.   The  relationship
    has blossomed in the UK whilst the respondent has had leave  to  remain
    with the  reasonable  expectation  that  this  would  continue  and  be
    extended (as he met the relevant requirements).  This is an exceptional
    case.  The respondent at all material times met all the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules save that he did not provide a  certificate  with
    his application to extend his leave.  He entirely  met  the  spirit  of
    that requirement because he spoke and  understood  English  to  a  high
    standard.  He obtained the certificate in time for the  hearing  before
    Judge De Haney and this remains valid.  The disruption to the  credible
    relationship between the parties that has been established  in  the  UK
    over a period of years together with  the  respondent's  employment  is
    likely to be  significant.   I  accept  that  the  public  interest  in
    securing strict compliance with the rules is important and I have fully
    taken into account section 117B of  the  Nationality,  immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 but in my view the public interest is outweighed by the
    compelling factors relevant to the respondent's private and family life
    that I have already referred to.


Decision


14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law.   I
    set it aside and I re-make the decision by  allowing  the  respondent's
    appeal.




Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
19 November 2014

