
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10491/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 30 January 2015                            |On 03 March 2015              |
|Judgment given orally at hearing              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 HALIT HUTJA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Bonavero, Counsel, instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Thus, the appellant is citizen of Albania  born  on  21
    October 1992. He made  an  application  for  a  residence  card  as  an
    extended family member under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations"), that is to say as a person in
    a durable relationship with an  EEA  national.   The  EEA  national  in
    question is Magdelena Naworska, a citizen of Poland.

 2. The application was refused in a decision dated 10 February  2014.  The
    basis of the refusal, in essence, was that it had not been  established
    that the appellant and the sponsor are in a durable relationship and no
    evidence of cohabitation had been provided prior to 2013.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan, after a hearing on  8  October  2014,
    allowed the appellant's appeal against that decision.  He made a number
    of findings of fact which,  in  summary,  are  as  follows:   that  the
    appellant and the sponsor were credible and consistent, that is to  say
    their evidence was consistent with the documentary evidence.  He  found
    that they had started living together as a couple in the United Kingdom
    in March 2013.  He also found that they  intended  to  marry  and  have
    children and the marriage would take place as soon as the appellant was
    granted a residence card.  He found that the couple are  in  a  durable
    relationship.

 4. The respondent challenges the conclusions of the  First-tier  Judge  on
    the basis that he failed to have regard to  a  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, namely YB (EEA reg  17(4)  -  proper  approach)  Ivory  Coast
    [2008] UKAIT 00062.  The effect of that decision, it is said,  is  that
    regard must be had, as a rule of thumb, to  the  criteria  set  out  in
    comparable provisions of the Immigration Rules in terms of duration  of
    a relationship under the EEA Regulations.

 5. The Secretary of State's position  is  that  the  appellant  needed  to
    establish that they had been in a durable relationship as a couple  for
    a period of two years.  That was  not the position at the time  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. I should say that Judge Morgan did not allow the appeal  outright.   He
    took into account that there is discretion under  regulation  17(4)  of
    the EEA Regulations whereby it is for the Secretary of State to examine
    all the circumstances  and  make  a  decision  about  the  issue  of  a
    residence  card  and  Judge  Morgan's  decision  in  that  respect   is
    consistent with authority.

 7. Before me today, Mr Jarvis on behalf of the respondent took what is  no
    doubt a pragmatic approach, in that he indicated  that  the  respondent
    had taken into account the period of time since  the  cohabitation  had
    started, found by Judge Morgan as being March 2013, a period  of  close
    to two years as at the present.  He said that whilst it  is  maintained
    that the judge did not have proper regard to the decision in YB  as  he
    should have done, it is nevertheless the case that the error of law  is
    not in the circumstances a material one, that is, not an error  of  law
    that requires the decision to be set aside. It was also indicated  that
    there was still the consideration of the  discretion  under  regulation
    17(4) in the respondent's mind in  terms  of  approach  to  the  appeal
    today.

 8. Mr Bonavero, naturally had little to say in the  circumstances,  and  I
    did not particularly encourage submissions  from  him  on  the  merits.
    Suffice  to  say,  he  indicated  that  had  the  matter  proceeded  to
    substantive submissions he would have resisted the Secretary of State's
    appeal. He outlined the basis on  which  the  matter  would  have  been
    advanced on behalf of the appellant.

 9. It seems to me in the circumstances that it is not necessary to give  a
    reasoned ruling in terms of whether the decision in YB  does  apply  in
    circumstances such as these, given the  concession  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that if there is an error of law,  it is not material to the
    outcome of the appeal. It was not suggested that the decision  requires
    to be set aside. However, proceeding on the footing that I am  required
    to decide whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law, in view of the fact that  the
    respondent's appeal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was, to all intents and purposes, not pursued, I conclude that there is
    no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

10. Thus, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal,  to
    the extent that it was allowed, is to stand.









Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                        25/02/15







