
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/10907/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On 17 December 2014                  |On 22 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                                    Y. B.
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. J. Kyakwita of Hounslow Legal Services.
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wilson promulgated on 19 September  2014,  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    appeal against a decision dated 10 February 2014 to refuse to issue her
    with a  Residence  Card  as  confirmation  of  a  derivative  right  of
    residence.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a national of Jamaica born on 12  December  1972.  She
    claims to have entered the UK in 1997 with leave to remain as a visitor
    for 6 months. She became an overstayer,  and  on  4  October  2011  was
    served with a removal notice. Be that as it may, she was still  in  the
    UK on 23 July 2013 when she applied for a 'derivative residence  card'.
    as the primary carer of a British  Citizen  resident  in  the  UK.  The
    application was based on the Appellant's care for her son  JAM  (d.o.b.
    13/03/2003).

 3. In this context I pause to note that the Certificate of registration as
    a British Citizen issued in respect of Master M on 17  May  2013  cites
    section 1(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981. It would appear  that
    this is in error. Section 1(3) confers nationality on the  basis  of  a
    parent  becoming  a  British  citizen  or  becoming  settled:  however,
    necessarily Master M's mother, the Appellant, has no such  status,  and
    the indication in the Respondents decision letter was that  the  father
    only  had  discretionary  leave  to  remain.  It  seems   likely   that
    citizenship was conferred upon Master M pursuant to section 1(4)  as  a
    person born in the UK who had spent the first 10 years of life  in  the
    UK. Mr Whitwell acknowledged that there would appear to be an error  on
    the face of the Certificate of registration. However, for the avoidance
    of any doubt, nothing turns on this distinction  for  the  purposes  of
    these proceedings.

 4. The application was refused for reasons  set  out  in  a  'reasons  for
    refusal' letter ('RFRL') with reference to regulations  15A(4A)(a)  and
    (c),  15A(7)  and  18A  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area
    Regulations 2006, and a  Notice  of  Immigration  Decision  was  issued
    accordingly.

 5. The Appellant appealed  to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    dismissed the appeal for reasons set out in his determination.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was granted by Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  MacDonald  on  4
    November 2014.

 7. The Respondent has filed a Rule  24  response  dated  7  November  2014
    resisting the challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. The essential facts and circumstances of the Appellant's  case  emerged
    from the various documents identified in the preceding paragraphs - and
    in particular the Respondent's decision letter and the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. All such documents are a matter of record on file,
    and the pertinent facts are known to the parties: accordingly I do  not
    rehearse them in detail here, but I make reference to such  matters  as
    is incidental for the purposes of this decision.

Consideration

 9. Permission to  appeal  was  essentially  granted  on  the  basis  of  a
    'reasons' challenge: specifically that  it  was  arguable  the  reasons
    given  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  for  concluding  that  the
    Appellant was not a  primary  carer  for  the  purposes  of  Regulation
    15A(4A)(a) were not adequate.

10. I address this issue below. However I have in any  event  come  to  the
    conclusion that the Judge's reasoning in support of his conclusion that
    the Appellant had not shown that her son's father could not look  after
    the child was entirely adequate, and accordingly  the  application  and
    appeal in any event failed by reference to regulation 15A(4A)(c).

11. In this context it is to be noted that the Judge sets out the  relevant
    issues, claimed factual matrix, and evidence over paragraphs 1 and 2 of
    his decision. Although paragraph 2 is of considerable length,  lacks  a
    degree of structure, and makes for difficult reading in some  respects,
    it is not seriously suggested on the Appellant's behalf  that  it  does
    not encompass all relevant factual matters  advanced  as  part  of  the
    Appellant's case.

12. As part of the factual matrix it is to be noted that the Appellant  and
    her son had lived with her son's father up until  July  2013  when  the
    relationship between the Appellant and Mr M broke down because  of  his
    violent behaviour towards her. Injunction proceedings had  taken  place
    which had resulted in an order which  included  provision  for  contact
    between father and child. The Appellant confirmed in her oral  evidence
    that contact was continuing.

13. At paragraph 3 of the decision the Judge found "In this particular case
    I am not satisfied on a balance of probabilities that the Appellant can
    show that [the child's] father could not care  for  [him]".  The  Judge
    then gave four reasons for this  conclusion,  albeit  attaching  little
    weight to the fourth:

   "Firstly there is the essential conflict in  the  evidence  between  the
         Respondent being satisfied indeed at one stage that the father  was
         the primary carer. Secondly the Appellant's own  evidence  to  some
         extent is tainted by her  conviction  for  deception.  Thirdly  and
         importantly the father continues to exercise  contact  specifically
         provided for under the terms of the injunction. I also note but  do
         not place much weight on it that it would appear to be  within  the
         context of a challenge within judicial review proceedings as to the
         decision of children's services that  their  view  is  that  father
         could adequately care for the child".

14. As Mr Whitwell points out the potential removal of  a  child  from  the
    care of one responsible parent  to  the  care  of  another  responsible
    parent was given express consideration in  the  context  of  regulation
    15A(4A)(c) in the case of Hines [2014] EWCA Civ 660, per  Lord  Justice
    Vos: see in particular paragraphs 23 and  24.  It  was  considered  all
    other things being equal that such a situation  would  not  render  the
    British citizen child unable to reside in the UK such  that  regulation
    15A(4A)(c) would be engaged.  In  short,  Mr  Whitwell  submitted,  the
    findings  of  fact  of  Judge  Wilson  herein  effectively  upheld  the
    Respondents decision, and justified his own conclusion that  regulation
    15A(4A) was not met.

15. The challenge  in  the  Grounds  in  support  of  the  application  for
    permission to appeal for the main part focus on the Judge's  conclusion
    in respect of primary carer. Whilst  this  is  relevant  to  regulation
    15A(4A)(a), it  is  not  relevant  to  regulation  15A(4A)(c),  and  an
    applicant must satisfy each of 15A(4A)(a), (b), and (c).

16. In so far as there is any challenge in respect of the finding that  the
    child's father could look after  him  -  "The  IJ  has  failed  in  his
    assessment of the facts and has relied upon his  flawed  assessment  of
    the evidence" - in my judgement in the absence of any  due  and  proper
    amplification and particularisation, it seems to me that  this  amounts
    to no more than  an  assertion  of  disagreement  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's evaluation and the outcome of the appeal.  No  express
    error of law is identified, and the mere reassertion of the Appellant's
    case does not constitute an undermining of the  reasons  given  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge. Before me,  Ms  Kyakwita  was  not  able  to
    articulate a challenge to the Judge's findings and reasons at paragraph
    3 of the decision that was anything other than based upon  disagreement
    and an attempt to reargue the case.

17. In all the circumstances I find no error of law, whether  by  reference
    to   misdirection,   a   misunderstanding   of   the   Regulations,   a
    misunderstanding of the Zambrano principle, inadequacy of reasoning, or
    otherwise in respect of the finding that the Appellant  had  not  shown
    that the child's father could not care for him. In  such  circumstances
    the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  regulation   15A(4A),   and
    accordingly the Respondent's decision was in accordance  with  the  EEA
    Regulations, and the First-tier Tribunal was  correct  to  dismiss  the
    appeal under the Regulations.

18. As noted above, the main focus of the Appellant's  challenge,  and  the
    matter in respect of which express comment was made  in  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal, is in respect of the Judge's finding on the issue
    of primary carer.

19. In my judgement it appears that the Judge's analysis was incomplete  in
    this  regard.  I  consider  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
    misdirected himself as to the meaning  of  primary  carer.  Indeed  the
    Judge makes no  express  reference  to  the  definition  at  regulation
    15A(7), under which  it  is  possible  to  be  a  primary  carer  where
    responsibility is shared equally with another  person  who  is  not  an
    exempt person within the meaning of regulation 15A(6)(c).

20.  The  Judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant  did  not   have   primary
    responsibility  because  there  was  shared  responsibility:  e.g.  see
    paragraph 4 "They both have therefore exercise parental  responsibility
    and my starting point has to be  that  the  current  provision  of  the
    care... reflects what the parents considered to  be  in  [the  child's]
    best interest". However, the alternatives under 15A(6)(c)(i)  and  (ii)
    admit of two possibilities: either a person has primary  responsibility
    or responsibility is shared equally between two persons.  Although  the
    Judge  is  clearly  of  the  view  that  the  child's   father   shares
    responsibility, there is  nothing  in  his  findings  -  and  certainly
    nothing in the supporting evidence or the way in  which  the  Appellant
    puts her case - that any such sharing is done equally. In my  judgement
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  in  error  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant did not have primary responsibility  for  the  simple  reason
    that the father had some responsibility.

21. However, for the reasons already given, even if  the  Appellant  should
    have had the benefit of a finding  that  she  met  the  requirement  of
    regulation 15A(4A)(a) this was not sufficient to meet the  requirements
    for a derivative residence card because of the failure  in  respect  of
    regulation  15A(4A)(c).  Accordingly  the  decision   under   the   EEA
    Regulations stands.



Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  involved  no  material
    error of law and stands.

23. The appeal remains dismissed on EEA grounds.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     18 June 2015

