

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10152/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at London Field House                   |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 20 January 2015                            |On 02 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         WILFREDO BUSINZA ESCALANTE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, instructed by Peter Horada & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the
    determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Petherbridge  that  was
    promulgated  on  13  October  2014.    Judge  Petherbridge  allowed  Mr
    Escalante's appeal against the immigration decisions of 6 February 2014
    (i) refusing to vary his leave to remain  under  the  parent  route  of
    appendix FM to the immigration rules and (ii) to remove him by  way  of
    directions.

 2. At the start of the hearing, Mr Kandola  explained  that,  although  he
    relied on the grounds of application for permission to appeal,  he  did
    not have much to argue.  The decision turned on  whether  Mr  Escalante
    took and would continue to  take  an  active  role  in  his  daughter's
    upbringing.  Mr Kandola conceded that, despite what was implied in  the
    grounds, Judge Petherbridge had concluded that Mr Escalante  had  taken
    an active role in his daughter's upbringing and that he continued to do
    so and that  there  was  no  basis  on  which  the  findings  could  be
    challenged.

 3. I did not need to hear from Mr  Bazini.   There  is  no  definition  of
    "active role" in the immigration rules  and  it  is  to  be  given  its
    ordinary meaning.  The evidence considered by  Judge  Petherbridge  was
    sufficient for him to find that Mr Escalante met  the  requirements  of
    the immigration rules in that respect.  He relied on evidence of how Mr
    Escalante maintained contact with his daughter through regular  contact
    over modern means of communication  and  by  regular  visits.   It  was
    through this regular contact  that  he  took  an  active  role  in  his
    daughter's  upbringing,  something  confirmed  unequivocally   by   his
    daughter's mother.  I acknowledge that the  meaning  of  "active  role"
    could have been made tighter had that been the wish of the Secretary of
    State but as drafted there is  nothing  in  the  immigration  rules  to
    suggest that the approach taken by Judge Petherbridge was wrong in law.

 4. As I announced at the hearing, I can discern no error on a point of law
    in the decision and reasons statement and therefore  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal is dismissed.



Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed  because
the decision and reasons statement of Judge Petherbridge  does  not  contain
an error on a point of law.

I uphold Judge Petherbridge's decision.




                               Signed   Date 02 February 2015


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
