
IAC-AH-DP-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10991/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th December 2014                            |On 17th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                         mrs megan elizabeth hudson
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R J W Hudson, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the United States of America born on 21st
    January  1984.   The  Appellant  applied  for  a  residence   card   as
    confirmation of a right of residence as the family member of a  British
    citizen who was previously working or self-employed in  another  Member
    State  pursuant  to  Regulation  9(2)(a)  and  (b).   The   Appellant's
    application was refused on 18th February 2014 on the basis  that  there
    was no evidence that the British citizen was working  or  self-employed
    in another Member State prior to coming to the United Kingdom and  that
    no evidence had been supplied that the Appellant herself  was  resident
    in another Member State prior to coming to the United Kingdom.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Immigration Judge JDL
    Edwards sitting at Manchester on 4th July  2014.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 9th July 2014 the Appellant's appeal under the 2006  EEA
    Regulations was allowed.

 3. The Appellant's immigration history was that she had been  issued  with
    entry clearance as a student on 1st January 2005 valid until 1st  April
    2008.  She then applied for a visit visa on 14th July  2009  which  was
    issued and expired  on  14th  January  2010.   She  applied  for  entry
    clearance on a visit to marry on 19th September 2011 which  expired  on
    19th March 2013 and she was then  issued  with  entry  clearance  as  a
    family member on 17th October 2013 which expired on  17th  April  2014.
    However prior to that expiry she had applied for a  residence  card  in
    November 2013 and it was this application that was refused and  is  the
    subject of this appeal.

 4. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 16th July 2014.  The grounds are succinct.  They state:

         "The First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  adequately  reason  the
         finding that the Appellant's husband was working in France.  Simply
         because the yacht operated out of France does not make or  lead  to
         the conclusion that the person is  working  in  France,  especially
         when it is registered in the British Virgin Islands.  There is also
         no finding as to whom  the  Appellant's  Sponsor  paid  tax.   This
         finding is important in respect of where the Sponsor was  domiciled
         and the payment of tax to the respective country."

 5.  On  3rd  September  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  granted
    permission to appeal.  It is on that basis that the appeal comes before
    me.  For the purpose of continuity in these proceedings be it that this
    is an appeal by the Secretary of State Mrs Hudson is referred to herein
    as the Appellant and the Secretary of State  as  the  Respondent.   The
    Appellant appears by her husband and  Sponsor  Mr  Robin  Hudson.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    McVeety.

 6. The grounds generally  complain  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    failed to give adequate reasons as to his finding that the  Appellant's
    husband was working in France.  It  is  apparent  from  the  bundle  of
    documents lodged before the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  Appellant's
    husband was working on  a  yacht  registered  in  St  Vincent  and  the
    Grenadines operating in the western Mediterranean  and  based  in  Port
    Canto, Cannes, France.  The Sponsor's contract of  employment  is  with
    Dominion Crew Solutions (Jersey) Ltd.  The Sponsor's payslips show that
    he is paid in euros although there is nothing therein to show in  which
    country he pays tax.  The Grounds of Appeal  concentrate  on  the  fact
    that none of these  issues  were  referred  to  by  the  judge  in  his
    determination.

 7. Albeit that I am determining whether or not there is a  material  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  an  up-to-date
    bundle has been lodged by the Sponsor.  That bundle contains  documents
    to show that Mr Robin Hudson was working abroad, that he  was  residing
    in France aboard a seafaring vessel.  He set out to  confirm  that  the
    Sponsor was paid in euros for contracted work aboard the vessel.   They
    also provided documents  of  a  UK  tenancy  agreement  to  show  their
    dedication to a stable home life  and  land  based  commitment  to  the
    United Kingdom.

Submissions/Discussions

 8. Mr McVeety goes no further than to rely  on  the  succinct  Grounds  of
    Appeal pointing out that this is a very complex case as to  whether  or
    not the Appellant meets the EEA Regulation.   The  Secretary  of  State
    accepts the Sponsor is a British citizen and accepts that the Appellant
    is married to the British citizen.  Mr  McVeety  on  the  Secretary  of
    State's behalf equates the position that the Sponsor found  himself  in
    to that of merchant seaman and the question to be answered  is  whether
    or not under the EEA Regulations an offshore worker qualify  under  the
    Regulations.

 9. Mr Hudson explains his position.  He was on a short term employment for
    six months working on a luxury yacht which  was  based  in  Cannes  and
    provided day trips to St Tropez and to Monaco.   He  acknowledges  that
    his employers were  a  company  based  in  Jersey  and  he  accepts  Mr
    McVeety's statement that Jersey is not part of the United Kingdom but a
    Crown dependency.  He further acknowledges he was  paid  in  euros  but
    that tax was not deducted

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. It is clear the judge made material errors of law in his  determination
    in what is a complex issue in that he failed to give due  consideration
    to any findings that the Appellant's husband was working in France,  as
    to his terms of his contract of employment and as to how and  where  he
    is paid along with any tax implications.  I acknowledge that a  failure
    to make such findings can be material so far as it relates to  findings
    under the EEA Regulation.  I consequently set aside  the  decision  and
    proceeded to remake it.

13. The Regulation:

    9.   (1)      If the conditions in paragraph (2) are  satisfied,  these
             Regulations apply to a person who is the family  member  of  a
             United Kingdom national as if the United Kingdom national were
             an EEA national.

         (2)  The conditions are that-

             (a)  the United Kingdom national is residing in an  EEA  State
                  as a worker or self-employed person  or  was  so  residing
                  before returning to the United Kingdom; and

             (b)  if the family member of the United  Kingdom  national  is
                  his spouse  or  civil  partner,  the  parties  are  living
                  together in the EEA State or had entered into the marriage
                  or civil partnership and  were  living  together  in  that
                  State before the United Kingdom national returned  to  the
                  United Kingdom.


Findings

14. Having had the benefit of hearing both the Appellant and the Sponsor  a
    full and detailed explanation as to the employment that was  undertaken
    it is clear whilst the Sponsor  was  working  on  day  cruises  he  was
    resident in France it would be  impossible  to  conclude  that  he  was
    resident anywhere else.  It was not as if the boat were on a long  term
    voyage into  the  Mediterranean.   The  boat  was,  on  his  testimony,
    carrying out predominantly day cruises to  Monaco  and  to  St  Tropez.
    Consequently I am satisfied that the Appellant was  working  in  Europe
    for the purpose of the Regulations.  Further  whilst  noting  that  his
    employers was  a  company  based  in  Jersey  and  that  the  boat  was
    registered out of the British Virgin Islands the fact  remains  he  was
    resident in France and that he was paid in euros.  It is a matter of no
    consequence as to where he pays  his  tax.   For  the  purpose  of  the
    Regulation the Appellant  is  a  family  member  of  a  United  Kingdom
    national working in an EEA State and was so doing  prior  to  returning
    with the UK national to the United Kingdom.  The Appellant subsequently
    satisfies Regulation 9 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

15. I am advised by both the Appellant and the Sponsor that they  have  now
    returned on a permanent basis to the United Kingdom and that  they  are
    settling down to what only can be described as a less exotic  and  more
    mundane way of life in North Wales.  I further note that  it  is  their
    wish to travel to the United States  this  Christmas  to  visit  family
    members of the Appellant.  Whilst there was a reason why they would not
    be able to leave the United Kingdom I acknowledged without the relevant
    visa it would be difficult for the Appellant to return.  They would  be
    ill-advised to make the trip without the visa being in place.  This was
    one of those unusual cases where an extemporary judgment  was  provided
    prior to the written judgment and Mr McVeety on behalf of the Secretary
    of State indicated that he would be taking steps to notify the relevant
    authorities  that  the  visa  should  be  expedited  as  a  matter   of
    considerable urgency.  I hope this can take place.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
    error of law and for the reasons given above is set aside. The decision
    is  thereafter  remade  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  under   the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 16th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

