
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10587/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 March 2015                      |On 19 March 2015                     |
|Prepared on 12 March 2015            |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                              MRS BECKY HANSON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Goldborough of Messrs Addison & Khan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Ghana,  born  on  16  August  1969  entered
    Britain in 2002 and overstayed. She claimed  to  have  married  an  EEA
    national in 2005 in a customary marriage in Ghana, and  was  granted  a
    residence permit as the wife of an EEA national. She appealed against a
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 23 February 2011  to  refuse
    an application for a permanent residence  card  under  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006.

2.   Her appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  O'Garro  in
    a determination promulgated  on  9  August  2011.   That  decision  was
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal. On 1 December 2011 Upper Tribunal Judge
    Storey  heard  submissions  and  made  a  decision  to  set  aside  the
    determination of Judge O'Garro for error of law. On 22  March  2012  he
    held a CMR hearing and  issued  further  directions.  His  decision  (a
    corrected  version  of  one  promulgated  in  February)   and   further
    directions was promulgated on 17 April  2012.   He  directed  that  the
    appellant  provide a statement regarding the circumstance and the  date
    of her divorce, by the end of April and indicated that when he received
    that statement or if  no  further  statement  were  received  he  would
    determine the appeal. This he did in a  final  determination  dated  28
    August 2012 in which he dismissed the appeal. The appellant appealed to
    the Court of Appeal who in an order dated 21 October 2013  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal by consent, quashed the decision of  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Storey and remitted the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  be
    determined "only on the issue of the date of the appellant's  divorce".



3.   The appellant's customary marriage in Ghana, in  2005,  was  to  Thomas
    Gyebi who was described  by  Judge  O'Garro  as  "a  Ghanaian/Austrian"
    national.  On 1 November 2005 she was granted a residence card.  On  10
    September 2009 that residence card was  revoked  as  the  Secretary  of
    State stated that there was  information  that  the  appellant  was  no
    longer married to her spouse and that they had been divorced on 11 June
    2007. As her marriage had not subsisted for three years the  respondent
    was entitled to revoke the  residence  card.   The  appellant  did  not
    appeal that decision.  Instead, she made an application in August  2010
    for a permanent residence card. This appeal is against the  refusal  of
    that application.

4.   The appellant's evidence before Judge O'Garro  was  that  she  and  her
    husband had lived together until 2009 when the marriage had broken down
    and her spouse had left the matrimonial home.  She said that on 11 June
    2007 she had  been  granted  a  customary  divorce  in  Ghana.   Having
    considered information relating  to  West  African  customary  divorces
    Judge O'Garro stated  that  the  divorce  which  had  taken  place  was
    essentially an agreement between the heads of the appellant's  and  her
    spouse's families and that she  was  satisfied  that  the  divorce  was
    dissolved otherwise than by "proceedings" and, taking into account  the
    provisions of Section 46(2) of the Family Law Act 1986 she  stated,  in
    paragraph 24 of the determination that  she  was  satisfied  "that  the
    appellant has not affected a divorce recognised  by  the  laws  of  the
    United Kingdom.  This must mean  that  the  appellant  is  not  legally
    divorced from her EEA spouse and remains a  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national spouse".  She then went on to conclude that the appellant  and
    her husband had been exercising Treaty rights for five years and  found
    that the burden lay on the respondent  to  show  that  the  appellant's
    spouse was not  exercising  Treaty  rights.   She  concluded  that  the
    appellant remained a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national,  that  the
    respondent  had  not  considered  the  correct   EEA   Regulations   in
    determining her application  and  therefore  the  refusal  was  not  in
    accordance with  the  law  and  the  appellant's  application  remained
    outstanding for a lawful decision.  She then allowed the appeal.

5.   The Secretary of State appealed arguing, inter  alia,  that  the  judge
    was not entitled to state that the appellant had never been divorced as
    there was nothing in the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 to say that
    divorce was not recognised unless it was terminated  by  "proceedings".
    Having made that mistake the judge had also erred in finding  that  the
    appellant's husband was exercising  Treaty  rights  and  therefore  the
    determination was flawed.  Permission to appeal was then  granted.   As
    stated above, the appeal then came before Upper Tribunal Judge  Storey.
    He heard evidence from the appellant and in his determination he stated
    that the appellant had stated that the divorce had taken place in 2007.
     He concluded that there was an error of law in  the  determination  of
    Judge O'Garro in that she  had  decided  that  the  appellant  had  not
    divorced until 1  October  2009  whereas  in  fact  the  appellant  had
    divorced in 2007.  Moreover, Judge O'Garro had wrongly stated that  the
    divorce was not lawful. He also said that there was  no  evidence  that
    the appellant's husband had been habitually resident in Britain or that
    he was exercising Treaty rights here.  Judge Storey therefore set aside
    the decision of Judge O'Garro.

6.   He told the Presenting  Officer  that  it  was  for  him  to  ascertain
    whether or not the appellant's husband was exercising Treaty rights and
    although the Presenting Officer initially stated  that  the  respondent
    would not do so that issue was eventually conceded by  the  respondent.
    The issues before the  Tribunal  was  therefore  narrowed  to  that  of
    whether or not the appellant and  her  husband  had  been  married  and
    exercising Treaty rights on 10 September 2009 when the residence permit
    had been revoked and thereafter when a decision was made to  refuse  to
    issue the appellant with a  permanent  residence  card.   Judge  Storey
    considered the relevant issue to be:-

         "If on 1 September 2009 she was still not divorced then  revocation
         was unlawful and, of fundamental importance to the present  appeal,
         she would be entitled to a permanent residence card on the basis of
         the period between her marriage in 2005 and her divorce in  October
         2010 (during which the SSHD now accepts her husband was  exercising
         Treaty rights).  If on the other hand she was in fact  divorced  in
         2007 then the SSHD was clearly entitled  to  revoke  her  residence
         card  and  to  refuse  her  permanent  residence.    One   of   the
         requirements of Regulation 10 is that the marriage must  have  last
         [sic] three years."

7.   Judge Storey then went  on  to  state  that  the  documentary  evidence
    before the First-tier Judge from the respondent referred to a customary
    divorce in June 2007.  He stated that Judge O'Garro  had  said  in  her
    determination that the appellant had said that the divorce  was  on  11
    June 2007 and that that was the date given in the statutory declaration
    form signed by the father of the appellant and her husband and also the
    date of the notice of dissolution document produced.  He concluded that
    the appellant clearly failed to meet the three year requirement between
    the claimed date of marriage in February 2005 and the June 2007 divorce
    - the period was about two years and four months.  In paragraph  16  he
    stated that:-

         "As  already  indicated,  there  is  a  serious  conflict  in   the
         claimant's own documentary and oral evidence as to the date of  her
         divorce.  Her case depends on her not having been divorced in  2007
         but rather not until October 2009, yet in evidence  before  me  she
         said she divorced in 2007 and that was also the date given  in  the
         documents she submitted in the  context  of  the  earlier  decision
         appeal [sic] against revocation of her revocation card (he  clearly
         meant residence card).  Given her  failure  to  explain  why  there
         should be two very different dates given for the claimed divorce, I
         am not persuaded that she has discharged the onus of proof  on  her
         to show that she was married for 3  years  or  longer.   Given  her
         failure to establish that her marriage to her EEA  national  spouse
         lasted  for  3  years,  it  is  clear  that  she  cannot  meet  the
         requirement of reg 10(5)(d)(i).  It is also clear that  she  cannot
         show she is entitled to permanent residence  on  the  basis  of  an
         unbroken marriage with an EEA national (exercising  Treaty  rights)
         between 2005-2010.  It follows:

             (i)  that she has failed to show she has a retained  right  of
                  residence; and

             (ii) that she cannot qualify for permanent residence under reg
                  15(1)(b).

         Her appeal against the decision of the SSHD cannot succeed."

    He therefore dismissed the appeal.

8.   It appears that the arguments before the Court of Appeal which  led  to
    the appeal being remitted to the Upper Tribunal  and  the  decision  of
    Judge Storey being quashed were that it was accepted that Judge  Storey
    misunderstood the evidence given by the appellant regarding the date of
    her divorce and that the Upper Tribunal had  erroneously  informed  the
    appellant the case management hearing listed for 22 March 2012 had been
    adjourned and that further directions of Judge Storey  dated  13  April
    2012 had not been served.

9.   In these circumstances the appeal came before me for hearing.   In  his
    initial submissions before me Mr Tufan stated that although  the  issue
    had been focused on the date of divorce the reality was that  following
    the decisions of the Tribunal in Kareem  (proxy  marriages  -  EU  law)
    Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC) and in TA (Kareem explained)  [2014]  UKUT
    316 (IAC) it was  clear  that  the  appellant's  marriage  to  the  EEA
    national was not valid in the first place and therefore she  had  never
    been entitled to a residence card let alone a permanent residence  card
    and therefore the issues before the  Tribunal  fell  away.   I  stated,
    however, that I would hear evidence and submissions  relating  both  to
    that issue and the date of the  divorce.   Mr  Tufan  stated  that  the
    reason that the respondent  had  found  that  the  appellant  had  been
    divorced in 2007 was that the appellant's husband had  written  to  the
    respondent stating that that was the case because he wished to bring in
    another spouse from Ghana by whom he already had a child.

10.  The appellant gave evidence.  She stated that she was  not  aware  that
    her husband had had any other relationship before he had  left  her  in
    2009 and that she was unable to discuss that issue with him because  he
    would beat her.  She had initially met him through a friend in Ghana in
    2004 and she stated that he had come to Britain in 2004  when  she  had
    started living with him and that he had worked between then  and  2009.
    She confirmed that she had entered Britain in 2002 and remained without
    authority.

11.  Asked when the marriage had taken place she  said  that  it  had  taken
    place in 2004.  It was pointed out to her that  there  was  documentary
    evidence stating that she had married in 2005.  She endeavoured to  say
    that this was because a customary marriage was  a  long  and  drawn-out
    matter  with  various  stages.   Moreover  there  had  been  delay   in
    registering the marriage as there was no need to do so.  Mr  Tufan  put
    to her that the document showed that the marriage had taken place on  6
    March 2006 - the appellant replied that her husband had been present at
    the marriage in 2005 and that she was not.  Mr Tufan then asked her  if
    her husband was Austrian or also Ghanaian.  The appellant  stated  that
    he was "just Austrian".  She was then asked if there was  any  evidence
    that the marriage was valid in Austria.  The appellant  said  that  she
    did not know if it was valid there - she had no evidence that  it  was.
    Asked if there was any evidence to show that she and  her  husband  had
    been living together as a couple the appellant referred to water  bills
    but said that they were not responsible for council tax nor was there a
    rent book.  She said that she had last seen her husband a month ago  at
    a funeral and had just greeted him.  There had been no  involvement  by
    the police in her and her husband's relationship.

12.  Asked why they had not married in Britain she said that  she  had  been
    told by her lawyer that she could not do so.

13.  She stated that she had not seen the 2007 divorce  document  until  she
    had gone to court.  She confirmed that she had stopped living with  her
    husband in 2009.  She was asked when her father had died and  she  said
    that he had died in April 2006.  It was put to her that on the  divorce
    certificate dated 2007 and it was noted that her father had signed  it.
    The appellant said that that was not the signature of her father.

14.  In summing up Mr Tufan referred firstly to the terms  of  the  judgment
    in TA and stated that it was clear that, as the appellant had said that
    her husband was Austrian the marriage could not be valid and  therefore
    the appellant had not been entitled to a residence card  in  the  first
    place.

15.  He then went on to submit that the question was then which of  the  two
    divorce documents could be relied on and stated that  in  any  event  I
    should find that the documents produced were not genuine.  The  reality
    was that there is no evidence as  to  the  validity  of  the  customary
    marriage in any event.  There was no expert evidence to  say  that  the
    customary marriage was valid in Ghana. He argued that when  considering
    the documents from Ghana I should apply the ratio of the  determination
    in Tanveer Ahmed and that I should place little weight thereon.  In any
    event there was no evidence that the appellant and her husband had been
    in a durable relationship - there is no credible evidence  to  back  up
    her assertions.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal and to further  note
    that there had been no claim that the appellant's rights under  Article
    8 of the ECHR would be infringed by her removal.

16.  In reply Mr Goldborough referred first to the issue of the  nationality
    of the appellant's husband.  He stated that the appellant  was  not  in
    position to know whether or  not  her  husband  had  retained  Ghanaian
    nationality but in any event he pointed out that her evidence was  that
    her husband had gone back to Ghana for  the  customary  marriage  which
    indicated that he had retained Ghanaian  citizenship.   The  fact  that
    there was agreement between the families would be  an  indication  that
    the marriage was valid under Ghanaian law.

17.  He stated that the appellant was clear that the divorce document  dated
    2007 was a fabrication put forward by her husband so that he could make
    a further application in respect of another relationship and  the  fact
    that  he  was  married  was  an  inconvenience  to  him.   The  divorce
    certificate could in any way  not  be  valid  because  the  appellant's
    father had died before the affidavit was made.  He stated that  it  was
    clear from the second divorce  certificate  dated  May  2010  that  the
    appellant and her husband had lived together  for  five  years  between
    2004  and  2009.   He  pointed  out  that  it  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant's husband was exercising Treaty rights here at  the  time  of
    the  application  for  permanent  residence  and  therefore  there  was
    evidence that the appellant had been entitled to a residence card.

18.  In any event even if I were to find that the marriage  was  not  valid,
    the reality was that the appellant would have qualified  for  leave  to
    remain as an "extended family member" under Regulation 8 as she was the
    partner of an EEA national and they were in a durable relationship.

19.  He accepted that the  issue  of  the  rights  of  the  appellant  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR were not before the Tribunal but stated that  the
    issue of the private and family life of the appellant was reflected  in
    the terms of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations and the  length  of  the
    appellant's relationship was such that it was  in  the  spirit  of  the
    Regulations that she should be granted leave to remain.

Discussion

20.  Although the initial grounds for refusal included  the  assertion  that
    the appellant's husband was not exercising Treaty rights  here,  before
    Judge Storey the respondent accepted that the appellant's  husband  was
    exercising Treaty rights here and therefore the only issue  before  him
    was whether or not the marriage had endured for  three  years  for  the
    appellant to fulfil the requirements  of  Regulation  15.   The  issues
    before me have been enlarged in that there are  the  further  arguments
    raised by both representatives which are relevant to this  appeal.   Mr
    Tufan argued that the marriage should not have been recognised  in  the
    first place as it was a customary marriage and  Mr  Goldborough  argued
    that notwithstanding that the marriage might be considered  not  to  be
    valid the reality was that the appellant  and  her  husband  had  lived
    together in a durable relationship for many years.

21.  I consider first the validity of the marriage.  There  are  two  issues
    which are of concern.  Firstly whether or not this was a valid marriage
    under Ghanaian customary law and secondly whether the validity  of  the
    customary marriage should be recognised by the respondent.   It  is  of
    note also is that the form of register of customary marriage which  was
    served with the bundle of documents lodged  by  the   appellant's  then
    solicitors, Messrs Hafiz and Haque  on 18 September 2012,  (although it
    is not mentioned in the index) is blank. That document is missing  from
    the bundle of documents submitted by the appellant's solicitors  on  19
    March 2014.  The reality is that there is no evidence to show that  the
    marriage was valid under Ghanaian customary law - there  is  no  expert
    report which would indicate  that  that  was  the  case.   I  can  only
    conclude that the appellant has not discharged the burden of proof upon
    her and that the marriage was not a genuine  customary  marriage  which
    was valid in Ghana.

22.  Moreover, it is relevant that the appellant's husband was Austrian  and
    in particular the  appellant  said  that  he  was  only  Austrian,  not
    Ghanaian, there is nothing to indicate that the marriage would be valid
    in Austria.

23.  Even if I were to accept, as Mr Goldborough urged me to  do,  that  the
    appellant's husband remained Ghanaian as well as Austrian it was as  an
    EEA national that he was exercising Treaty rights here and it  is  from
    his Austrian nationality that the appellant hoped to be entitled to the
    residence card.  I therefore consider that the appellant cannot succeed
    on the basis that she had made a genuine customary marriage, recognised
    in the country of the EEA national and therefore as  the  marriage  was
    not valid I can  only  conclude  that  she  was  not  entitled  to  the
    residence permit.

24.  In any event, when I consider the issue as to the date of  the  divorce
    there is nothing to indicate that I should accept the  later  date  for
    the divorce rather than the declarations that the divorce took place in
    2007.  For me to discount the document of divorce dated  2007  I  would
    have to rely on the death certificate of  the  appellant's  father  but
    when  considering all the documentary evidence within  the  context  of
    this appeal and noting the conflicting documentation from the  Ministry
    of Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration of the Republic of Ghana in
    the name of  various  legal  officers  certifying  that  certain  names
    appeared on the statutory declarations made by the appellant's  claimed
    uncle and that of her husband, those documents  are,  I  consider,   of
    themselves unlikely to be genuine as one  from  the  director   of  the
    Legal and Consular  Bureau , Ministry of Foreign Affairs dated 28  June
    2011, refers to "the signature of  Samuel  Boakye-Yiadom  covering  the
    signature of Elizabeth E Jeffrey-Amoako Esq Notary Public appearing  on
    the statutory declaration dated 24 June 2011  as  being  the  true  and
    certified signature of Samuel Boakye-Yiadom" whose signature  and  seal
    appear on a statutory declaration of the appellant's uncle  dated  June
    2011, as being genuine.  That does not  indicate  that  the  statements
    made in the documents are themselves true but only the signature of the
    person before whom the declaration was made. The same  comment  can  be
    made of the other documents which purport to verify the  signatures  of
    those before whom the declarations where made. The reality is that both
    the documents relating to the divorce in 2007  and  that  in  2009  are
    similar and none of the documents are in any way persuasive.

25.  I conclude that I can place no weight on any of the documents  relating
    to the marriage or the divorce and can only conclude that the appellant
    has not shown either that she was married as claimed or  that  she  was
    divorced in 2009 or indeed that the marriage was subsisting.  I do  not
    consider that the appellant was an  honest  witness  and  the  evidence
    which she produced relating to cohabitation was minimal.

26.  I therefore conclude that the appellant has  not  shown  that  she  was
    ever a party to a  genuine  customary  marriage  let  alone  that  that
    marriage had been dissolved in Ghana or was valid.

27.  Furthermore, I do not consider that there is any evidence to show  that
    the appellant was in a  durable  relationship  at  any  time  with  her
    claimed husband.

28.  I therefore, in remaking this decision dismiss this  appeal.   I  would
    add that the issue of the appellant's rights under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR were not argued before me nor  indeed  does  it  appear  that  any
    application for leave to remain on that basis has ever been made.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



Signed        Date 17 March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

