
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10698/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 November 2015                  |On 10 December 2015                  |
|Decision given orally on 27 November |                                     |
|2015                                 |                                     |


                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                        Upper Tribunal Judge N Finch


                                   Between

                                BIDIT NEUPANE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:    Mr Z Malik, Malik Law Chambers (Solicitors)
Respondent:   Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  This  appeal  raises  a  rather  interesting  issue.   Ultimately  its
    resolution is found in the judgment of the Court of Appeal in the  case
    of R (Patel) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1175.

 2. We are required to consider all of the available evidence in  order  to
    make a proper assessment of what occurred  at  the  conclusion  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT").  That evidence  has
    two sources. One is the contemporary record found in the report made by
    counsel for the Appellant  to  his  instructing  solicitors.   This  is
    recited verbatim in [2] of the grounds of appeal.  The second source of
    evidence is the record of proceedings.  Each  of  these  two  items  of
    evidence requires a degree of evaluation  and  interpretation.   Having
    subjected both  to  careful,  but  fair  and  reasonable,  analysis  we
    conclude without hesitation that what the judge did at  the  conclusion
    of the hearing was to pronounce in terms his decision that  the  appeal
    was being allowed.  While there is no record of  his  precise  language
    that is the conclusion we make  unhesitatingly  having  considered  the
    only available evidence on  this  issue  and  drawing  on  the  panel's
    experience of practices and events of this kind.

 3. Mr Wilding has argued, with some ingenuity, that judge merely  gave  an
    "indication".  We are quite satisfied that there are no shades, nuances
    or levels involved in a judicial act of this nature.  A decision  is  a
    decision is a decision.  One  might  in  principle  be  able  to  apply
    different labels and appellations: such as  determination,  conclusion,
    result or outcome - all synonyms in this context. But from as long  ago
    as this bench can remember it has been the practice in a  whole  series
    of courts and tribunals for judges at all tiers of the legal system  in
    the United Kingdom, in appropriate circumstances, having heard all  the
    evidence and the arguments, to state in terms what  their  decision  is
    without elaborations or reasons.  The most frequently employed  formula
    of which one readily takes judicial notice is that  of  the  judge  who
    says 'I am allowing  [the  action,  the  application,  the  claim,  the
    appeal] (or I am refusing it) for reasons  which  will  follow  in  due
    course in my written  judgment'.   That  is  an  experience  which  all
    litigating practitioners have had on countless  occasions  in  practice
    spanning many decades.  That was in substance what  the  judge  did  on
    this occasion.  We are absolutely clear about this.

 4. Having regard to the terms of rule 40  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Rules,
    juxtaposed with the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Patel,  we
    conclude that the error of law canvassed on behalf of the Appellant  is
    established.

 5. The nature of this error of law raises the important considerations  of
    fairness and appearances. Having  regard  to  those  considerations  we
    further conclude, again, without hesitation  and  consistent  with  the
    Practice Directions of the Upper Tribunal, that the appropriate  course
    is to set aside the decision of the FtT  and  remit  the  appeal  to  a
    differently constituted FtT for a rehearing and fresh decision.  We  do
    not consider that we need to exercise our statutory power to  make  any
    associated or ancillary directions.  This is a routine appeal.   It  is
    ready to proceed upon remittal.

                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                    Dated:  27 November 2015
