
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number IA/10635/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons promulgated  |
|On 10 October 2016              |On 29 November 2016             |


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                         Priyanka Niranjanbhai Shah
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra of Counsel instructed by Law Lane.
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This case comes  before  me  to  remake  the  decision  in  the  appeal
    following  the  decision  of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Woodcraft
    promulgated on 8 September 2016 finding an error of law in the decision
    of First team Tribunal Judge Ford (promulgated on 7 January 2016).



Background

 2. The Appellant, a national of India born on 7 July 1981, appeals against
    a decision of the Respondent dated 17 March 2015 cancelling her earlier
    leave pursuant to paragraph  321A(1)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and
    consequently refusing leave to enter. The Respondent was satisfied that
    the Appellant had previously obtained leave as a Tier 4 Migrant  on  10
    October 2013 (valid until 14 February 2015) in reliance  upon  a  TOEIC
    certificate from Educational Testing  Service  which  was  fraudulently
    obtained.

 3.  The  Appellant's  immigration  history,  and  the   details   of   the
    Respondent's decision are known to the parties,  are  set  out  in  the
    documents on file, and also are adequately recorded in  the  respective
    decisions of Judge Ford and  Judge  Woodcraft:  it  is  unnecessary  to
    rehearse them in further  detail  here.  Suffice  to  say  for  present
    purposes that in setting aside  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ford, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft  set  the  parameters
    for the hearing before me, with reference to the  guidance  in  Shehzad
    [2016] EWCA Civ 615, in the following terms:

   "[T]he Respondent had discharged the initial burden of proof upon her of
         establishing deception. The case upon rehearing  will  be  for  the
         Appellant to provide an innocent explanation." (paragraph 10).

Preliminary Matters

 4. In correspondence with the Tribunal the Appellant's representatives had
    raised an issue in respect of potential adjournment of the hearing.  Ms
    Malhotra indicated that no such application was pursued before me.

 5. Although it was necessary to afford the  representatives  some  reading
    time - a supplementary bundle having been submitted by  the  Respondent
    and a further witness statement filed on behalf of the Appellant  -  in
    due course both representatives  indicated  that  they  were  ready  to
    proceed with the appeal.

Consideration

 6. It is clear that Judge Woodcraft  concluded  that  the  Respondent  had
    discharged the initial  burden  of  proof  to  establish  deception  by
    reference  to  supporting  evidence  for  Rebecca  Collins  and   Peter
    Millington, and the ETS records wherein the Appellant test results were
    judged to have been invalid (rather than merely  questionable).  It  is
    unnecessary to revisit this finding.

 7. In her evidence before me, the Appellant adopted her witness statements
    of 9 December 2015 and 7 October 2016. She was then cross-examined  and
    re-examined. I have kept a note  of  her  evidence  in  the  record  of
    proceedings, and have had regard to everything that was said during the
    hearing in reaching my decision.

 8. Essentially, the Appellant denies the Respondent's core allegation that
    somebody else took her ETS test in May  2013.  In  her  submissions  Ms
    Malhotra emphasised that the Appellant had  given  an  account  of  the
    circumstances of taking the test that rang true, and also that  it  was
    apparent from her command of English that she  was  not  a  person  who
    needed to cheat in order to secure a satisfactory result in an  English
    test. Indeed it was this latter aspect that it was suggested was a  key
    fact and powerful indicator that it was  unlikely  that  the  Appellant
    would have cheated.

 9. It is a feature of this case that the Appellant when interviewed on  17
    March 2015 upon her return to the UK after a trip to India,  said  that
    she had not sat any further English tests other than the IELTS in  2008
    and the ABE for her indefinite leave to remain; she denied submitting a
    TOEIC test in 2013. On appeal the Appellant has sought to  explain  the
    answers  on  the  basis  of  confusion  and  poor  memory   recall   in
    circumstances where she had just arrived in the  UK  after  some  eight
    hours travelling. I note that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ford  did  not
    accept this explanation: he found, in effect, that  the  Appellant  was
    alert to the by then widely publicised issues in relation to ETS tests,
    and was essentially evasive. However, in his overall  evaluation  Judge
    Ford concluded that the reason for evasion was not so much deception as
    a wish to avoid "being tarred with  the  same  brush"  as  others:  see
    paragraphs 17 and 18.

10. I have read the interview conducted on 17 March  2015  very  carefully,
    and have considered the Appellant's response to it on appeal. I do  not
    accept her explanation of fatigue and confusion. It is clear  that  she
    gave a very detailed account of the earlier IELTS test. Moreover in  so
    far as she was being asked about English  language  testing  there  was
    more than sufficient to trigger her memory in respect of the 2013 test,
    and indeed a direct question in this regard. I do not accept  that  she
    answered question 28 in the interview in the negative because  she  had
    forgotten in her tiredness.

11.  I  conclude  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that   the   Appellant
    deliberately told an  untruth  at  the  interview  on  17  March  2015.
    Irrespective of the motivation for this untruth, the fact that  it  was
    deliberately told is necessarily damaging to her  overall  credibility.
    Moreover, in my judgement it is also damaging to the  credibility  that
    she has offered a  false  explanation  for  the  circumstances  of  the
    telling of this untruth.

12. In such circumstances, and generally, I am not satisfied that the  fact
    that the Appellant is able now to advance an  account  consistent  with
    the notion of arranging and attending  a  TOEIC  test,  is  a  reliable
    indicator of the truth of that account.

13. Accordingly, what I am left with to balance  against  the  Respondent's
    evidence is the, albeit well-founded, assertion that the Appellant very
    probably did not need to cheat to secure a satisfactory results in  her
    English language testing. Whilst I take that into  account,  I  am  not
    prepared to conclude that this is sufficient to outweigh  the  evidence
    provided  by  the  Respondent.  It  is  readily  possible  to  envisage
    circumstances in which a  competent  student  nonetheless  cheats:  for
    example, possibly because it is  easier,  or  because  of  some  malign
    influence, or because of a lack of confidence  in  their  own  ability.
    Whilst I accept that the Appellant's ability is a helpful and  relevant
    indicator as to the likelihood of cheating (or  more  particularly  not
    cheating), it is not determinative.

14. In all such circumstances I conclude that the Respondent has discharged
    the burden of proof in establishing that the Appellant did not  herself
    sit her TOEIC examination, and the Appellant has  failed  to  offer  an
    'innocent  explanation',  or  otherwise  demonstrate  contrary  to  the
    Respondent's evidence that she did indeed sit her own exam.

15. I conclude that the Respondent's invocation of  paragraph  321A(1)  was
    appropriate: the Respondent's  decision  was  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules.

16. Ms Malhotra indicated that she  had  no  instructions  to  abandon  any
    arguments on Article 8 of the  ECHR,  but  she  acknowledged  that  the
    Appellant's case in this regard would be  in  some  difficulty  in  the
    event of an adverse conclusion in respect of the  issue  of  deception.
    She did not seek to lead out any further evidence from the Appellant in
    this regard, or develop matters in  submissions.  Mr  Norton,  for  the
    Respondent, emphasised, as per the Notice of Immigration Decision,  the
    circumstances of the deception and in turn the impact upon the  way  in
    which the Respondent's husband had  secured  his  British  citizenship.
    Moreover there was  no  particular  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  to
    suggest that the couple could not establish and continue  their  family
    life together in India.

17. In circumstances where the Article 8 case has not been  articulated  or
    amplified before me, I do not propose to rehearse the relevant case law
    and statutory provisions in respect of public interest. In my judgement
    it is sufficient to say that  the  Respondent's  position  -  that  the
    removal of the Appellant is proportionate in  circumstances  where  she
    has practised deception, and there  being  no  adequate  evidence  that
    family life cannot  be  established  and  enjoyed  in  her  country  of
    nationality with her partner who is also Indian  in  origin  -  is  the
    position that I reach  on  the  available  evidence.  The  Respondent's
    decision does not  breach  the  Appellant's  or  anybody  else's  human
    rights.



Notice of Decision

18. The appeal is dismissed.

19. No anonymity order is sought or made.


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis   26 November 2016



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD     (This is not part of the Decision)

I have dismissed the appeal and accordingly there can be no fee award.


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis   26 November 2016


