
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10919/2015
                                                               IA/10921/2015
                                                               IA/10926/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 June 2016                      |On 05 July 2016                      |
|Prepared on 4 July 2016              |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    E. C.
                                    R. C.
                                    O. H.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rogers, Immigration Advice Centre Limited
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellants are mother, and two sons, who are citizens of Slovakia.

   2. On 12 October  2013  the  First  Appellant  undertook  a  ceremony  of
      marriage with S, a national of India who had  at  the  time  leave  to
      remain in the UK as a post study work migrant. S duly  applied  for  a
      residence card as the spouse of an EEA national, but  his  application
      was refused because the Respondent considered theirs was a marriage of
      convenience, so that he did not meet the definition of "spouse" in the
      Immigration EEA Regulations 2006. That decision followed an  interview
      of both the First Appellant  and  S,  in  February  2014.  Although  S
      brought an appeal to the Tribunal,  his  appeal  was  dismissed  in  a
      decision of 12 September 2014. Both S and  the  First  Appellant  gave
      evidence to the Tribunal during the course of that appeal,  and  their
      evidence that this was a genuine and subsisting marriage was  rejected
      as untrue. Their evidence about one another when interviewed  together
      was found to be inconsistent in relation to matters that  a  genuinely
      married couple could be expected to be consistent  about,  and  indeed
      the Judge found  that  she  was  not  satisfied  that  they  had  ever
      cohabited together.

   3. As a result of that decision, and the  subsequent  exhaustion  of  the
      appeal rights of  S  in  relation  to  it,  the  First  Appellant  was
      interviewed again on 10 March 2015. As a result of  the  answers  that
      she gave during that interview the Respondent  took  the  decision  to
      remove from the UK both her, and her two  children,  by  reference  to
      Regulations 19(3), and 21B(2), on the basis that this course of action
      was justified because of her abuse of her Treaty  rights  by  entering
      into,  and  assisting  another  person  to  enter,   a   marriage   of
      convenience.

   4. The Appellants appealed that refusal decision, and their appeals  were
      heard  and  dismissed  by  Immigration  Judge  Fisher  in  a  decision
      promulgated on 15 October 2015.

   5. In the course of that decision Judge Fisher made specific findings  of
      fact against the credibility of the First Appellant's evidence, and he
      specifically rejected as untrue her account of how her interview on 10
      March 2015 had been conducted by the Respondent. By the  date  of  the
      hearing the Respondent had served evidence to  rebut  the  Appellant's
      description of how she had been handled  during  that  interview,  and
      what she had said at it, which included contemporaneous notes from the
      immigration officers who had  conduct  of  the  interview.  The  First
      Appellant had however  persisted  during  her  oral  evidence  with  a
      description of the interview that  was  quite  inconsistent  with  the
      contemporary documents. The Judge concluded that the  First  Appellant
      had  been  frank  with  the  Respondent  during  the  course  of  that
      interview, and that she  had  given  the  information  that  had  been
      recorded by immigration officers, unaware that her very candour  could
      lead to the decision that  was  then  taken.  He  concluded  that  her
      subsequent evidence about both the conduct of that interview, and  the
      money that she had admittedly received from S,  was  no  more  than  a
      desperate attempt to avoid the consequences of  the  information  that
      she had given at  that  interview.  The  interview  was  described  as
      "damning from her perspective", and the Judge went on to note that  it
      had included the admissions by her that  she  believed  that  everyone
      present at the wedding ceremony had known that it  was  a  sham,  and,
      that she entered into it in return for payment by S.

   6. The Appellants sought permission to appeal that decision to the  Upper
      Tribunal. Permission was granted by the First Tier Tribunal by way  of
      decision of Judge Ford on 19 April 2015. There were two limbs  to  the
      grounds, and the grant, but both rested on the premise that the  Judge
      had arguably failed to demonstrate that he had given due weight to the
      First Appellant's alcoholism.  First,  that  he  had  thus  failed  to
      consider whether she had the cognitive ability to form  the  necessary
      intention to enter into a marriage of convenience. Second, that he had
      thus failed to consider whether she  could  adequately  care  for  her
      children in Slovakia.

   7. The Respondent served a Rule 24 response to the grounds of  appeal  on
      28 April 2016 in which she  asserted  that  the  Judge  gave  adequate
      regard to the First Appellant's alcoholism, and that his assessment of
      her evidence was demonstrably a  holistic  one,  and  that  since  the
      evidence showed that she was the primary carer for  both  of  her  two
      children there was no reason to suppose that she would  be  unable  to
      continue to perform that role in Slovakia.

   8. Thus the matter comes before me.

   Error of Law?

   9. Ms Rogers confirmed for me that there was no evidence to suggest  that
      the father of the Second and Third Appellants was in the UK,  or  that
      he had ever left Slovakia.

  10. Ms Rogers also confirmed for me that she accepted that the evidence of
      the First Appellant concerning her marriage to S had been rejected  as
      untrue by both Judge Kempton,  and  by  Judge  Fisher,  and  that  she
      accepted that Judge Fisher had properly taken the  decision  of  Judge
      Kempton as only his starting point  before  considering  the  evidence
      that was now before the Tribunal. She therefore accepted that although
      the issue of the First Appellant's alcoholism was  not  one  that  was
      apparently raised before Judge Kempton, it was  one  that  was  raised
      before Judge Fisher, and, that he had quite  properly  taken  it  into
      account in the course of both his decisions as to how  to  manage  the
      appeal [4], and, his approach to the evidence. She  accepted  that  it
      was plain that he had done so, because his decision contains a  number
      of references to her problems with alcohol.

  11. Ms Rogers' argument, as advanced, was that the  effect  of  the  First
      Appellant's alcoholism upon her thinking and decision making processes
      was an issue that went to the issue  of  the  proportionality  of  the
      decision to remove all of the Appellants. As to this first ground,  Ms
      Rogers did not however seek to argue that the First Appellant was  not
      mentally competent to enter into a valid marriage as a result  of  the
      effect of  her  alcoholism  upon  her  thinking  and  decision  making
      processes. Nor did Ms Rogers seek to argue that  the  First  Appellant
      was not mentally competent to care for her children.  Nonetheless  she
      argued that there should have been  an  evaluation  by  the  Judge  of
      whether  the  First  Appellant  was  capable  of   understanding   the
      implications of the decision to enter into the marriage with S, at the
      date of the marriage. As Ms Rogers put it, whether or  not  the  First
      Appellant had lied in the course of her evidence, alcohol  must  still
      have played a part in the decision that she had taken in October 2013,
      and it was an issue that ought to have been taken  into  account  when
      considering the proportionality of the removal.

  12. As to the second ground, Ms Rogers accepted that  neither  the  Second
      nor the Third Appellant were "qualified persons" in their  own  right,
      and that to date their right to remain in the UK was only ever a right
      that was subsidiary to the exercise of treaty rights by their  mother.
      She accepted that their mother had not acquired a right  of  permanent
      residence, and that the Judge had been  correct  to  proceed  on  that
      basis [24]. Ms Rogers argued however that neither of the two  children
      were party to any decision by their  mother  to  commit  an  abuse  of
      treaty rights, and argued that there had been an inadequate assessment
      of the proportionality of the decision to remove them. They had  lived
      in the UK, and had been educated here, since 2006, although there  was
      no evidence placed before the Tribunal to suggest that education would
      not be accessible to them in Slovakia.

  13. Whilst Ms Rogers confirmed that she did not therefore  seek  to  argue
      that the evidence was insufficient  to  ever  permit  a  proportionate
      decision to remove this family, she argued that  the  assessment  that
      was undertaken by the Judge was deficient and should therefore be  set
      aside and remade.

      Conclusions

  14. The decision that the  First  Appellant  and  S  had  entered  into  a
      marriage of convenience was plainly one that was  well  open  to  both
      Judge Kempton, and, Judge Fisher, on  the  evidence  that  was  before
      them. Ms Rogers did not seek to challenge that decision before me.

  15. It is quite clear that the  evidence  that  was  placed  before  Judge
      Fisher was not sufficient to have allowed him to find that  the  First
      Appellant did not have the mental capacity to  enter  into  a  legally
      valid marriage on 12 October 2013. Although Ms Rogers argued that  her
      alcoholism  must  have  affected  the  First  Appellant's  ability  to
      understand the implications of her actions, there are (at  least)  two
      serious problems with that argument.

  16. First, it is quite clear that the decision to enter into a marriage of
      convenience was not a split second decision, but one that was taken by
      her over  a  period  of  time.  Thus  she  had  ample  opportunity  to
      reconsider, and to refuse to proceed with the agreement.  On  her  own
      account, as given at  the  interview  on  10  March  2015,  the  First
      Appellant had made it perfectly clear that this was an arrangement she
      had entered into for payment, and, that she had  been  perfectly  well
      aware that  she  was  not  entering  into  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      marriage. Thus, whilst the decision may well be one that at some later
      point she regretted making, she knew perfectly well what she was doing
      at the time. It is perfectly clear from the Judge's decision that this
      was not a case in which only party to a marriage had entered  into  it
      without a genuine intention to enter a genuine and subsisting marriage
      - both had done so, and they had done so deliberately to obtain for  S
      an immigration advantage to which he was not entitled.

  17. Second, although the medical evidence is not complete  (only  excerpts
      from the First Appellant's medical notes were contained in the  bundle
      of evidence produced for the hearing before the Tribunal), it is by no
      means clear that the First Appellant was abusing  alcohol  during  the
      operative period of time. In June 2013 she was requesting help for her
      abuse of alcohol, and obtained it. By the end of  July  2013  she  was
      telling her GP she had reduced her consumption,  and  on  8  September
      2013 she reported that she had stopped  drinking  alcohol  two  months
      earlier. Whilst notes from spring 2014  show  she  was  then  drinking
      again, the notes produced in evidence  do  not  record  what  occurred
      during the intervening period.

  18. Whatever  the  true  situation  with  the  First  Appellant's  alcohol
      consumption in October 2013, it is plain from the terms in  which  the
      decision is written that the evidence concerning the First Appellant's
      problems with alcohol were at the forefront of the  Judge's  mind  [4,
      19, 24].

  19. The second ground assumes that the Second and  Third  Appellants  were
      exercising Treaty rights on their own account,  when  it  is  accepted
      before me that they were not. Their right to reside  has  always  been
      subsidiary to that of the First Appellant, as her children,  and  thus
      her "family members". It is  accepted  before  me  that  none  of  the
      Appellants has ever acquired a permanent right of residence in the UK.

  20. As her March 2015 interview exposed, the First  Appellant  had  always
      understood what she was doing when she agreed to  enter  into  a  sham
      marriage with S; she was doing so in return for payment in order  that
      he should gain some immigration advantage. The evidence concerning the
      degree to which she abused alcohol consisted essentially  of  her  own
      claims advanced after the decision to remove her had  been  made,  and
      she had been shown to be quite prepared to lie in the  course  of  the
      evidence she had offered since that date. There was no suggestion that
      she was unable to care for either her children, or her mother, in  the
      evidence before the Judge, and as he noted, the contrary was the  case
      [24].

  21. Ms Rogers accepted that the abuse of Treaty rights was a very  serious
      matter  that  would  weigh  heavily   in   the   assessment   of   the
      proportionality of the decision to remove. It is plain that  this  was
      the approach that the  Judge  also  took.  I  am  satisfied  that  his
      decision shows that he did consider all of the relevant material,  and
      that  he  did   not   introduce   into   his   assessment   irrelevant
      considerations. Given the scant evidence placed before him he did  all
      that he could be expected to have done in relation to  his  assessment
      of the best interests of the children; to conclude simply  that  their
      interest were served by continuing to live with their mother the First
      Appellant. Thus I am satisfied that the grounds amount to no more than
      a disagreement with the  Judge's  findings  and  his  conclusion  upon
      proportionality. In the circumstances they disclose no error of law in
      the approach that the Judge took to the evidence. The conclusion  that
      it was proportionate for the Appellants to be removed was one that was
      well open on the evidence, as Ms Rogers accepted, and I  am  satisfied
      that it was adequately reasoned.

Decision


   The decision promulgated on 15 October 2015 did not involve the making of
   an error of law in the approach taken by the Judge to the evidence relied
   upon by the Appellants sufficient to require the decision upon the appeal
   to be set aside and remade, and that decision is accordingly confirmed.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

        Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise the Appellants  are
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  them.  This
        direction applies both to the Appellants  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 4 July 2016
