
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/10940/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On February 16, 2016                 |On February 24, 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                              MRS DUR-E-SAMEEN
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Brown, Counsel, instructed by Arshed & Co
Respondent  Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. The appellant last entered  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor on May 4, 2014 with six months  leave  that
    expired on October 10, 2014. On October 2, 2014 she applied  for  leave
    to remain under Paragraph 276ADE and Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules on the basis of  her  private  and  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The respondent considered her application and on March 6, 2015
    refused her application.

 2. The appellant appealed this decision on March 18,  2015  under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Holmes on  July
    30, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on August 27,  2015  he  refused
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on September 8, 2015  submitting
    the First-tier Judge had approached the appellant's case  unfairly  and
    his findings infected his assessment of the  appellant's  claims  under
    paragraph 276ADE, Appendix FM and article 8 ECHR.

 5. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shimmin gave permission to  appeal  on
    basis the Judge's approach to the failure to  seek  an  explanation  on
    matters important to him amounted to a material error. He accepted that
    may have then impacted on his approach to paragraph 276ADE, Appendix FM
    and article 8 ECHR.

 6. In a Rule 24 letter dated January 6, 2016 the  respondent  opposed  the
    appeal. She argued the First-tier Judge  had  considered  the  evidence
    about the family in Pakistan but had rejected their  claims  and  given
    reasons.

 7. The matter came before me on the above date  and  I  heard  submissions
    from both representatives. The appellant  and  her  witnesses  were  in
    attendance.

 8. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make no order now.

    SUBMISSIONS

 9. Mr Brown submitted this was a case where the appellant's  circumstances
    in Pakistan was crucial. The First-tier Judge  recognised  this  as  he
    referred to the lack of evidence from witnesses living in Pakistan. The
    First-tier Judge did not seek any explanation from the witnesses  about
    the availability of accommodation for the appellant and his failure  to
    do this undermined his findings on both private  and  family  life.  He
    referred me to the grounds of appeal and invited me to  find  an  error
    in.

10. Ms Johnston adopted the rule 24 response dated November 12,  2015.  She
    submitted that whilst the First-tier Judge may not have considered  all
    of the evidence nevertheless the Judge's findings at paragraphs 16,  17
    and 23 demonstrated he had engaged with the evidence and  the  decision
    was open to him.

11. Mr Brown reminded me that  the  public  are  entitled  to  see  justice
    dispensed fairly and if the  hearing  was  tinged  with  any  perceived
    unfairness then the decision should be set aside. The Judge  formulated
    his conclusions based on the fact he had no regard to the circumstances
    in Pakistan because of the lack of evidence from  witnesses  living  in
    Pakistan even though the respondent would have argued they  were  self-
    serving.




    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

12. Permission to appeal was given because Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Shimmin found it arguable the First-tier Judge erred by  attaching  too
    much weight to the lack of statements from family members.

13. This was a detailed decision in which it is clear the First-tier  Judge
    engaged with the appellant's unfortunate circumstances. Paragraph  [15]
    of the First-tier Judge's decision appears on the face of it to  amount
    to nothing more than  a  statement  of  fact.  However,  Mr  Brown  has
    submitted there was procedural unfairness because the First-tier  Judge
    should have raised why there were no statements on the file from  these
    witnesses.

14. In assessing this argument, it is necessary to have regard to the First-
    tier Judge's whole decision. The First-tier Judge noted that Mr  Siddiq
    repeatedly asserted the appellant was alone and had nobody to care  for
    or assist her. Part of his evidence the First-tier Judge  recorded  was
    supported by two other family UK based family members.

15. The First-tier Judge considered all of the evidence and fund  that  the
    witnesses had each failed to disclose that  she  had  close  family  in
    Pakistan. The First-tier Judge placed considerable weight  on  evidence
    elicited in cross-examination that the appellant had  been  spending  a
    substantial proportion of her time with her father and sister at  their
    home address. Paragraph [15] of  the  decision  has  to  be  considered
    against the background  of  this  evidence  in  the  sense  that  these
    witnesses had not provided any evidence  to  explain  circumstances  in
    Pakistan. If  the  First-tier  Judge  had  simply  found,  without  any
    evidence to support his finding, that the appellant could stay with her
    father and/or her sister then that could have been  open  to  challenge
    but those were not the circumstances facing the First-tier Judge as  he
    was satisfied there were close family members who  had  demonstrated  a
    willingness to care for the appellant. Full details  of  this  relevant
    evidence was recorded in  paragraph  [17]  of  the  First-tier  Judge's
    decision.

16. At paragraph [18] the First-tier Judge examined  the  evidence  further
    and concluded the witness statements were misleading having  regard  to
    the oral evidence he  heard.  He  found,  contrary  to  what  was  been
    advanced by  her  family,  that  she  would  have  both  practical  and
    emotional support available in Pakistan.

17. Ms Johnstone argued before  me  that  in  light  of  this  finding  the
    appellant could not succeed because she was unable to demonstrate  very
    significant obstacles or meet the dependant relative provisions.

18. Mr Brown's criticism of the decision  was  that  the  First-tier  Judge
    should have asked the witnesses why the  family  in  Pakistan  had  not
    offered any views on the matter  but  whether  the  evidence  would  be
    viewed as self-serving is a matter of conjecture.

19. The refusal letter made it clear that the  respondent  felt  she  could
    return to Pakistan. The  First-tier  Judge  did  not  accept  the  oral
    evidence given and concluded the evidence was not reliable.

20. The appellant bears the burden of proving her case and bearing in  mind
    the alternative to the appellant continuing to live here  was  for  her
    return I am  satisfied  the  First-tier  Judge  was  entitled  to  make
    findings as he did. It is not  unusual  for  appeal  files  to  include
    statements  from  family  members  and  it  was  the  absence  of  such
    statements together with the unsatisfactory nature, in  the  First-tier
    Judge's opinion, of the witnesses' evidence  that  led  the  First-tier
    Judge to refuse this appeal.

21. Mr Brown's submissions on the remaining grounds  of  appeal  were  tied
    into the unfairness issue and I see no error in the First-tier  Judge's
    approach to the evidence.

22. Mr Brown indicated that there may have been reasons for there being  no
    evidence from family members but I am satisfied that is  something  the
    witnesses should have covered if they had wanted the  First-tier  Judge
    to know about it. As stated above the First-tier Judge was  unimpressed
    with the evidence he heard and was satisfied there  were  close  family
    members because of what he had been told.

23. I find there has been no error in law.

    DECISION

24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point  of  law.  I  uphold  the  First-tier
    decision.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
