
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10131/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2015                            |On 9 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                           ms taniesha itisha rowe
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Bhachu of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, a Home Office Presenting Officer


          DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW


Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  She first came  to  the  UK  in
    October 2001 as a student with  leave  until  31  December  2002.   She
    subsequently sought further leave to remain  under  the  provisions  of
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human rights  (ECHR)  but  this
    application  was  rejected.   Her   most   recent   application   under
    Regulations 15A and 18A of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations) was  refused  on  5th  February
    2014 but in that refusal the respondent also considered the appellant's
    rights under article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    (ECHR). On balance she considered the appellant's human  rights  to  be
    adequately protected in the  Immigration  Rules.  The  respondent  also
    refused her application the EEA Regulations.   The  appellant's  appeal
    against that decision came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Stott (the  Immigration  Judge)  on  30th  July  2014.  The  respondent
    considered the fact that the appellant was the primary  carer  for  her
    daughter, Connie Grant, who was born on 15 December 2006,  but  decided
    that as no decision had been made to remove her, but merely to refuse a
    residence card, there would be no  breach  of  the  appellant's  rights
    under the ECHR.  In any  event,  it  was  accepted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the appellant was the primary carer of Connie Grant,  who
    was a UK  citizen.   However,  the  Immigration  Judge  concluded  that
    Connie's grandmother and elder sister were also  available  to  provide
    care for her.  Consequently they could provide that care  if  the  need
    arose and the Immigration Judge  did  not  accept  therefore  that  the
    provisions of the 2006 Regulations were satisfied because Connie  would
    be able to remain in the UK with one  of  those  other  carers  if  the
    appellant were removed.  The Immigration Judge concluded that the child
    had no contact with her father for approximately two years at the  date
    of the hearing. This was a factor of considerable significance  in  her
    view.  But the Immigration Judge decided to allow the appeal  on  human
    rights grounds, specifically, under Article 8.

2.    The  Immigration  Judge  who  granted  permission   (Judge   Cruthers)
    considered that the Immigration Judge had not sufficiently  taken  into
    account the relevant Immigration Rules and if all factors were properly
    considered the respondent's  decision  was  not  disproportionate.   He
    therefore gave permission to appeal on all grounds.

The Hearing

3.   At the hearing Mr Mills conceded that the Rule  24  response  submitted
    by the appellant's representatives on  27  January  2015  contained  an
    answer to the respondent's  grounds  of  appeal.   In  particular,  the
    appeal was heard on 24 July 2014 but prepared on 28 July 2014.  On  the
    latter date the provisions of the Immigration Act  2014,  which  amends
    the Immigration, Nationality of Asylum Act 2002, came into force.   Had
    the application been determined after 28  July  he  conceded  that  the
    respondent would find it difficult to succeed given the  provisions  of
    Section 117B (6).  His concession went further; he  accepted  that  the
    Immigration Judge's analysis of Article 8 was properly within the ambit
    of her discretion but although criticism can be levelled at the way she
    reasoned the case those criticisms were not  material  to  the  overall
    conclusion.   Accordingly,  he  conceded  that  the  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

4.   Ms Bhachu had nothing to add.

Notice of Decision

Having regard to the concession made the appeal against the decision of  the
First-tier Tribunal is dismissed.  I find no material error of law and  that
the decision to allow the appellant's appeal under Article  8  of  the  ECHR
stands.

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.

In addition no fee award was made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



