
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10765/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th June 2016                             |On 7th July 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                Edward Ugboh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance by the appellant, who was represented
                    by A & A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Peterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  31st  August  1982.   He
    applied for a residence card as a family member of a  qualified  person
    under Regulation 17(1) of the EEA Regulations 2006 but was  refused  on
    the grounds that the respondent was not satisfied that he was a  direct
    family member of the EEA national since, as a  result  of  the  answers
    given by  both  parties  at  interview,  she  had  concluded  that  the
    appellant had attempted to enter into a marriage of convenience.

 2. The matter came before Judge  Jones  on  24th  September  2015.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 5th October 2015  Judge  Jones  found  that  no
    marriage had taken place because of  the  intervention  of  Immigration
    Officers but that in fact the appellant did  intend  to  enter  into  a
    marriage  of  convenience.  Furthermore  the  EEA  national   was   not
    exercising treaty rights.

 3. The judge however allowed the appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations  but
    dismissed it under Article 8.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal but in the  interim  a  fresh
    decision was promulgated by Judge Jones on 26th October 2015 dismissing
    the appeal both under the EEA Regulations and under Article 8.

 5. The appellant challenged that decision on  the  basis  that  it  was  a
    nullity. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin
    stated that it was correct that the judge could not amend the  judgment
    under the slip rule if by doing so the outcome was altered, as in  this
    case.  Accordingly she granted permission  and  suggested  that,  since
    there was no challenge to the substance of  the  reasoning,  the  Upper
    Tribunal should issue a direction to both parties  seeking  submissions
    as to why the case should  not  be  remitted  to  the  same  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to deal with submissions as to why the appeal should  be
    allowed or dismissed on the basis of his unimpugned findings.

 6. Accordingly on 29th April 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun issued  those
    directions.

 7. Prior to the hearing  I  received  notification  from  the  appellant's
    solicitors that he was in Nigeria and confirmation from the  Presenting
    Officer that he had made a voluntary departure from the UK.

 8. Accordingly the appellant's appeal is abandoned.   The  consequence  is
    that the decision of Judge Jones promulgated on 26th October 2015 is  a
    nullity since the judge had no jurisdiction to amend his judgment under
    the slip rule. Accordingly the decision promulgated on 5th October 2015
    will stand.

Notice of Decision

Appeal abandoned.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 6 July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
