
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10071/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 February 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|Prepared on 5 February 2016          |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                               ZHIXIANG LIANG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, born 24 March 1991, is a citizen of China. He first came
    to the UK to study with a valid grant of entry clearance as  a  Tier  4
    student on 15 September 2013, and on 27 September 2014 he applied for a
    variation of his leave to remain in the same capacity.  On  4  February
    2015 the Appellant was interviewed by the  Respondent.  That  interview
    prompted a decision on 26 February 2015 that he was not genuinely  able
    to undertake the course he had applied to follow, and was not genuinely
    able to communicate in English at the standard he had claimed  to  have
    in his application, taken by  reference  to  paragraphs  245ZX(da)  and
    245ZX(o) of the Immigration Rules.  As a  result  the  application  was
    refused and a removal decision was also made on that date  pursuant  to
    s47 of the 2006 Act.

 2. The Appellant duly appealed against those  immigration  decisions.  His
    appeal was heard on the papers filed at his request, on  12  June  2015
    and dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 grounds in a
    Decision promulgated on 22 June 2015 by First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  PA
    Grant-Hutchison.

 3. The Appellant's application to the First Tier Tribunal  for  permission
    to appeal was granted by Judge Colyer on 15 October 2015. The grant  of
    permission is made on the basis it is arguable the Immigration  Officer
    who interviewed the Appellant was not qualified to assess  his  fluency
    in English, and that the Judge gave no consideration to the Appellant's
    explanation for his performance at the interview, or to the  fact  that
    he had already been awarded a degree by Sunderland University  and  had
    previously been awarded  a  qualification  to  show  that  he  had  the
    appropriate level of fluency in English.

 4. Thus the matter comes before me.

The decision under appeal

 5. The Appellant produced in support of his application  a  CAS  that  had
    been issued to him by the University of Sunderland which declared  that
    his fluency in English had been assessed as equivalent to  CEFR  B2  by
    reference to the 2:2 degree that had already been  awarded  to  him  by
    that University in Banking and Finance.

 6. Notwithstanding the award of that degree, and the Appellant's  previous
    award of an English qualification, on 4 February 2015 the Appellant was
    interviewed by the Respondent, by reference to paragraph 245ZX(da);

         (da)     The applicant must, if required to do so on examination or
             interview, be able to demonstrate without the assistance of an
             interpreter English language proficiency of a standard  to  be
             expected from an  individual  who  has  reached  the  standard
             specified in a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies assigned
             in accordance  with  Appendix  A  paragraph  118(b)  (for  the
             avoidance of doubt, the applicant will not  be  subject  to  a
             test at the standard set out in Appendix A, paragraph 118(b)).
             (01.10.2013 HC 628)

 7. The Appellant's performance at that interview resulted in the  decision
    on 26 February 2015 that he was not genuinely  able  to  undertake  the
    course he had applied to follow, and that he was not genuinely able  to
    communicate in English at the standard he had claimed to  have  in  his
    application, by reference to paragraphs 245ZX(da) and 245ZX(o);

         (o)       the  Secretary  of  State  must  be  satisfied  that  the
             applicant is a genuine student.

 8. The application was thus refused and a removal decision was  also  made
    by reference to s47.

Error of Law?

 9. Paragraph 245ZX(da) is  a  separate  free  standing  provision  in  the
    Immigration Rules, which the grant of permission to appeal  appears  to
    have overlooked. If required to do so, a claimant must submit  to  such
    an interview, and demonstrate an appropriate level of  fluency  to  the
    interviewing officer - whatever the  previously  earned  qualifications
    relied upon. This provision is  a  necessary  and  sensible  precaution
    against abuse of the Immigration Rules. There was no suggestion in this
    appeal that the Respondent had  abused  her  powers  in  requiring  the
    Appellant to attend for interview, and the evidence did not permit  the
    Appellant to pursue an argument that the Respondent had  misrepresented
    his performance at the interview.

10. The grounds seek to argue that the Tribunal went  behind  the  evidence
    relied upon by the University of Sunderland to assess  the  Appellant's
    language fluency, without having  sufficient  evidence  to  rebut  that
    assessment, so it usurped the function and powers  of  the  University.
    There is no merit in that argument because it ignores the existence  of
    paragraph  245ZX(da),  and  it  assumes,  wrongly,  that  the   fluency
    assessment undertaken by the University when issuing a student's CAS is
    somehow to be taken by both the Respondent and the Tribunal  under  the
    Immigration Rules as conclusive of the level of fluency attained by  an
    individual student.

11. As a result of the Appellant's request that the  appeal  be  determined
    upon the papers filed the Judge had no opportunity  to  hear  him  give
    evidence. The Judge did however  have  the  full  record  of  interview
    before him, and it is plain from his decision that he reviewed it  with
    care. Having done  so,  he  gave  entirely  adequate  reasons  for  the
    decision that he was  satisfied  the  Appellant  could  not  understand
    eleven of the thirty  six  questions  posed  to  him.  The  Judge  also
    considered the Appellant's  explanation  for  his  performance  at  the
    interview, and rejected it, with entirely adequate reasons, as  he  was
    entitled to do.

12. In the circumstances there was  never  any  merit  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, and permission should not have been granted because  they  were
    unarguable.

13. I am told today that the  Appellant  voluntarily  left  the  UK  on  30
    September 2015. As a result his appeal was abandoned before  permission
    was granted to him to challenge the decision.

DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    22 June 2015 did not involve the making of  an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision  to  be  set
    aside and remade. The decision to dismiss  the  appeal  is  accordingly
    confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    The Appellant did not seek anonymity before the  First  Tier  Tribunal,
    and no request for anonymity is made to me.  There  appears  to  be  no
    proper basis for the Upper Tribunal to make such a direction of its own
    motion.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated  5 February 2016
