
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA106652015
     IA106692015
     IA106762015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 19 June 2017                     |On 11 August 2017                     |
|Prepared 19 June 2017               |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                              Mrs Ashabahen [P]
                              Mr Mayurkumar [P]
                                    [F P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    None
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The  first  Appellant,  a  national  of  India,  appealed  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision, dated 18 February 2015,  to  dismiss  an
    application made on 28 May 2014  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student.  The second and third  Appellants  are  husband  and
    daughter of the first Appellant (1 June 1980, [ ] 2013).  Their appeals
    against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rowlands (the Judge), who on 29 September 2016 dismissed
    the  appeals  on  immigration  grounds.   Permission  to  appeal  those
    decisions was given First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen on 30 April 2017.
     The Respondent's Rule 24  response  was  made  on  19  May  2017.   In
    granting permission Judge  Brunnen  had  in  mind  what  had  become  a
    somewhat confused position over two aspects, first the withdrawal of  a
    certificate of sponsorship letter (CAS letter) in respect of the  first
    Appellant and secondly the suspension of the college (Newcastle Academy
    of Business & Technology) status as a trusted Sponsor ultimately  being
    revoked as of 16 December 2014.

2.   It is clear that before the Judge the evidence was  there  to  indicate
    that the CAS letter had been issued on or with effect from 14 July 2014
    but ultimately withdrawn on 25 September 2014.  There was therefore, at
    the date of the Respondent's decision  on  18  February  2015,  no  CAS
    letter in existence irrespective of the issue of the revocation of  the
    college's sponsorship licence.

3.   The position was, although this was not a case, even if  the  Appellant
    was in regular contact with the college, that the withdrawal of the CAS
    letter was not a matter caused by the Secretary of State.  It  did  not
    attract, as sometimes became the case, additional time  (60  days)  for
    applicants to apply from  a  different  college  as  a  result  of  the
    suspension or withdrawal of the sponsorship licence.

4.   It is clear on the evidence that irrespective  of  the  status  of  the
    college there was no valid CAS letter  in  being  as  at  the  date  of
    decision.

5.   The Appellant did not appear before the Judge  and,  whilst  the  front
    page of the decision suggests they are present, the Judge unequivocally
    states at paragraph 2 of the decision  none  of  the  three  Appellants
    attended the hearing.  The first Appellant

         "... had requested that the proceedings be adjourned as she was due
         to give birth in October 2016.   Her  application  was  refused  as
         there was no medical evidence to suggest she was  unfit  to  attend
         the hearing.  I  proceeded  in  their  absence.   The  Respondent's
         representative did not wish to add to the refusal notice".


6.   In a letter sent to the Ft Tribunal, dated  16  June  2016,  the  first
    Appellant  indicated  that  she  was   not   able   to   afford   legal
    representation to attend and she asked that the case be dealt  with  on
    the papers without her "oral attendance".

7.   In this matter there has been some discussion  as  to  whether  or  not
    Article 8 ECHR was raised by the Appellant at the  outset  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision.  Given that the Appellant  was  claiming
    in effect to be in the United Kingdom for the purposes of studies it is
    difficult to see on what basis Article 8 would  have  been  engaged  to
    show that an adverse decision was disproportionate.  Be that as it may,
    on a careful scrutiny of the papers the first appearance  of  reference
    to Article 8 ECHR is in fact in paragraph  8  of  the  grounds  seeking
    permission.  It is said that the Appellant  had  raised  these  grounds
    before and within her witness statement.  Having  carefully  considered
    the witness statement of 6 March 2015, which was before the  Judge,  it
    is fair to say that there is no reference whatsoever to Article 8 ECHR.

8.   Accompanying the papers for the purposes of the hearing was  a  further
    witness statement of the Appellant which must be  misdated  because  it
    refers to the Secretary of State's Rule 24 response which was not  made
    until 19 May 2017 but the additional statement is dated 18 March 2016.

9.   Attached to the same statement is a copy of the  Secretary  of  State's
    May 2017 Rule 24 response.

10.  Additionally provided but it is undated is a copy of a  document  which
    is said to have been submitted at  some  point  or  another  but  which
    ultimately does not in reality disclose an Article 8  ECHR  issue.   It
    appears to be proforma grounds used to make a general claim of a breach
    of the ECHR.  The fact is that there was no evidence advanced by way of
    statement on behalf of any  of  the  Appellants  concerning  Article  8
    issues nor the impact  on  their  family/private  life  rights  by  the
    Respondent's decision nor by removal with reference to  Section  47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

11.  I am therefore not satisfied that there was  ever  a  ground  on  which
    permission should be given in relation to Article 8 grounds and, as the
    person granting permission noted, there was no reference whatsoever  in
    the Judge's decision to an Article 8 ECHR claim.  It seems to  me  that
    is wholly explicable by the fact that there was none articulated at the
    outset or before Judge Rowlands when she considered the appeals.

12.  In these circumstances therefore I am  not  persuaded  that  there  has
    been any material error of law by the Judge in the consideration of the
    merits of the appeal.  The sad fact is that if there is a dispute as to
    the justification for the withdrawal of the CAS letter then  that  must
    lie between the first Appellant and the college.  I do not see how  the
    withdrawal of the CAS letter is a fault of the Respondent.   Further  I
    have considered paragraph 7 of the Appellant's statement dated 6  March
    2015.  No admission has been made by the Home Office that  the  college
    was bullied into withdrawal of the CAS letter.  There is  nothing  from
    the college in writing confirming  that  to  be  the  case.   In  these
    circumstances I do not see that the Judge can be  criticised  when  she
    received the statement of 6 March 2015 on the  basis  of  the  evidence
    which was then presented.

13.  The additional bundle provided for this Tribunal does not enlarge  upon
    that claim or demonstrate any acceptance by the college that they  were
    bullied  by  the  Home  Office,  for  unspecified  reasons,  into   the
    withdrawal of the CAS letter in September 2014.

14.  The Original Tribunal's decision discloses no material error of law.

15.  The Original Tribunal's decision stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order was sought nor is one required.


Signed                                  Date 10 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed.  Therefore there is no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 10 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

