
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/10293/2014
     IA/10297/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th February 2015                          |On 13th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE PATTERSON
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                        MISS SHANICE PETERGALE PALMER
                        MISS SHANELL ABIGAYLE PALMER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Adeolu, Solicitor, Lonsdale Mayall Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are nationals of Jamaica and are twins,  being  born  on
    24th August 1995.  They entered the United Kingdom as visitors on  18th
    January 2013 and appealed against the Respondent's decision  to  refuse
    to vary their leave to remain here and to  give  directions  for  their
    removal under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act
    2006.

 2. Their  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Meates  who
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  under  Article  8
    ECHR in a determination promulgated on 24th October 2014.

 3. Grounds of application were lodged and permission to appeal granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge (UTJ) Deans in  a  decision  dated  18th  December
    2014.  Thus the matter came before us on the above date.

 4. Mr Adeolu appeared for the Appellants. He submitted that in the judge's
    determination there had been no proper application  of  the  principles
    set out in R (Razgar) v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27.   Article  8  was  not
    restricted to the length of time a person spent in a particular country
    and the judge should have looked at the quality of the family life that
    the Appellants enjoyed here. UTJ Deans had agreed there was an arguable
    issue in relation to Article 8.  There had been no mention of the  case
    of Huang in the decision.  Mr Adeolu particularly emphasised  the  fact
    that the Appellants would be returning to a volatile society and  could
    be preyed upon.  This was a vital element of  this  appeal  and  absent
    their father (away at sea) and their mother (in the UK) they  would  be
    vulnerable to these attacks.  In  response  to  Mr  Bramble  Mr  Adeolu
    accepted that he was not saying  that  the  Appellants  qualifed  under
    Appendix FM but  rather  that  the  error  of  the  judge  was  in  his
    assessment of proportionality under Article 8.  There was no democratic
    necessity for the Appellants to be removed  and  they  operated  as  no
    threat to society. The judge had been wrong to  attach  weight  to  the
    public interest as outlined  in  paragraph  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   We were asked to  set  the  decision
    aside and make a fresh decision allowing the Appellants' appeals.

 5. Mr Bramble  for  the  Home  Office  submitted  that  in  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal the grounds in general were seen as no more than a
    disagreement with the  findings  made  by  the  judge.  UTJ  Deans  had
    indicated that no consideration appeared to have been given to  section
    R-LRT-C of Appendix FM with the implication being that there  might  be
    some merit in the Appellants'  argument  that  the  judge  should  have
    looked at that section and made findings on it.  However, although  the
    judge had simply said in paragraph  26  that  it  was  clear  that  the
    Appellants did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  or
    Appendix FM the judge was quite correct  to form that conclusion as the
    Appellants' mother could not be described as someone  who  was  present
    and settled here.  The judge had gone on  to  consider  Article  8  per
    Razgar.  He had made clear findings on the evidence.  In particular  at
    paragraph 22 the judge had recorded that Mrs Harmione  Brown-Pryce  had
    confirmed that the Appellants were  supported  by  her,  their  Sponsor
    (their mother) and their father in Jamaica.   She  had  also  confirmed
    that the Appellants would return into school once  they  had  completed
    their visit here.

 6. In paragraph 23 the judge had noted that the Appellants' father was  in
    Jamaica and there was an extended family network there.  The  Appellant
    Shanell Palmer had given evidence and confirmed that she  maintained  a
    loving bond with her father and there was no explanation at all  as  to
    why their father could not make arrangements for their care in Jamaica.



 7. At paragraph 24 the judge noted that the father played an  active  role
    in their lives and he would have concluded that the Appellants had  not
    established that their mother in the UK had had sole responsibility for
    their upbringing. These factual findings were clear and furthermore the
    judge had dealt with the submission made by Mr Adeolu relating  to  the
    volatility of life in Jamaica for young women in the final sentence  of
    paragraph 30 of the determination.

 8. Mr Bramble said that it was entirely correct for the judge to  consider
    paragraph 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    because in the balancing exercise it was important to take  account  of
    the public interest.

 9. Finally it was said that the decision of  the  judge  was  not  flawed.
    There were no errors and therefore the decision to dismiss  the  appeal
    should remain.

10. We reserved our decision.

Conclusions

11. Although now aged 19 years, the twins' initial application was made  on
    19th June 2013 when they were children. As such  their  application  to
    remain  here  was  (correctly)  considered  on  that  basis  with   the
    conclusion by the Secretary of State and thereafter Judge  Meates  that
    the Appellants  did  not  qualify  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   In
    granting permission UTJ Deans stated that no consideration appeared  to
    have been given to Section R-LTR-C of Appendix FM but against that  the
    judge had made a finding that the  Appellants  did  not  qualify  under
    Appendix FM. As this was not challenged in any way by Mr Adeolu we need
    to say little more about that except that we agree  with  Judge  Meates
    that the Appellants do not meet the terms of Appendix  FM  for  reasons
    given in the refusal letter.

12. As Mr Adeolu confirmed to us, his position was that  the  decision  was
    inadequate  in  its  conclusions  on  proportionality  with  particular
    emphasis on the mentioning of paragraph 117B of the 2002 Act and to the
    dangers the Appellants would face in terms of  their  vulnerability  as
    young women in the volatile society of Jamaica.

13. The judge was bound  to  take  the  public  interest  into  account  in
    undertaking the balancing act under Article 8 and as Mr Bramble said it
    is a statutory requirement  to  take  into  account  what  is  said  in
    paragraph 117B of the 2002 Act.  It  is  transparently  clear  that  no
    proper criticism can be made of the judge in this regard.

14. The judge summed up the facts in paragraph  30.   She  said  that  both
    Appellants had only lived here with their mother for a short period  of
    time, namely since 18 January 2013.  They  had  previously  lived  with
    their mother in Jamaica up until the age of 7 and then lived with their
    grandmother and aunt.  They  have  throughout  this  period  maintained
    their relationship with their father who has been providing  them  with
    emotional and financial support.  The judge said that there was nothing
    at all exceptional or unusual in the Appellants' circumstances.   There
    was nothing at all that would prevent or cause any difficulties to them
    on their return to Jamaica. They can live with their father, their aunt
    or other extended  family  members.   Their  father  will  continue  to
    provide for their financial support and their mother may continue to do
    so.

15. We pause to say that on the evidence presented to her  these  were  all
    findings that the judge was entitled to make. The judge went on and did
    make findings about the high level of violence in  Jamaica  perpetrated
    against young women but said that the Appellants  were  safe  prior  to
    coming to the UK and would, therefore, with  the  assistance  of  their
    family members, be safe on their return to Jamaica. There  was  nothing
    in the profile of either Appellant  to  permit  the  judge  to  form  a
    different conclusion.

16. For these reasons it is  our  view  that  the  judge  carried  out  the
    appropriate balancing exercise in  assessing  the  competing  interests
    between the parties in relation to the the Appellants' fundamental  but
    qualified rights under Article 8 ECHR.  The particular complaints  made
    by Mr  Adeolu  in  his  oral  submission  were  dealt  with  more  than
    adequately by the judge.

17. There is therefore no error in law in  the  judge's  findings  and  the
    decision must stand. There is no need for an  anonymity  order  and  we
    were not asked to make one.

Notice of Decision

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

19. We do not set aside the decision.



Signed        Date 13th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


