
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10402/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 September 2016                  |On 16 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                 SHIRA TZUR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Pobjoy, instructed by The Aire Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Israel.  She appealed to a judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision on 3  March  2015
    refusing her application for a residence  card.   The  reason  for  the
    refusal was  that  the  requirements  of  Regulation  4(d)(ii)  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006   were   not
    satisfied  in  that  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  did  not   have
    comprehensive sickness insurance in the  United  Kingdom,  specifically
    because their policy did not cover pre-existing medical conditions  for
    the first two years.

2.   The judge noted evidence from Mr Crane, a Health  Insurance  Consultant
    at ActiveQuote.com,  with  whom  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  had
    obtained insurance, that there was no way of including coverage for pre-
    existing conditions with UK insurers on an individual basis,  and  also
    information  from  a  Mr  Stephen  Draper  of  Bupa  that  pre-existing
    conditions were not  covered  under  the  policy.   Mr  Matthew  Evans,
    Director of the AIRE Centre, had made enquiries  and  received  similar
    information i.e. that standard practice was that policies did not cover
    pre-existing medical conditions.  The judge also noted a letter from Dr
    Emily Hull concerning the appellant and stating that  during  the  time
    she had been a patient of hers since 17 September  2014  there  was  no
    history of any significant medical conditions, and with regard  to  the
    sponsor who had been a patient of hers for a similar  period,  she  had
    not had access to earlier medical records but from his current  medical
    records there was no history of any medical conditions.  The judge also
    noted translated overseas medical notes which had nothing  of  note  in
    them except to say that the appellant was an ex-smoker and the  sponsor
    had a heart murmur and the sounds in 2002 were "absolutely normal".

3.   The judge said that it was not known whether either of the  couple  had
    any medical conditions.  They did not believe that they  did  but  they
    had not undertaken  any  medical  assessments  in  order  to  determine
    whether they had any undiagnosed medical conditions.  He  confirmed  it
    was not known whether either of them had any  medical  conditions  that
    were as yet asymptomatic but might develop  to  require  treatment  and
    medication in the near future.  He said that he found, having regard to
    all the circumstances of the case, that the respondent's  decision  was
    not disproportionate given that the couple had only lived in the United
    Kingdom for twelve to thirteen months, where  they  had  not  disclosed
    income sufficient to pay for  medical  treatment  and  where  they  had
    failed to demonstrate that they did not suffer  medical  conditions  by
    way of a medical assessment.  He rejected the argument that the lack of
    available insurance policies  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  such  that
    Regulation 4 could not be satisfied.  Proportionality was  required  to
    be considered in each case upon the specific facts of the  application,
    bearing in mind what had been said in Baumbast v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2002] 3CMLR 23.  He accepted that the couple  were
    of good character and that the appellant worked and paid  tax  and  the
    sponsor intended to do so in the near future and  that  they  had  been
    unable to obtain insurance that was more comprehensive than that  which
    they had purchased from Active.Quote.com.

4.   The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    first that the judge had erred in law in concluding that the  rejection
    of  the  application  for  a  residence  card  did  not  constitute   a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's right  of  residence
    in circumstances where the judge had accepted that it was not  possible
    to  obtain  private  health  insurance  covering  pre-existing  medical
    conditions in the United Kingdom.  In addition it  was  contended  that
    the judge had erred in finding that the decision was  proportionate  on
    the basis that the couple had not disclosed income  sufficient  to  pay
    for medical treatment and had failed to demonstrate they did not suffer
    medical conditions by way of a medical assessment, given that  in  fact
    the sole basis for rejecting the application was that  the  appellant's
    private health insurance did not cover pre-existing medical  conditions
    for the first two years of membership and did  not  refer  to  the  two
    matters set out by the judge at  paragraph  31  of  the  decision.   In
    addition, if disclosure of this information had  been  required  or  if
    they had been required to undertake  a  particular  medical  assessment
    they would have done so.  There was evidence of  both  financial  means
    and medical status before the Tribunal.

5.   Mr Pobjoy mentioned at the outset that the appellant's partner was  now
    a worker within Regulation 4 and on the basis of  that  an  application
    had been made for a residence card in January of this  year  which  had
    been granted in July.  This did not render the  claim  academic  as  it
    would mean there would be a later start for the period of residence.

6.   It is not necessary for me to go into any detail into the  submissions,
    although what I shall have to say about the law shortly  has  benefited
    significantly from the quality of the submissions made.  The reason why
    no more needs to be said about the submissions arises as a  consequence
    of a letter sent to Mr Evans at the AIRE Centre from Mr Peter Grant  of
    the International Immigration Policy Group of the Home Office, dated 22
    June 2016.  In response to a request for  information  about  the  Home
    Office's policy on comprehensive sickness insurance for EEA  nationals,
    it was confirmed that there was  no  requirement  for  private  medical
    insurance policies to  cover  pre-existing  conditions  for  a  defined
    period.  On the basis of this evidence, Mr Bramble accepted that it was
    a clear response, although post-decision it clearly went to  the  heart
    of the matter and made the original  decision  and  hence  the  judge's
    conclusions on it incorrect.  As a consequence he accepted, very fairly
    and properly, that the appeal fell to be allowed.

7.   I indicated that that would be my decision and that I would  provide  a
    reasoned decision subsequently, which I now do.

8.   The appellant had provided evidence that her  EEA  family  member,  her
    partner  Mr  Shimon  Hassid,  was  a  student.   Regulation  4  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 provides a definition  of  the  term
    "student" for the purpose of the Regulations.  Thus, Regulation 4(1)(d)
    contains the following definition:

         "(d) 'Student' means a person who -

             ...

             (ii) has comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the  United
             Kingdom;

             ...".

    The application was refused because although the appellant had provided
    evidence  that  she  and  her  partner  had  medical   insurance   with
    Simplyhealth, the summary of cover that they had provided  stated  that
    the policy did not cover pre-existing medical conditions for the  first
    two years of membership and consequently  it  was  concluded  that  the
    requirements of Regulation 4(1)(d)(ii) were not met.

9.   In Baumbast the relevant insurance  cover  did  not  include  emergency
    treatment.   The  court  stated  at  paragraph  91  that  the  relevant
    limitations and conditions were to be applied in  compliance  with  the
    limits imposed by Community Law and  in  accordance  with  the  general
    principles of that law, in particular the principle of proportionality.
     In addition, in  respect  of  the  application  of  the  principle  of
    proportionality to the facts in Baumbast, it was noted at paragraph  92
    that it had not been denied that Mr Baunbast had  sufficient  resources
    within the meaning of Directive 90/364; second, that he had worked  and
    had therefore lawfully resided in the host  Member  State  for  several
    years, initially as an employed person  and  subsequently  as  a  self-
    employed person; third, that during that period his family also resided
    in the host Member State and remained there even after  his  activities
    as an employed and self-employed person in that state came to  an  end;
    fourth, that neither he nor  the  members  of  his  family  had  become
    burdens on the public finances of the host Member  State;  and,  fifth,
    that both he and his family had  comprehensive  sickness  insurance  in
    another Member State of the union.

10.  These facts were described subsequently  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Ahmad [2014] EWCA Civ 988 at paragraph 45 as  exceptional.   That  case
    was concerned with the question of whether a person could  be  regarded
    as having comprehensive health insurance in the United Kingdom  because
    they were entitled to use the National Health Service.  That claim  was
    unsuccessful.  The  Court  of  Appeal  noted  the  conclusion  in  that
    decision that the host state must apply the conditions  for  compulsory
    sickness insurance cover in accordance with the general  principles  of
    EU law, including in particular the principle  of  proportionality  and
    should therefore disregard minor discrepancies which might  arise  when
    the  cover  was  not  totally  comprehensive.   It  can  be  seen  that
    proportionality forms part of  the  European  Economic  Area  Nationals
    Qualified Persons Guidance of the Home Office of  7  April  2015  which
    states, inter alia, in that case  workers  must  take  a  proportionate
    approach when they consider if an insurance  policy  is  comprehensive.
    It said that for example a policy may contain certain exemptions but if
    it covers the applicant  for  medical  treatment  in  the  majority  of
    circumstances it can be accepted.

11.  Bearing in mind the evidence that was  before  the  judge,  I  consider
    that even without the letter from Mr Grant,  I  would  have  found  the
    judge's decision to be legally flawed.  It is  clear  to  me  that  the
    appellant had done all that could be done both to provide  evidence  of
    her medical history and that of her partner and also with regard to the
    availability of the kind of insurance cover that it appeared  at  least
    at the time of  the  decision  to  be  required  by  the  Home  Office.
    Certainly, as Mr Grant says, the policy at pages  41  to  46  does  not
    contain a requirement for private medical insurance policies  to  cover
    pre-existing conditions for a defined period.  Were it  ever  to  be  a
    factor to regard it as being of relevance, I consider that, as in  this
    case, an applicant who could provide good evidence  going  back  for  a
    sufficient period such as to show an absence of pre-existing conditions
    and also evidence that it is not possible to obtain coverage  for  pre-
    existing  conditions  with  UK  insurers  would  be   able   to   argue
    successfully that any refusal decision would be disproportionate.

12.  But that is by the way with respect to this appeal.  In  light  of  the
    concession in Mr Grant's letter  and  by  Mr  Bramble,  I  am  entirely
    satisfied that the decision in this case was legally wrong, and for the
    judge's decision  dismissing  the  appeal  is  substituted  a  decision
    allowing it.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              16 September 2016
