
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10739/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 June 2015                                |On 11 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                            Mrs Savita Bharmotra
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, Counsel instructed by Visa Expert
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of India and her date of birth is 17  August
    1979.

2.   The appellant made an  application  for  a  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  ("the  2006  Regulations")  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.  On  30  July  2013
    the appellant was married to a Spanish citizen, Gurpreet Virk Kaur. The
    application was made on 26 September 2013.

3.   The application was refused and the  appellant  appealed.   Her  appeal
    was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Malins in a  decision
    which was promulgated on 19 November 2014 following a hearing at Hatton
    Cross on 6 October 2014.   The  appellant  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun on 23 April 2015.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

4.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant,  the  sponsor  and  Jaswal
    Rahman.  Before her there was the report by Immigration Officer Kenneth
    Muir relating to a  visit  he  had  made  to  the  appellant's  address
    following the application. The officer's evidence is that  he  was  let
    into the address by Varinder Singh. He asked Mr Singh whether he  could
    speak to the appellant and the sponsor.  He was shown the room which he
    was told the appellant and the sponsor inhabited, but it was locked and
    the officer was told by Mr  Singh  they  were  at  work.   The  officer
    indicated that he was aware that somebody  was  in  the  room.   Before
    having entered the property he saw that the lights were on and he noted
    that curtains had been pulled shut after he had knocked  on  the  door.
    However, the occupant would not open the door and allow him access.  In
    the Officer's opinion the sponsor was in the room and it was not  clear
    whether the appellant lived there. At  the  property  the  officer  met
    Jaswal Rahman, who identified himself as the sponsor's cousin.

5.   The judge made the following findings:

         "14.1    I did not find the appellant to be a credible witness  for
             myriad reasons, touching every aspect of this appeal and going
             to the heart of its key issue - the nature of the marriage.  I
             shall break down the main reasons for the appellant's lack  of
             credibility, into categories of evidence:

         14.2 Dishonest Evidence

             (a)  I reject the appellant's evidence upon the Christmas tree
                  lights  lighting  her  bedroom,  which  was  repeated   by
                  Gurpreet Virk  Kaur  and  in  February,  seems  inherently
                  unlikely.  Had there been Christmas tree lights on only in
                  the room and the curtains crossed  over  them  before  the
                  Immigration Officers' arrivals then, the light  given  out
                  would have been insufficient to  warrant  the  Immigration
                  Officer's description 'all  the  lights  were  on  in  the
                  room.'  I note  his  use  of  the  plural  and  the  clear
                  implication that the room was well lit.   Nor  would  this
                  situation warrant the officer's unequivocal statement 'the
                  curtains had been pulled close  shut  after  we  knocked.'
                  These observations - which I accept from  the  Immigration
                  Service - are wholly inconsistent with the  bedroom  being
                  unoccupied, locked and the two  parties  to  the  marriage
                  both departed for work;

             (b)  I also reject the detailed account in both the  appellant
                  and  her  husband's   statements   that   Varinder   Singh
                  telephoned the appellant to ask about  breaking  the  lock
                  and that the Immigration Officer declined to  do  this  in
                  order  to  inspect  the  room,  when  the  appellant   had
                  consented.  There  is  no  reference  in  the  Immigration
                  Officer's statement to a discussion about the breaking  of
                  the lock: rather, his account is that he  knocked  on  the
                  door to obtain permission to enter from a  person  inside,
                  having 'heard movement and a voice came from the  room'  -
                  already aware that it was occupied, due  to  the  lighting
                  observed from outside the house  and  the  action  of  the
                  closing of the curtains;

             (c)  Towards the end of her oral evidence, the  appellant  was
                  asked by me, about her employment.   Her  answer  verbatim
                  was 'no, I don't work: I don't have permission.'  Yet  the
                  appellant had produced a letter from Sainsburys giving her
                  shift hours as 5am to 9am on 11th February 2014.  She will
                  have had no permission to work then either.  This was  not
                  an honest response to the question;

             (d)  In her application form, asked  to  describe  her  'ties'
                  with the country of which she is a national, the appellant
                  wrote 'India - All ties broken.'  Yet she had been in  the
                  UK for five years at the time, out of the 34 of her  life.
                  She had therefore lived 29 years in India - been  a  child
                  there, been a teenager there, spent all her  20-somethings
                  there and been  to  school  there.   How  could  she  have
                  severed all connections with her mother, father, siblings,
                  grandparents,   uncles,   aunts,   nephews   and    nieces
                  (undoubtedly, she will have most  of  these)  and  friends
                  together with  organisations  in  her  native  land?   The
                  appellant's parents will have had to fund the  appellant's
                  college place and accommodation in the  UK  to  the  ECO's
                  satisfaction, before her 2008 visa was granted: they  will
                  not be poor.  I reject the appellant's sweeping  statement
                  as dishonest;

             (e)  I find that the appellant  never  had  the  intention  of
                  studying in the UK and that her application for a visa  to
                  do so, was accordingly dishonestly obtained.  Not only did
                  the appellant give up on her course with  no  struggle  or
                  plan to undertake something easier,  but  nowhere  in  her
                  statement or evidence, is there a single reference to  her
                  career plan in coming to the UK, wish to study  or  regret
                  at dropping out nor indeed, a plan  for  any  alternative.
                  Also, there is no letter or document from the  college  in
                  question, showing failed examinations to demonstrate  that
                  the appellant was  not  ab  initio,  an  economic  migrant
                  wishing to procure settlement in the UK through any  means
                  and had employed a student visa for this purpose;

             (f)  The appellant's overall honesty is not  assisted  by  the
                  total absence of any account explaining her  life  in  the
                  four years between her arrival in the UK  'as  a  student'
                  and her moving in with the man she married  in  2012/2013.
                  In which country was she living and for which  years?   On
                  what funds was she living?  What was she doing in the UK?

             (g)  The serious discrepancies in the evidence given upon  the
                  genesis  of  the  marriage,  undermines  the   appellant's
                  credibility further: it is  inconsistent  with  a  genuine
                  proposal, that the appellant states that she  accepted  it
                  after one or two months' thought and consultation, yet the
                  husband states that she gave her answer 'the next day.'

         14.3 The Nature of the Marriage

             Despite my having a  copy  of  only  the  right  half  of  the
             marriage certificate,  I  accept  that  a  ceremony  was  gone
             through.  However, I find the resulting marriage to be  not  a
             genuine marriage within the usual meaning  of  that  phrase  -
             between two committed people, who love each other and wish  to
             spend  the  rest   of   their   lives   together,   in   these
             circumstances:

             (a)   To  the  contract  clearly  did  not  carry  the   usual
                  significance, or both parties would  have  remembered  the
                  happy day when they agreed to marry (see 14.2(e) above);

             (b)  The union is palpably cold:

                  (i)  Neither party buys  a  gift  for  the  other  on  any
                      occasion, not even a card.  This is  not  a  cultural
                      matter but one of inclination in my judgment;

                  (ii) The couple do not go out together ever - save once to
                      the Gurdwara in Gravesend which entailed  eating  out
                      (it is some distance away) or to the shops  nearby  -
                      as housemates often deportation order

                  (iii)    Neither party to the  marriage  uses  any  phrase
                      implying affection or  attachment  in  their  witness
                      statement;

             (c)  The wedding itself was functional:

                  (i)  The groom's parents did not bother to attend  despite
                      being only on the other side of the Channel  an  hour
                      and a half's flight away and the wedding taking place
                      adjacent to the airport;

                  (ii) The reception consisted of three persons eating in  a
                      restaurant - bride, groom and her uncle;

                  (iii)    The bride had no friends/bridesmaids present, nor
                      did she carry any flowers;

                  (iv) Crucially and this is of  significance:  neither  the
                      groom's cousins, housemates, nor a single  friend  of
                      the groom,  bothered  to  attend.   Even  the  person
                      'supporting' the groom for marriage purposes, was one
                      of the two guests  provided  by  the  appellant.   In
                      short, the  groom  went  to  his  wedding  alone  and
                      incidentally, without even a jacket,  still  less,  a
                      buttonhole.

         14.4 The Credibility of the Other Two Witnesses

             (i)  Above, there are references to the want of credibility of
                  Gurpreet Virk Kaur in 14.2(a), (b) and  (g).   As  to  the
                  evidence of Jaswal Rahman, I  do  not  find  it  truthful.
                  This person clearly wishes to support his friend  although
                  I note, this feeling did not  prompt  him  to  attend  the
                  wedding.  No doubt he understood its lack of significance.
                   However, the  significance  of  the  appeal  hearing,  is
                  infinitely greater."

Conclusions

6.   The grounds of appeal are insufficiently particularised  and  there  is
    significant overlap.  The main challenge is that the judge did not take
    into account letters from the appellant and  the  sponsor's  respective
    employers (at F1 and J1 of the appellant's bundle) which establish that
    they were at work when the Immigration Officer attended  the  premises.
    The judge accurately lists the evidence that  was  submitted  with  the
    application at paragraph 4 of the determination.   She  refers  to  the
    letter from the  appellant's  employer  at  paragraph  14.2(c)  of  the
    determination.   The judge did not make any reference to the letter  of
    employment relating to the sponsor. She did  not  make  findings  about
    whether or not the appellant and or the sponsor were  at  work  at  the
    time of the visit or whether the sponsor was  in  the  locked  room  as
    suspected by the Immigration Officer.

7.   The purpose of the letters was to support  the  appellant's  case  that
    she and the sponsor were working at the time of the visit and therefore
    they were not at  the  premises.   The  appellant's  appeal  turned  on
    credibility and the judge preferred the  evidence  of  the  Immigration
    Officer to that of the appellant, the sponsor and the  witness.  It  is
    obvious that  the  judge  took  into  account  the  evidence  from  the
    appellant's employer and indeed there is nothing in the decision  which
    would suggest that she did not accept that at the date of the visit the
    appellant was indeed working in Sainsbury's.  It was not necessary  for
    her to make a finding in relation to this because it was  not  material
    to the decision.

8.   The Immigration Officer was of the view that the sponsor was locked  in
    the room at the time  of  the  visit;  however,  his  evidence  is  not
    conclusive on the matter and the judge did not make a specific  finding
    on the point.  In our view whether  or  not  the  sponsor  was  at  the
    address at the time of the visit was not material  to  the  outcome  of
    this case.  The evidence in the report is that the room  the  appellant
    and the sponsor were said to occupy was locked and  the  officer  could
    not gain access. This in itself is not suspicious. What was  suspicious
    is that according to the Immigration Officer there was  someone  inside
    the room and he gave reasons for this.  It  is  clear  that  the  judge
    accepted this evidence.  She  was  entitled  to  and  her  decision  is
    reasoned on the point.  It  is  immaterial  whether  the  occupant  who
    refused to  open  the  door  was  the  sponsor,  as  suspected  by  the
    Immigration Officer, or another person. Either way would give raise  to
    suspicion and is no assistance to the appellant. If the judge failed to
    take into account the letters (rather than simply considering  them  to
    be immaterial) we do not consider that this amounts to an error of law.
    In any event, it is not material.

9.   The judge found that the appellant had been dishonest  because  at  the
    date of the hearing she said that she was not working because she  does
    not have permission to work and that this was at odds with  the  letter
    from Sainsbury's stating that she had been working on 11 February 2014.
     It was not evidence before the First-tier Tribunal,  but  the  grounds
    assert that the appellant  had  ceased  working  as  a  result  of  the
    decision as she no longer had permission to work and it was not open to
    the judge to make an adverse credibility finding  on  this  point.   We
    note that the issue was not raised in re-examination by the appellant's
    representative.  In any event,  it  may  well  be  the  case  that  the
    appellant had legitimately ceased to work as a result of the  decision;
    however, in the context of the evidence as a whole  and  the  extensive
    adverse credibility findings made by the judge we do not find that this
    amounts to a material error of law.

10.  It was  open  to  the  judge  to  take  into  account  the  appellant's
    immigration history in the UK and the lack of evidence relating to  her
    life generally here since she arrived.   These  are  issues  which  are
    clearly relevant to credibility.

11.  The judge gave adequate reasons for concluding that the appellant,  the
    sponsor and Mr Rahman were not credible.  Considering the findings as a
    whole we do not accept that the judge assessed  credibility  simply  on
    the basis of the lack of  material  gifts  and  affection  between  the
    parties.  However, these were factors which she was  entitled  to  take
    into account when considering the evidence as a whole.  Her findings in
    this respect were not determinative of the outcome.  If  the  appellant
    and the sponsor do not "believe in material things"  or  the  appellant
    was depressed which may have resulted in the lack of ceremony and gifts
    or cards between the parties this evidence should have been put  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

12.  In our view the grounds amount to an attempt to reargue the case and  a
    disagreement with the findings of the First-tier Tribunal which we find
    were open to the judge and are lawful and sustainable.

13.  The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 8 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

