
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10535/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 May 2015                          |On 13 May 2015                       |
|Oral decision                          |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                VIVIAN NYANTA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appeals with permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Clapham promulgated on  8  December  2014  in
    which having found the claimant had not shown  that  she  was  lawfully
    married to her partner, nonetheless found that the  appellant  and  her
    partner were  in  a  durable  relationship  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The judge  then
    at paragraph 48 held: "in the circumstances however I  am  prepared  to
    allow the appeal not on the basis of a spousal relationship but on  the
    basis of the alternative submissions that were made.  I was  not  asked
    to make any fee award or any anonymity order."  The judge then  allowed
    the appeal but made no directions as to what was to follow.

 2. The respondent appealed against this decision  on  the  basis  that  in
    light of the decision in Ihemedu [2011] UKUT 340 that as  this  finding
    would require the Secretary of State to exercise her  discretion  under
    Regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations, that the appropriate course of
    action for the judge was to have been to allow the appeal as not  being
    in accordance with the law and leaving the matter of whether discretion
    was to be exercised in the  appellant's  favour  to  the  Secretary  of
    State.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on  that
    basis by First-tier Tribunal Judge V Osborne on 28 January 2015.

 3. When the matter  came  before  me  I  noted  that  there  had  been  an
    application for this matter to be adjourned,  that  application  having
    been made on 6 May 2015.  It is said that as the claimant is  suffering
    from post-natal depression and is unable to attend the  hearing.   That
    application was refused by the Upper Tribunal it being  noted  that  no
    medical evidence had been produced to support that contention and  that
    it was unclear why the claimant's attendance was required in order  for
    the Tribunal to  determine  whether  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had involved the making of an error of law.

 4. There was no appearance  by  the  appellant  or  for  that  matter  her
    solicitors.  No proper explanation is made for this and  it  must  have
    been clear to  the  solicitors  that  in  the  absence  of  a  positive
    indication from the Upper Tribunal that there would be  no  adjournment
    of the case, that they should have attended and  I am satisfied in  all
    the circumstances it would be appropriate to proceed to  determine  the
    application.

 5. I heard brief submissions from Mr Whitwell on behalf of  the  Secretary
    of State who relied on the grounds of appeal.  I am satisfied  that  in
    this case it is clear that in allowing the appeal on the basis on which
    it was allowed, that is a finding that the appellant  and  her  partner
    were in a durable relationship, that the judge ought then to have found
    the decision of the Secretary of State was not in accordance  with  the
    law and allowed the appeal on that  basis  and  subsequently  making  a
    direction in order to give effect to that appeal that the Secretary  of
    State should reconsider the matter.  I am satisfied that that error  is
    material and that in the circumstances the decision or that part of the
    decision of Judge Clapham should be set aside.

 6. In re-making the decision I consider that  the  appropriate  course  of
    action in this case is to allow  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the  law.   It
    follows therefore that the application remains before the Secretary  of
    State awaiting a proper lawful decision and it is for the Secretary  of
    State to make a fresh decision taking  into  account  the  findings  of
    Judge Clapham which have not been challenged.

 7. Accordingly therefore, for  the  reasons  given,  I  am  satisfied  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an  error
    of law.  I set it aside and I re-make it by  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal on the basis that the decision of the Secretary of State was not
    in accordance with the law.  I direct the Secretary of State to make  a
    fresh decision on this matter, taking into account the findings of  the
    First-tier Tribunal which are preserved. The respondent will also  need
    to take into account the fact that the claimant now has a child who may
    well be an EU national.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 8. The decision of the First-tier tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 9. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on the basis that  it  was
    not in accordance with  the  law.  The  application  therefore  remains
    pending before the respondent and  awaits  a  fresh,  lawful  decision,
    taking into account the findings of  fact  reached  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Signed        Date: 8 May 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

