




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
                                                               IA/10075/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 20th July 2016                            |On: 26th July 2016           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                       Brioney Stanishlous Mothersill
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl,   Counsel instructed by Mohammad & Co
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Jamaica born on the 26th June 1984.


 2. On  the  30th  June  2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Grimshaw)
    dismissed his appeal, on human rights grounds, against  a  decision  to
    refuse to vary his leave to remain and to remove him  from  the  United
    Kingdom pursuant to s47 of the Immigration Asylum and  Nationality  Act
    2006. The Appellant appealed to the Upper  Tribunal  and  on  the  28th
    April 2006 I found the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  contain
    errors such that it was set aside.  My  reasons  are  set  out  in  the
    attached 'Error of Law Decision' but in summary I found that the First-
    tier Tribunal had failed to give effect to the provisions in  s117B  of
    the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   The  Tribunal  had
    accepted that the Appellant had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with not only his own son in the UK (M) but with his step-son  (S)  who
    is a British national  and  therefore  a  "qualifying  child"  for  the
    purpose of s117B(6).  The determination had not considered this finding
    in the context of the statutory provision.  The findings of  fact  made
    by the First-tier Tribunal were unchallenged by  either  side  and  are
    preserved.



    The Factual Matrix


 3. The Appellant wishes to remain in the United Kingdom inter alia because
    he has an Article 8 family life here.  That  family  life  is  said  to
    consist of (in no particular order):


           a) His marriage to [TM], a Jamaican national living lawfully  in
              the UK with a grant of Discretionary Leave;


           b) His paternal relationship with his son M, born in 2014. M  is
              a Jamaican national and has leave in line with his mother  Ms
              [TM];

           c) His paternal relationship with his stepson S, born in 2006. S
              is a British national and is currently living with  his  baby
              brother, his mother Ms [TM], and the Appellant.

 4. The background to those relationships is that the Appellant and Ms [TM]
    met  approximately  five  years  ago.  They  pursued  a   long-distance
    relationship. The Appellant had work commitments in Cuba and Ms Mathews
    was living in the UK.   They spent time together when  they  could,  in
    both the UK and Jamaica. Ms [TM] became pregnant in 2013. In June  2014
    the Appellant came to the UK as a visitor in order to be here  for  the
    birth of his son.  He had intended to return to the Caribbean in  order
    to continue working there. After he has spent some time here however he
    realised that Ms [TM] needed his support.  They have  all  been  living
    together as a family since the Appellant's arrival and it would be very
    disruptive  if  they  were  to  be  now  separated.  It   would   cause
    considerable distress to everyone. Ms [TM] cannot relocate because  her
    son S is a British national and his father  will  not  consent  to  him
    leaving the country.  It was for these reasons that the Appellant  made
    an application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his family
    life. He made that application before his visitor's visa expired.


 5. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that factual background.   Although  S
    sees his biological father regularly the Tribunal accepted that he  had
    developed a "strong bond" with the Appellant who  for  instance  spends
    time each day helping him with  school  work.   S's  father  had  given
    evidence to the effect that he would not allow S to leave the  UK;  the
    Tribunal did not expressly reject this but noted that he had done so in
    the past, for instance to attend his mother's wedding in October  2013.
    The Tribunal found M is too young to maintain any  kind  of  meaningful
    relationship with his father via "modern means of communication".

 6. Before me the Appellant relied on the findings  of  fact  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and asked me to take account  of  an  item  of  new
    evidence, an  Educational  Psychologists  Report  prepared  by  Dr  Ian
    Corban, a chartered Educational and Child Psychologist. That report was
    admitted without objection by the Respondent. The subject of the report
    is S.  In order to prepare it Dr Corban interviewed  Ms  Mathew,  spoke
    with staff from S's primary school and spent a day observing S.  It  is
    a helpful and detailed report. In summary the position is  that  S  has
    special educational  needs  which  are  centred  on  his  communication
    difficulties. He is described as a "popular child" whom Dr Corban found
    to be "engaging, friendly and well-mannered".  The challenges he  faces
    are around memory, concentration and  ability  to  understand  what  is
    happening in different social situations.  His  level  of  maturity  is
    observed by his Mum to be lower than his actual age.   He  is  assessed
    as being in the 3rd  percentile  in  terms  of  his  verbal  abilities,
    centile 0.3 in respect of 'General Conceptual Ability' and on the World
    Reading Scale he was found to have a reading age of 6 years  10  months
    (his chronological age at date of testing was 10 years 10 months).   As
    a consequence S needs far more support than another  boy  of  his  age,
    without those specific challenges, would do.




    My Findings


 7. The Appellant made his application for leave to remain on human  rights
    grounds on the 6th November 2014.  As a result his application fell  to
    be decided with reference to Immigration Rules codifying Article 8,  ie
    paragraph 276ADE(1) and Appendix FM.


 8. The Appellant accepts that he  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules. He has not lived in the UK for long enough to qualify under  any
    of the 'long residence'  provisions  in  paragraph  276ADE(1),  and  he
    cannot show there to be any significant obstacles to his integration in
    Jamaica. In respect of Appendix FM the Appellant cannot  get  past  the
    first hurdle: he is not eligible to make  an  application  under  those
    provisions because he had leave to enter as a visitor at the time  that
    he made his application.

 9. I am satisfied that there are good grounds to proceed to  consider  the
    Appellant's Article 8  rights  outwith  the  framework  of  the  Rules.
    Appendix FM is not a "complete code" and this is  a  paradigm  case  to
    illustrate why: the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting family  life
    albeit that  he  entered  as  a  visitor.   I  therefore  consider  the
    Appellant's case within the Razgar framework.

10. It is accepted that there is a family life  and  that  the  Appellant's
    removal would be an interference with it. Although it is possible  that
    Ms Mathew and M could go to Jamaica to live with the Appellant it is in
    my view extremely unlikely that they would do so, since it  would  mean
    leaving S behind. Although his father has in the past permitted him  to
    make short visits to Jamaica he has made it very clear (in his  witness
    statement dated 15th June 2015) that he will not allow him to leave the
    country permanently.

11. I am satisfied that a decision to remove a  person  with  no  right  to
    remain under the Immigration Rules is a decision  rationally  connected
    with the legitimate Article 8 (2) aim of protection of the economy.

12. The question is whether the decision is disproportionate, or to put  it
    another way, whether the consequences for the Appellant and his  family
    would  be  "unjustifiably  harsh"  when  weighed  against  the   public
    interest.

13. The starting point for consideration of proportionality is s117B of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases



         (1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

           (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

           (a) a private life, or

           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship with a

           qualifying child, and

           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.


14. In the recent case of MA (Pakistan) & Ors v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705
    the Court of Appeal  considered  the  construction  of  that  statutory
    provision, and found that sub-section  6  is  not  simply  one  of  six
    equally weighted considerations [at 17]:


         "there can be no doubt that section 117B(6) must be read as a self-
         contained provision in the sense  that  Parliament  has  stipulated
         that  where  the  conditions  specified  in  the  sub-section   are
         satisfied, the public interest will not justify removal. It is  not
         legitimate to have regard to  the  public  interest  considerations
         unless that is permitted, either explicitly, or implicitly, by  the
         subsection itself"

15. It follows that if an applicant can show the three limbs of 117B(6)  to
    be satisfied, the public interest will not require his removal and  the
    appeal must be allowed.


16. In this case it is not in issue that the Appellant has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with S, who is a qualifying child. The question
    is whether it is "reasonable" to expect  S  to  leave  the  UK.     The
    question of exactly what "reasonable" means remains at large, in  light
    of the decision of the Court of Appeal in MA to grant permission for an
    onwards appeal to the Supreme Court. For the purpose of this appeal,  I
    take the approach advocated by the Secretary  of  State  and  approved,
    albeit with much reluctance, by the Court in MA.    That  accords  with
    the approach taken by the Upper Tribunal in  PD  &  Ors  (Article  8  -
    conjoined family claims) [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC). The assessment  is  not
    limited to the circumstances pertaining  to  the  child.  The  decision
    maker must weigh in to the balance all relevant factors, including  the
    position of the parents, but must give substantial weight to  the  long
    residence (or nationality) of the child.

17. In this case it hardly matters what approach is taken. That is  because
    all factors point towards it not being  "reasonable"  to  expect  S  to
    leave the UK. Apart from the fact that he is a British citizen with the
    right  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  living  in  the  country  of   his
    nationality, he has regular contact  with  his  biological  father  who
    lives here and who makes strong objection to him being removed from the
    jurisdiction. He is a child with special educational needs  who  has  a
    strong support structure in the UK in the form not only of his  family,
    but his school who have provided significant "support  scaffolding"  in
    order to assist him in the transition to secondary school.   S also has
    another half sibling on his father's side and if he  were  required  to
    leave the UK that relationship would very likely be scuppered. For  all
    of those reasons it is wholly unreasonable that S be expected to travel
    to Jamaica with his stepfather.


      Decisions

18. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law
    and was set aside, albeit with preserved findings  of  fact.  Following
    submission of further evidence and submissions, I re-make the decisions
    in the appeal as follows:


        i) The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.


       ii) The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              21st July 2016




























































                      Appendix A: Error of Law Decision








































































Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
                                                                 IA/10075/15


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 28th April 2016                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                       Brioney Stanishlous Mothersill
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl,   Counsel instructed by Mohammad & Co
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION

19. The Appellant is a national of Jamaica born in 1984.   He appeals  with
    permission[1]  the  decision  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal   (Judge
    Grimshaw)[2] to dismiss his appeal, on human rights grounds, against  a
    decision to refuse to vary his leave to remain and to remove  him  from
    the United Kingdom pursuant  to  s47  of  the  Immigration  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.



    Background and Matters in Issue


20. The Appellant wishes to remain in the United Kingdom inter alia because
    he has an Article 8 family life here.  That  family  life  is  said  to
    consist of (in no particular order):


           d) His marriage to Ms [TM], a Jamaican national living  lawfully
              in the UK with a grant of Discretionary Leave;


           e) His paternal relationship with his son M, born in 2014. M  is
              a Jamaican national and has leave in line with his mother  Ms
              [TM];

           f) His paternal relationship with his stepson S, born in 2006. S
              is a British national and is currently living with  his  baby
              brother, his mother Ms [TM], and the Appellant.

21. The background to those relationships is that the Appellant and Ms [TM]
    met  approximately  five  years  ago.  They  pursued  a   long-distance
    relationship. The Appellant had work commitments in Cuba and Ms Mathews
    was living in the UK.   They spent time together when  they  could,  in
    both the UK and Jamaica. Ms [TM] became pregnant in 2013. In June  2014
    the Appellant came to the UK as a visitor in order to be here  for  the
    birth of his son.  He had intended to return to the Caribbean in  order
    to continue working there. After he has spent some time here however he
    realised that Ms [TM] needed his support.  They have  all  been  living
    together as a family since the Appellant's arrival and it would be very
    disruptive  if  they  were  to  be  now  separated.  It   would   cause
    considerable distress to everyone. Ms [TM] cannot relocate because  her
    son S is a British national and his father  will  not  consent  to  him
    leaving the country.


22. When the  matter  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  was  not
    contested that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM.  He failed at the first  hurdle  of  'eligibility':  as  a
    visitor he was not able to 'switch' under the 'family life' Rules.  Nor
    could he show that he met the requirements of paragraph  276ADE,  since
    he had not been in the UK long enough.  The case  was  put  on  classic
    Article 8 grounds, that is to say outside of the Immigration  Rules  on
    the basis of the Razgar framework.

23. The Tribunal directed itself that compelling circumstances  would  need
    to exist before a grant of  leave  'outside  of  the  Rules'  could  be
    justified.  In assessing that  test  the  Tribunal  made  a  number  of
    admirably clear findings of  fact,  which  it  helpfully  divides  into
    factors that weigh in the Appellant's favour, and those that  might  be
    thought to weigh against him. Those factors identified as supportive of
    the Appellant's case were:

              i) The Appellant enjoys a family life with his  wife  and  the
                 children;
             ii) He has taken on the responsibilities of a father  to  S  as
                 well as M;
            iii) The Appellant did intend to leave the UK at the end of  his
                 visit;
             iv) The Tribunal accepts that he changed his mind once  he  had
                 bonded with his son and witnessed the burden  faced  by  Ms
                 [TM];
              v) Although S continues to see his biological  father  he  has
                 developed a "strong  bond"  with  the  Appellant  who,  for
                 instance,  helps him with his school work;
             vi) S is not permitted to leave the UK by his father;
            vii)  M  is  too  young  to  maintain  any  kind  of  meaningful
                 relationship  with  his  father  via   "modern   means   of
                 communication";

    Those held to weigh in favour of the Respondent were:

           viii) The couple had originally been happy to live apart, because
                 the Appellant had a well paid  job  at  Guantanamo  Bay  US
                 Naval Base. They had not planned to live together  for  the
                 first 5 to 6 years of their marriage;
             ix) Those plans did not change when Ms [TM] became pregnant;
              x) Ms [TM] and M could therefore continue  their  relationship
                 with the Appellant in line with their original plans;
             xi) S has a father in this country with whom he enjoys  regular
                 contact and with whom he can stay if  his  mother  goes  to
                 visit the Appellant;
            xii) S has been permitted to visit Jamaica in the  past  by  his
                 father.

24. Pulling all of that together, the Tribunal accepts that  the  Appellant
    likely underestimated how the birth of M  would  be  a  "life-changing"
    experience for him:


         "He is a new father  keen  to  develop  his  family  life  in  this
         country. Be that as it  may,  although  I  have  sympathy  for  the
         Appellant I cannot find that his position, or that of his family in
         the United Kingdom that he will leave behind,  is  either  rare  or
         exceptional"


    On that basis the appeal is dismissed.




      Error of Law

25. Permission was granted on the ground that  the  Tribunal  has  arguably
    erred  in  failing  to  consider  section  117B  of   the   Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The considerations listed  at  (1)-(6)
    of that statutory provision are mandatory considerations for any  Judge
    conducting an Article 8  proportionality  balancing  exercise  in  this
    Chamber. The matters set out at (1)-(5) could all inform the weight  to
    be attached to the public interest  in  removal,  however  it  is  sub-
    section (6) which is the focus of this appeal.   It being accepted that
    the Appellant enjoys a family life with M, and potentially S, it  would
    appear that the Tribunal accepted  that  he  had  a  "genuine  parental
    relationship", at least with his own son.  The Tribunal  was  therefore
    bound  to  consider  whether  it  would  be  "reasonable"  for  M  (and
    potentially S) to leave the UK in order to  continue  his  relationship
    with the Appellant. If it was not,  then  it  was  not  in  the  public
    interest for the Appellant to be removed:  s117B(6).   The  failure  to
    consider this provision was an error of law.


26. Before me Ms Faryl did not challenge the findings of fact made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal. She did  however  submit  that  the  determination
    failed to address one aspect of the evidence that was before it.   That
    was the material relating to S.  Ms  [TM]'  eldest  child  has  special
    educational needs and  is  said  to  have  recently  suffered  "immense
    upheaval" when his father  separated  from  his  stepmother,  who  left
    taking S's half-brother with her.  There  were  no  findings  on  these
    assertions and it was an important part of the Appellant's case.

27.  I  therefore  agreed  to  re-make  the   decision,   in   respect   of
    proportionality, at a later date  when  evidence  could  be  called  in
    respect of S and any other relevant matter.



      Decisions

28. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    as identified above. The findings  of  fact  are  preserved,   but  the
    proportionality assessment is set aside.


29. I make no direction for anonymity in this unreported  decision.  Should
    either party consider an anonymity order to be appropriate (in view  of
    involvement of minors) an application should be  made  at  the  resumed
    hearing.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                1st May 2016


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 29th September 2015 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Nicholson
[2] Determination dated 30th June 2015

