
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/10087/2015
     IA/10093/2015
     IA/10099/2015
     IA/10112/2015
     IA/10122/2015
     IA/10083/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th July 2016                              |On 2nd August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 samuel [g]
                               christiana [c]
                                    [s a]
                                    [n g]
                                    [s g]
                                    [b o]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms M Crowley, OISC Adviser, Cardinal Hume Centre

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal however I  will  refer  to  the
    parties according to their status before the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    ease of comprehension.

 2. The Respondent appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Owens promulgated on 22nd  December  2015  allowing
    the Appellants' appeals against the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  their  human  rights  under  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on three grounds which may be summarised as follows:

      1) It was arguable that the judge erred in his  consideration  of  the
         best interests of the children.

      2) It is arguable that the judge erred in  failing  to  give  adequate
         reasons on material matters.

      3) It is  arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in  taking  into  account
         irrelevant factors in reaching her decision.

Error of Law

 4. At the close of the hearing I reserved my decision which  I  shall  now
    give.  I do not find that there is  an  error  of  law  such  that  the
    determination should be set aside.

 5. In respect of ground 1, Mr Walker argued that the First-tier Judge  had
    erred at paragraph 42 of the determination in her consideration of  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in EV (Philippines) &  Ors  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 as she approached the
    best  interests  of  the  child  "without  reference  to  his  parent's
    immigration status".  The Secretary of State advocated that  the  exact
    opposite  approach  should  be  followed  in  light  of  [58]   of   EV
    (Philippines).

 6. Ms Crowley for the Appellants submitted that she would  rely  upon  her
    skeleton argument and referred my attention to [33] of EV (Philippines)
    which she submitted stated the precise opposite of what  was  contended
    for in [58].  With respect to both parties, in my view the Secretary of
    State has misconstrued the court's judgment at [58] and not  gauged  it
    by its context.  In my view, the court in EV (Philippines) did not seek
    to give guidance that the immigration history of the children's parents
    should be considered in determining the child's bests interests as such
    a finding by the court would have conflicted with the judgment  of  the
    Supreme Court in Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2013] UKSC 74 at paragraph 10(7) wherein  Lord  Hodge  delivering  the
    judgment of the court stated that "A  child  must  not  be  blamed  for
    matters for which he or she is not responsible, such as the conduct  of
    a parent". I do not believe that the Court of Appeal would have  sought
    to disagree with that binding guidance of  the  Supreme  Court  without
    more.

 7. In respect of ground 2 and the contention that the judge failed to give
    adequate reasons, in my view there is a discrepancy pointed  to  by  Mr
    Walker. This occurs in respect of the second Appellant  being  said  to
    have been educated up to the age of 18 at paragraph 38 but later  being
    described at paragraph 47  as  neither  being  "a  skilled  worker  nor
    educated".  That discrepancy in my view is not material to the  judge's
    overall decision and holistic approach to  the  difficulties  that  the
    family would face on return to Ghana.  In my view the judge was  trying
    to say that the second Appellant  had  not  undergone  education  which
    would supply her with skills, or in other words education,  that  would
    lead to a profession. That is why the judge found at paragraph 47  that
    the second Appellant was not a skilled worker nor educated as  part  of
    her reasons for finding that the family would  be  likely  to  live  in
    poverty if returned to Ghana.

 8. Mr Walker also highlighted that the refusal letter from  the  Secretary
    of State mentions that the second Appellant stated in  her  application
    that she had two children in Ghana  however  any  complaint  which  the
    Respondent may have in those  matters  not  factoring  in  the  judge's
    consideration are immaterial given that the judge finds at paragraph 58
    that the first and second Appellants do not meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules  where  such  ties  to
    Ghana would have been relevant.  Consequently the judge's assessment of
    the first and second Appellants' human rights outside of the Rules  has
    not been attacked by the Secretary of  State  in  that  regard  as  her
    grounds focus on the findings of  fact  made  in  the  context  of  the
    judge's  assessment  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and   before   she
    considered Article 8 outside the Rules.  Thus given  that  the  judge's
    assessment of the factors underlying private life fell  to  be  refused
    under the Immigration Rules the complaints made  by  the  Secretary  of
    State do not infect  the  findings  made  separately  under  Article  8
    outside the  Rules,  which  have  not  been  challenged  at  any  rate.
    Consequently if I am wrong in my view any error is immaterial for  that
    reason alone.

 9. Further still, if I am wrong in my view, any error in relation  to  the
    second or first Appellant would be immaterial given that the judge  has
    found at paragraph 57 that the third Appellant child has lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for seven years and it would be  unreasonable  for  that
    child to leave the UK.  Such a finding would have consequences for  the
    first and second Appellants  as  parents  of  that  child  which  would
    require consideration under  Section  117B(6)  under  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which the judge has considered  at  any
    rate under paragraph 88 and  which  has  not  been  challenged  by  the
    Respondent.  Therefore  given  the  judge's  unchallenged  findings  at
    paragraph 88 concerning Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, there would be
    no public interest in the parents' removals given that they  meet  that
    sub-Section of the statute (which assessment is  in  harmony  with  the
    recent decision of the Court of Appeal in R, (on the application of  MA
    (Pakistan) & Ors) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  &
    Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

10. Turning to the third and final ground, in my view  the  judge  had  not
    taken irrelevant factors into account. Indeed the factor  of  delay  is
    relevant given that the Appellants made their application on 8th August
    2012 which was refused on 28th August 2013 but it  was  not  until  2nd
    March 2015 that removal directions were issued against  the  Appellants
    (presumably under the Removal Directions policy) which gave rise  to  a
    right of appeal and the appeal hearings before the First-tier  Tribunal
    in due course.  Therefore the judge's taking into consideration of  the
    delay against the backdrop that there is no discernible reason why  the
    Secretary of State did not issue removal  directions  until  2nd  March
    2015 is acceptable and represented delay that the judge was entitled to
    take into account.  Furthermore there was  no  reason  pressed  by  the
    Respondent as to why the judge would  not  be  entitled  to  take  into
    account the lack of specialist language therapy in Ghana  as  a  factor
    amongst others to be considered outside the Rules.

11. Consequently I do not find that  there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    determination such that it should be set aside.  The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is affirmed and shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

















