
IAC-AH-KRL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10424/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2015                            |On 27 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ms Mariam Omoyemi Quadri
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant/Secretary of State:   Ms S Vidyadharan, Specialist
Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mrs J Heybroek, Solicitor, Cale Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    decision by the Secretary of State to refuse  to  grant  her  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of long residence.  The First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not make an anonymity direction, and I do  not  consider  that  such  a
    direction is warranted for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of  Nigeria,  whose  date  of  birth  is  12
    December 1964.  On 5 July 2012 she applied, with the assistance of Cale
    Solicitors, for ILR on long residence grounds.   She  claimed  to  have
    arrived in the UK from Nigeria on 30 November 1995, having left  behind
    her former husband and three children.   Her  case  was  she  could  no
    longer bear the tumultuous violence that she  was  subjected  to  on  a
    daily basis at the hands of her violent husband.   Her  travel  to  the
    United Kingdom had been facilitated by an agent, with  the  support  of
    family and friends in the UK.  Upon arrival in the UK,  she  had  lived
    with her aunt Mrs Abiola Ogunkoy, a British national at an  address  in
    London, SE13 up until 2003.  She had then gone  to  stay  with  another
    family member at an address in London, SE17,  before  finally  settling
    down at her present address.   She  was  in  a  stable  and  subsisting
    relationship with Mr Tunde Ayoyemi, who was present and settled in  the
    UK.  The claimant's solicitors asserted that the claimant qualified for
    leave to  remain  under  paragraph  276B  of  the  Rules;  and  in  the
    alternative her removal would contravene Articles 2, 3  and  8  of  the
    ECHR.  Their client's life would be in grave danger from her husband if
    she went back to the south western  part  of  Nigeria  from  where  she
    originated.  Relocation to another part of Nigeria would be  difficult,
    and if she went to the north of Nigeria, it would not be safe.

 3. While the application  was  pending,  the  claimant  was  convicted  at
    Woolwich Crown Court on 12 June 2013 of obtaining  pecuniary  advantage
    by deception on 23 May 2005 in contravention of Section  16(1)  of  the
    Theft Act 1968.  She  was  sentenced  to  a  term  of  imprisonment  of
    eighteen weeks.

 4. On 14 January 2014 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing
    the claimant's application for ILR, and for making directions  for  her
    removal as an illegal entrant.

 5. The documentary evidence did not substantiate a claim to reside in  the
    UK continuously for fourteen years.  The evidence provided was  sparse,
    and did not cover the entire fourteen year period.  She had provided no
    documentary evidence at all for the period 1996 to 1999  and  from  the
    year 2000 to 2001.  Furthermore, evidence of residence was required  in
    the form of documents from official verifiable sources such as  utility
    companies,  employers'  letters,  dental/general  practitioners,   bank
    statements and Government  departments.   She  had  not  provided  such
    material which would substantiate her claim to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom since allegedly arriving here in November 1995.  She did not in
    any event meet the requirements of paragraph 276B(iii) of the Rules  as
    she had an unspent conviction.  Her conviction on 12  June  2013  would
    not be considered spent until 12 June 2020.

 6. She also fell foul of paragraph 322(1C)(iii)  which  provided  that  an
    application for leave to remain or  variation  of  leave  to  enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom should normally be  refused  where,  inter
    alia, the applicant had been convicted of an  offence  for  which  they
    have been sentenced to a term  of  imprisonment  of  less  than  twelve
    months, unless a period of seven years had passed since the end of  the
    sentence.

 7. The SSHD went on to consider whether the claimant had a  viable  family
    or private life claim under Appendix FM or Rule 276ADE  of  the  Rules.
    She did not, inter  alia,  satisfy  the  requirement  of  having  lived
    continuously in the UK for less  than  twenty  years  (discounting  any
    period of imprisonment) but having no ties to the country to which  she
    would have to go if required to leave the UK.  She also  fell  foul  of
    paragraph S-LTR1.6 as her presence in the UK was not conducive  to  the
    public good because her recent criminal conviction made it  undesirable
    to allow her to remain in the UK.

 8. She stated her life would be in danger if returned to  Nigeria  as  she
    would suffer abuse from her husband.  If she  had  a  genuine  fear  of
    this, it was open to her to make an  asylum  claim.   Regard  had  been
    given to all the representations that she had submitted, but there were
    no sufficient compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances  to  justify
    allowing her to remain in the United Kingdom outside the Rules.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The claimant's appeal came before Judge Majid sitting in the First-tier
    Tribunal on 24 September 2014.  The claimant was  represented  by  Mrs
    Heybroek, and the Secretary of State was  represented  by  Mr  Carroll.
    The judge received oral evidence from the claimant  and  her  aunt  Mrs
    Ogunkoy.

10. In his subsequent determination, the judge made some findings  of  fact
    in favour of the claimant at paragraph 10.  At paragraph 15 he observed
    that the author of the refusal letter seemed not to  realise  that  the
    claimant's case should be considered under the  old  Rules  which  were
    without doubt more lenient than the present Rules.  At paragraph 16, he
    cited an extensive extract from the claimant's witness statement of  23
    April 2014.  At paragraph 17, he said he  was  clearly  persuaded  that
    this was a case in which the rule  of  law  required  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed.  He was particularly  affected  by  the  dispositive
    reasons (findings of fact) he had enumerated in  paragraph  10  of  his
    determination.  Compassion made a positive  judgment  acceptable  given
    the fact that the claimant was forced to leave Nigeria in 1995  due  to
    the violence of her husband.

11.  At  paragraphs  18  to  21,  the  judge  made  reference  to   various
    authorities, and to the Immigration Act 2014.  He  described  the  2014
    Act as trying to obviate the benefit of the ECHR Articles, particularly
    relating to the respect for family life.  He said that judges  believed
    that in giving the protection of the HRA parliament did not  intend  to
    supersede the HRA by ordinary changes to the Rules, clearly  understood
    to be far less in statutory status.  His careful reading  of  the  2014
    Act revealed that the Izuazu type situation could still lead to Article
    8 ECHR being applied in appropriate circumstances.  In this  particular
    case, he  found  that  the  claimant  could  not  be  deprived  of  the
    protection of the Convention and should be helped to  remain  with  her
    family members in the UK.  His partner was sitting in court, willing to
    be examined on his witness statement.  His Counsel had  submitted  that
    his seven year old relationship, and his keenness to marry the claimant
    as soon as her  immigration  was  sorted  out,  should  be  taken  into
    account.

12. The judge concluded at paragraph 23 that  he  was  persuaded  that  the
    claimant merited the benefit  of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395,  as
    amended, and the protections  of  the  ECHR.   The  judge  allowed  the
    appeal, not specifying on what basis the appeal was allowed.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

13. The Secretary of State applied for permission to  appeal,  arguing  the
    judge had failed to give reasons, or adequate reasons, for findings  on
    material matters.  The claimant's credibility was seriously undermined,
    as she had failed to disclose her conviction for deception in 2013.  If
    she had  disclosed  this  information,  her  refusal  would  have  been
    mandatory under the old Immigration Rules.  The judge had  also  failed
    to  provide  adequate  reasons  why  her  circumstances   were   either
    compelling or exceptional.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

14. On 24 November 2014 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  G  J  White  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

      a) the judge appears to have allowed the appeal under the  Immigration
         Rules and the ECHR;

      b) it is arguable the judge has given insufficient reasons as  to  why
         any of the Immigration Rules are met;

      c) the judge's approach to  human  rights  is  arguably  difficult  to
         discern;

      d) it is arguable the judge has failed to have any engagement with the
         fact that the claimant was convicted  of  a  criminal  offence  and
         sentenced to a term of imprisonment in 2013;

      e) the judge arguably appears to show no adequate engagement with part
         5A of the 2002 Act (public interest).

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

15. At the hearing before me, Mrs Heybroek drew my attention to her written
    Rule 24 response.  She accepted that the judge had erred in law insofar
    as he had allowed the appeal under the Rules, but  she  submitted  that
    his finding under Article 8 was  sustainable.   Although  she  had  not
    relied on the Court of Appeal decision in Edgehill, she submitted  that
    it was open to the judge to conduct an old style Article  8  assessment
    without reference to Appendix FM or Rule 276ADE because the application
    predated the introduction of the new Rules. Moreover, in the  light  of
    the positive findings of fact made by the judge, his finding  that  the
    claimant succeeded in  an  Article  8  appeal  outside  the  Rules  was
    sustainable.  She acknowledged that he had not set out the  five  point
    Razgar  test,  and  nowhere  in  his   decision   did   he   refer   to
    proportionality. But he was an experienced judge who  had  referred  to
    the relevant case law.  So it should be taken that he knew what he  was
    doing, and had adopted the correct approach.

16. Having heard  submissions  from  both  parties  on  the  error  of  law
    question, I found that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    vitiated by a material error of law such that it should be set aside in
    its entirety.  I gave my reasons for so finding in short  form  and  my
    extended reasons are set out below.  I  then  received  submissions  on
    future disposal.  Mrs Heybroek was keen  that  the  judge's  favourable
    findings of fact should be preserved, whereas Ms Vidyadharan  submitted
    that none of the judge's findings of fact could stand.  As I needed  to
    reflect on this, I reserved my decision on this question.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

17. As conceded by Mrs Heybroek, the judge erred in law in finding that the
    claimant qualified for ILR under the Rules.   Her  criminal  conviction
    debarred her from succeeding under the  fourteen  year  long  residence
    Rule which was in force at the time of her application.   Although  the
    judge failed to make findings of fact on the applicable  provisions  of
    Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE, it is apparent from the  uncontested  fact
    of the claimant's conviction and the contents of the claimant's witness
    statement that she did not qualify for leave to remain on either family
    or private life grounds under the new Rules.  Her  mother  remained  in
    Nigeria (see paragraph 18 of her witness statement) and in his  witness
    statement her partner said he had  recently  visited  her  children  in
    Nigeria, and had provided them with  financial  support.   Although  Mr
    Ayoyemi is described in the decision as the claimant's partner, he  was
    not in fact a partner for the purposes of Appendix FM.  This is because
    they had not been living together in a relationship akin to marriage.

18. Following Nagre and MF Nigeria in the Court of Appeal, it was necessary
    for Judge Majid to undertake a two stage Article 8 assessment.  This he
    manifestly  failed  to  do.   His  failure  cannot  retrospectively  be
    defended on the basis that it is in accordance with the Court of Appeal
    decision in Edgehill.

19. Under the transitional provisions contained in HC 194, it was expressly
    represented that an application for leave to remain that was pending as
    of 9 July 2012 would be considered in  accordance  with  the  Rules  in
    force on 8 July 2012; and, as held by the Court of Appeal in Edgehill &
    Anor [2014] EWCA Civ 402, that the Secretary of State would not rely on
    the new Rules which came into force  on  9  July  2012.  The  ratio  of
    Edgehill is that the Secretary of State cannot go back on this  express
    representation, and so cannot rely on the new  twenty  year  rule  when
    addressing an Article 8 claim by  an  applicant  who  applied  on  long
    residence grounds before 9 July 2012.

20. However, the Court of Appeal's attention was not apparently drawn to  a
    modification of  the  transitional  provisions  in  HC  194  which  was
    introduced into the Rules in September 2012 by HC 565 (06.09.12).  Rule
    A277C, in its initial form, provided as follows:

         Subject to paragraphs A277 to A280 ... where the Secretary of State
         is considering any application to which the provisions of  Appendix
         FM (family life) and paragraphs 276ADE to 276ADH (private life)  do
         not already apply, she will do so in line with these provisions.

21. As from 13 December 2012, paragraph A277C was re-worded as follows:

         Subject to paragraphs A277 to A280 ... where the Secretary of State
         deems it appropriate, the Secretary  of  State  will  consider  any
         application to which the provisions of Appendix  FM  (family  life)
         and paragraphs 276ADE to  276ADH  (private  life)  do  not  already
         apply, under ... EX.1 of Appendix FM (family  life)  and  paragraph
         276ADE (private life) of these Rules.  If the applicant  meets  the
         requirements  of  leave  under   those   provisions   (except   the
         requirement for a valid application), the applicant will be granted
         leave under ... Appendix FM  or  under  paragraph  276BE  of  these
         Rules.

22. Accordingly, prima facie the Rules permitted the Secretary of State  at
    the date of decision in  January  2014  to  consider  this  appellant's
    Article 8 claim under Rule 276ADE, although the Rule did not  "already"
    apply to her as the application of the Rule was previously excluded  by
    the transitional provisions of HC 194.

23. The ratio of Edgehill is also called into  question  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal decision in Haleemuden [2014] EWA Civ 558.

24. But even if the ratio of Edgehill is treated as sound, Judge Majid  was
    not relieved of the obligation to undertake a two stage assessment.  At
    best the impact of Edgehill on the claimant is that it cannot  be  held
    against her that  she  has  not  yet  accrued  twenty  years'  unlawful
    residence.

25. The decision of Judge Majid on the Article 8 claim failed to perform an
    essential function which is to explain to the losing party why she  had
    lost.  Most egregiously, the decision wholly failed to engage with  the
    public interest considerations arising under Section 117B of  the  2002
    Act as amended by the Immigration Act 2014.

26. Accordingly, as I ruled at the hearing, the entire decision is vitiated
    by a material error of law, such  that  it  should  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

Future Disposal

27. The findings of fact which Mrs Heybroek submits should be preserved are
    the following:

      a) that the claimant has been in the UK since 1995; and

      b) that she was forced to leave Nigeria in 1995 as she was a victim of
         domestic violence; and

      c) on return to Nigeria she is likely to be killed by her husband  who
         caused her to leave Nigeria in the first place.

28. Mrs Heybroek's reasoning was that Judge Majid, who  is  an  experienced
    judge, had the benefit of receiving oral evidence from the claimant  on
    these matters, and it was reasonably open to Judge Majid to find her to
    be an entirely credible witness.

29. However, his decision contains no recognition  of  the  fact  that  the
    claimant had recently been  convicted  of  an  offence  of  dishonesty,
    albeit that the actual offence took place in 2005.  Judge Majid has not
    apparently taken into account in assessing the  claimant's  credibility
    her  conviction  for  an  offence  of  dishonesty.   Furthermore,   the
    reasoning underpinning the favourable findings of fact  is  very  thin,
    and it does not adequately engage with the case for  the  Secretary  of
    State.

30. Accordingly, I find that none of the findings of  fact  made  by  Judge
    Majid should be preserved.

Conclusion

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that the decision should be set aside in its entirety and remade.

Directions

32. This appeal shall be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Taylor
    House for a de novo hearing on the claimant's Article  8  claim  before
    any judge apart from Judge Majid.  None of the findings of fact made by
    the previous First-tier Tribunal shall be preserved.



Signed        Date 27 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

