
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10624/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2 February 2015 / 20 April 2015        |On 14 May 2015                    |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                           HASSAN ABDULAZIZ MBARAK
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Soloman, Counsel, instructed by Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Tanzania born on  14  October  1982.   He
    applied on 13 January 2014 for leave to remain in the UK as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant under the points-based system.  The appellant
    proposed to complete a course  at  the  College  of  Advanced  Studies,
    London E1 leading to a diploma in  strategic  management  NQF  Level  7
    finishing in September 2015.  The appellant entered the UK as a student
    in December 2006.

 2. On 30 January 2014 the Secretary of State refused the appellant further
    leave because the CAS submitted for the application related  to  a  new
    course at the institution and the sponsor register was  checked  on  30
    January 20124 and the sponsor college was found to be a legacy sponsor.
    Therefore the appellant could not  comply  with  the   requirements  of
    Appendix A 116(da)(db) and paragraph 119.

 3. In addition the appellant had previously been  granted leave  to  study
    at degree level or above for a period of four years and  eight  months.
    The current application related to a course at Level until 4  September
    2015.  This would result in the appellant spending more than five years
    in the UK as a student at degree level above and contrary to  paragraph
    245ZX(c)(ha) of the Rules.

 4. The appeal  was heard by Judge S Taylor on 6 October and  he  dismissed
    the appeal on 17 October 2014.  The judge found that at the time of the
    application  the  college  was  not  yet  a  legacy  sponsor  and   the
    appellant's representative submitted a copy of the published policy and
    guidance which confirmed that if a  college  became  a  legacy  sponsor
    after it had assigned a CAS the relevant student may  still  apply  for
    leave and if successful the  student  may  continue  to  study  at  the
    college.

 5. However, with regard to refusal on the grounds of paragraph  245ZX((ha)
    the respondent  had refused the  application  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant had spent a period of  four  years  and  eight  months.   The
    current application was to study  the  level  7  diploma  in  strategic
    management NQF Level 7 until 4 September 2015.  A  grant  of  leave  to
    study this course would result in the appellant having spent more  than
    five years in the UK as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  studying  courses
    that consisted of degree level study or above and therefore  he  failed
    to meet the requirements of  paragraph  245ZX(ha)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 6. Application for permission to appeal was made contending that the judge
    had erroneously found that the five year rather than the six year limit
    under paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the Rules applied on the  basis  that  the
    appellant was required to demonstrate he wished  to  follow  a  Masters
    course and the combination of the first and Masters course may total up
    to six years.  The appellant had completed a first and  Masters  course
    and now wished to complete an additional "diploma course".

 7. It was stated that Paragraph 245ZX((ha)(i) of the Rules did not require
    that the appellant wished to follow a "Masters course" but  instead  "a
    course of study at Masters degree level".

 8. Under paragraph 6 of the Rules "degree  level  study"  meant  a  course
    which led to a recognised United Kingdom degree  at Bachelors level  or
    above or an equivalent qualification at Level 6 of the revised National
    Qualifications Framework or Levels 9 or above of  the  Scottish  Credit
    and Qualifications Framework.

 9. Under part 8 of these Rules "postgraduate level"  meant  at  course  at
    Level 7 or above for the revised National Qualifications  Framework  or
    Qualification and Credit Framework or Level 11 or above of the Scottish
    Credit and Qualifications Framework, which leads to a recognised United
    Kingdom postgraduate degree at Masters level or above, or an equivalent
    qualification at the same level.

10. The appellant wished to follow an NQF  level  7  diploma  in  strategic
    management.  The diploma was at Masters degree level and this  sufficed
    for the purposes of the Rules.  It was irrelevant that the course was a
    diploma rather than a Masters degree.

11. If the judge had directed himself correctly he would  have  found  that
    the six year limit applied and the grant of leave   the  appellant  was
    seeking was one year seven months seven days plus the time he had spent
    in studying at degree level, four years and two months and twenty  five
    days rather than four years six months. The date of determination would
    not lead to the appellant having spent more than six years in the UK.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  P  J  M  Hollingworth  on  8
    December. An error of law had arisen in the context of the construction
    to be placed upon the relevant Rule.

Conclusions

13. The appeal hearing was adjourned on the basis that the exact status  of
    the college needed to be established as at the date of decision and  at
    the hearing before me it was accepted by Mr Solomon that the College of
    Advanced Studies was not a recognised  body  which  is  an  institution
    granted degree awarding powers by Royal Charter or Act of Parliament or
    the Privy Counsel.  By  the  Education  (Recognised  Bodies)  (England)
    Order 2013 which was brought  into  force  on  30  December  2014,  the
    College of Advanced Studies was not listed. I accept that it was not  a
    recognised body as at the date of decision.

14. At the hearing before me Mr  Solomon  relied  on  his  application  for
    permission to appeal and submitted it should be the six year limit that
    would apply.  In effect the total periods  of  the  length  of  courses
    would be within the six year limit.

15. Miss Isherwood submitted that Mr Solomon was asking me  to  ignore  the
    previous period of  study  and  she  referred  to  the  case  of  Islam
    (Paragraph 245X(ha) five years  study)  [2013]  UKUT  608  (IAC).   The
    purpose of the rule is to stop students from  continually  studying  at
    the same level and the rule confirms that there remains a  time  limit.
    The diploma course would take him over the five year point.

16. Despite Mr Solomon's interpretation there still remains  a  time  limit
    under (ha)(i) of six years when comparing (ha)(i) with  (ha)(ii)  which
    introduces the concept of no time limit.  I take  the  point  that  the
    appellant was intending to study at Master's degree level.  However,  I
    am not persuaded that the judge materially erred in law

17. The fact is that the College of Advanced Studies is  not  a  recognised
    body and whatever level course the appellant wished to  follow  he  was
    not seeking to study a Masters degree level sponsored by a sponsor that
    is a recognised body.  Thus the appellant cannot bring himself into the
    exception of (ha(i)) as asserted and his appeal was bound to fail.

18. I find no material error of law in Judge S Taylor's  decision  and  the
    decision shall stand.



Signed        Date 11th May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
