
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10003/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th July 2015                    |On 2nd September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                         MRS LUCY MARY INOJIE-ONIHA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Praisoody, Counsel instructed by Chris
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mrs Lucy  Mary  Inojie-Oniha,  appeals  with  permission
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson dismissing
    her appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to  refuse  her
    application for indefinite leave to remain under  Appendix  FM  as  the
    dependent parent of her daughter, Christiana Oniha, under human  rights
    grounds pursuant to Article 8 ECHR and against removal  directions  set
    for the Appellant's country of origin, Nigeria.

 2. The Appellant at her appeal hearing opted to pursue her appeal  outwith
    the rules  alone  under  Article  8  ECHR.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hodgkinson dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Respondent's decision was a proportionate interference with her  family
    and private life under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision.  The  grounds  may  be
    summarised as follows:

      i) The decision at paragraph 37  and  paragraph  48  referred  to  the
         decisions in Gulshan (Article 8 - new  Rules  -  correct  approach)
         Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) and Nagre, R (on the application of)
         v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC  720
         (Admin) and applied an intermediary test when  considering  whether
         there was an Article 8 claim outside the rules. This  approach  was
         contrary to that in MM,  R  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraphs 128-130;

     ii) The decision conflates the immigration rules  with  the  Article  8
         assessment at paragraphs 38, 45 and 47 in contradiction of the  "no
         near miss" train of arguments made popular by Miah v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ  261  and  the  rules
         could not form part of any Article 8 assessment;

    iii) The decision does not reveal any credibility findings in respect of
         the witnesses;

     iv) The decision fails to apply the guidance in Kugathas v Secretary of
         State for the Home  Department  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  and  Ghising
         (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) Nepal [2012] UKUT 160  (IAC)
         in assessing whether there is any family life.

 4. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Levin by way of a decision  wherein  it  was  observed  that  the
    approach in  Gulshan  and  Nagre  no  longer  represented  the  correct
    approach to the consideration of Article 8 outside the  rules  and  the
    judge conflated his consideration under Appendix FM with his assessment
    outside the rules.

 5. I was provided with a  Rule  24  response  from  the  Respondent  which
    confirmed reliance on the decision of Singh and Khalid v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74  which  upheld  the
    approach taken in Nagre.

    Submissions

 6. In advancing the Appellant's grounds of appeal, Ms Praisoody  submitted
    inter alia that the approach in Gulshan is incorrect in whether to make
    a decision outside the Rules. The final ground was no longer pursued in
    light of the judge  acknowledging  that  family  life  was  engaged  at
    paragraph 35 of his decision. Ms Praisoody further sought to remind  me
    about the facts of the underlying  appeal  however,  these  submissions
    were not of a legal nature and did not refer to any legal error in  the
    judge's decision.

 7. I then heard submissions from Ms Isherwood who submitted in reply inter
    alia that the judge took the immigration rules into account because one
    should always start with those. She also highlighted that at  paragraph
    33 of the decision, the  judge  found  that  there  was  no  dependency
    between the Appellant and her family members and that at  paragraph  27
    the judge highlighted the contradictory evidence between the  Appellant
    and her witnesses. Ms Isherwood submitted  that  paragraph  34  of  the
    decision was the crux of the  conclusion  and  emphasised  the  judge's
    finding that there was no independent  evidence  before  him  from  the
    Appellant and the new evidence the  Appellant  now  sought  to  present
    should have been done sooner and was not before  the  judge.  Regarding
    the threshold of engagement of Article  8,  Ms  Isherwood  relied  upon
    Singh & Khalid at [62 and 67] and  confirmed  that  there  need  to  be
    "compelling grounds"  to  go  outside  the  rules.  Ms  Isherwood  also
    referred to Secretary of State for the Home Department v SS  (Congo)  &
    Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 regarding consideration  of  the  rules  in  an
    Article 8 assessment  which  may  go  in  an  Appellant's  favour.  She
    submitted that ultimately the judge did not materially err by referring
    to  Gulshan  anyhow  as  he  looked  at  the  evidence  and  found   it
    inconsistent and contradictory and because of the lack of evidence  the
    appeal could not be found in her favour.

 8. In concluding her application, Ms Praisoody  accepted  that  there  had
    been a consideration outside the Rules of Article 8, but the wrong test
    of Gulshan had been applied. In response to  my  query  as  to  whether
    there was a material error in the decision  given  that  the  Appellant
    accepted there had  been  an  Article  8  consideration,  Ms  Praisoody
    contended that there remained an error because the  judge  had  applied
    the incorrect Gulshan threshold throughout his decision as a  'compass'
    when  deciding  the   issue   of   whether   removal   would   not   be
    disproportionate even though he did consider  the  appeal  outside  the
    rules. She submitted in closing that the main point she relied upon was
    that the test was applied wrongly.

 9. I asked both parties at the close of submissions whether they had
    anything further to add and both confirmed that they did not.

10. At the close of submissions, I indicated that I would reserve my
    decision which I shall now give. I do not find that there was an error
    of law in the decision such that it should be set aside. My reasons for
    so finding are as follows.

    No Error of Law

11. In relation to the first ground, I am satisfied that in considering the
    appeal the judge clearly went to great lengths to approach  the  appeal
    in a lawful and Article 8-compliant manner. At the First-tier  Tribunal
    the Appellant's previous legal representative stated  that  the  appeal
    was advanced on Article 8 outside the  rules  alone.  This  is  clearly
    reflected in the judge's decision at paragraph 23 and demonstrates that
    the decision itself was entirely focussed upon an Article 8  assessment
    outside the rules. Therefore, the first ground of appeal as drafted  is
    flawed as it is seemingly premised upon the misapprehension that  there
    was no Article 8 assessment which is clearly incorrect. For example, at
    paragraphs 35-48 of his  decision,  it  is  clear  that  the  judge  is
    performing a step-by-step assessment of the Razgar questions which  are
    the  hallmark  of  a  lawful  proportionality  assessment.  Thereafter,
    paragraphs 35-36 notes that family  life  and  private  life  are  both
    engaged, and so on. Therefore, the reference to Gulshan is a  non-issue
    and in any event immaterial given that Article 8  was  already  engaged
    and the judge went on to consider the remaining  limbs  of  the  Razgar
    test.

12. It is unfortunate that it was thought necessary  to  refer  to  Gulshan
    given that it has not been upheld or followed by the  Court  of  Appeal
    even in the recent matter of Singh and Khalid. A recent decision of  Mr
    Justice Edis equally comments  fairly  that  the  threshold  stated  in
    Gulshan is a misstatement of the law (see [47] of Sunassee, R  v  Upper
    Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  &  Anor  [2015]  EWHC  1604
    (Admin)). It is now well-settled that there  is  no  intermediary  test
    before a decision-maker or Tribunal must consider whether there  is  an
    Article 8 claim not dispensed with by  the  rules.  That  consideration
    will always need to take place and the  two-stage  approach  stated  in
    Izuazu remains good law as followed by Mr Justice  Sales  (as  he  then
    was) in Nagre and as followed by Lord Justice Underhill  in  Singh  and
    Khalid. One does  not  need  to  demonstrate  "compelling  grounds"  as
    asserted by Ms Isherwood.

13. As to the argument that the judge applied the Gulshan  threshold  as  a
    'compass' throughout  his  decision  as  to  whether  the  removal  was
    disproportionate, that is not how I understand the grounds to have been
    drafted. However, I am of the view that there is no indication  in  the
    decision that the judge applied Gulshan as a compass or other threshold
    concerning the proportionality assessment. I was not  referred  to  any
    paragraph  (other  than  paragraph  37  which   simply   mentions   the
    'reasoning' in Gulshan was borne in mind  by  the  judge)  which  could
    corroborate or support that submission.

14. In conclusion, although the reference to Gulshan  was  unfortunate  and
    infelicitous it did not affect the judge's decision-making nor preclude
    him from considering Article  8  substantively  nor  did  it  form  the
    threshold upon which he decided whether removal might be  proportionate
    or not.

15. Concerning the  second  ground,  I  also  find  this  is  misconceived.
    Although it is correct that the Court of Appeal  stated  in  Miah  that
    there is no "near miss" principle, this was clarified in my view by the
    later dicta of Lord Carnwath in the Supreme Court authority of Patel  &
    Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 [at 56]
    which confirms as follows:

         "Although  the  context  of  the  rules  may  be  relevant  to  the
         consideration of proportionality ... this cannot be equated with  a
         formalised "near-miss" or "sliding scale" principle".

16. If further authority were necessary to establish this point, it can  be
    found in the recent judgment of Lords Justice  Sales  in  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
    [at 56] which states as follows:

         "However, it cannot be said that the fact that a  case  involves  a
         'near miss' in relation to the requirements set out in the Rules is
         wholly irrelevant to the balancing exercise required under  Article
         8. If an applicant can show that there are individual interests  at
         stake covered by Article 8 which give rise to a strong  claim  that
         compelling circumstances may exist to  justify  the  grant  of  LTE
         outside the Rules, the fact that their case is also a  'near  miss'
         case may be a relevant consideration which tips the  balance  under
         Article 8 in their favour. In such a case, the  applicant  will  be
         able to say that the detrimental impact on the public  interest  in
         issue if LTE is granted in their favour will be somewhat less  than
         in a case where the gap between the applicant's  position  and  the
         requirements of the Rules is great, and the risk that they may  end
         up having recourse to  public  funds  and  resources  is  therefore
         greater".

17. Therefore, it is clear from the above passage that the rules  can  form
    part of a proportionality assessment, much to the benefit of appellants
    it would seem. In this particular decision, it is clear to me that  the
    reason why the judge referred to the rules at paragraph 38 was to gauge
    whether the decision taken by the Respondent was  "in  accordance  with
    the law" in tackling the third limb of the Razgar test.

18. I was not persuaded by Ms Isherwood's submission that  a  judge  should
    always start every Article 8 ECHR assessment by taking the  Immigration
    Rules into account. In this particular scenario, it was for  the  judge
    to balance the facts as he saw them. It is not mandatory that  a  judge
    consider the extent to which the Immigration Rules  are  met  where  an
    appeal is advanced on Article 8 ECHR alone. If an appeal is not pursued
    on the basis that the Rules are met, a judge can immediately proceed to
    consider the appeal on its second stage outwith the rules. However,  as
    stated above, the reference to the Rules in  this  particular  decision
    did not adversely affect the overall approach taken by the judge anyhow
    but was a gauge to whether the decision was in accordance with the law.
    In light of the above, the second ground must also fail.

19. Regarding the third ground, I find  that  the  judge  made  credibility
    findings upon the oral evidence before him (see paragraphs 25  and  34)
    and discussed the evidence he had heard as a whole.  I  find  that  the
    judge reached findings upon the evidence before him that were  open  to
    him and which he was entitled to  reach.  Those  findings  are  neither
    perverse nor irrational in a Wednesbury sense.

20. In relation to the final ground that the decision failed to  apply  the
    guidance in Kugathas and Ghising in  assessing  whether  there  is  any
    family life, Ms Praisoody rightly accepted that this ground should  not
    be pursued given that the judge found that family life was engaged (see
    paragraph 35 of the decision). Had that concession  not  been  made,  I
    still would have found against the Appellant on this issue  given  that
    the  guidance  in  Ghising  specifically  requires   a   fact-sensitive
    assessment in determining whether family life  is  engaged  between  an
    adult-child and  a  parent,  and  that  fact-sensitive  assessment  was
    performed and fell in favour of the Appellant and  consequently  it  is
    difficult to see what possible complaint the  Appellant  can  have  had
    with that finding.

21. Therefore, in conclusion, the grounds do not reveal  an  error  of  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

22. In the circumstances the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed  and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.

    Decision

23. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

