
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10674/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th May 2015                     |On 15th June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                            DAVID OPEYEME ALAWADE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Youngerwood, promulgated on 3rd October 2014, following a hearing
    at Taylor House on 16th September  2014.   In  the  determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of David  Opeyemi  Alawade.   The  Appellant
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria,  who  was  born  on  7th
    September 1993.  He entered the UK on a  visit  visa  on  4th  November
    2004.   His  leave  expired  on  19th  February  2005.   The  Appellant
    subsequently overstayed.  On 20th May 2013, he applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain.  On 12th February 2014, the Secretary of State refused
    that application and also made a decision to remove  the  Appellant  to
    Nigeria.  The Appellant appeals against that decision.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he arrived in the UK,  with  his  younger
    brother on 4th November 2004, sponsored by his paternal uncle  and  his
    wife, and that the reason for this  was  his  parents  were  undergoing
    enormous financial difficulties in the  respect  of  their  upbringing.
    Since their arrival, the Appellant's younger  brother  has  been  given
    indefinite leave to remain.  The Appellant has lived  continually  with
    his paternal uncle and  his  wife  since  coming  to  the  UK.   He  is
    currently studying for a B.Eng (Hons) in Engineering at the  University
    of Bolton.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the Appellant had been in the UK  unlawfully  since
    February 2005, "and the key person responsible, his  uncle,  was  fully
    aware of that fact" (paragraph 16).  Consideration  was  given  to  the
    case of Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 60 which considered  the  meaning  of  the
    word "ties" and explained that it is  "a  concept  involving  something
    more than merely remote and abstract links to the country  of  proposed
    deportation or removal" (see paragraph 17).  The  judge  observed  that
    the Appellant had left his country of origin at the age of  6  and  had
    been in the UK for 23 years.

 5. However, the judge held that the Appellant had  "some  contact  between
    himself and his parents, and more particularly between his uncle,  whom
    he treats as his father, and his  parents.   There  are,  in  addition,
    other family members in Nigeria, ..."  The judge went on to hold that

         "The arrangement whereby the Appellant came to, and stayed  in  the
         UK is clearly basically a financial one, rather than based  on  any
         hostility towards him from his parents.  The Appellant  still  has,
         on my findings, social and cultural ties to Nigeria, not diminished
         by his ties to his uncle, and has not lost all family  ties  there"
         (paragraph 18).

 6. It was on the basis of these facts, that the  judge  then  went  on  to
    consider the law.  Specific consideration was given to  the  well-known
    case of Kugathas [2003] EWCA  Civ  31.   In  this  respect,  the  judge
    observed  that,  whereas  Kugathas  might  have  been  interpreted  too
    strictly in the past, nevertheless, "a key principle must still be  the
    extent of emotional dependence between members of a family"  (paragraph
    19).  The Appellant's private life was clearly met "given the length of
    residence that the Appellant has been here" (paragraph  19).   On  this
    basis, the judge had regard to the "Razgar principles."  However, given
    that Section 117B of the 2014 Immigration Act had to be applied, it was
    clear that "little weight" had to be given to a private life  that  was
    established at a time when the  Appellant's  presence  in  the  UK  was
    precarious (see paragraph 19).

 7.  The  judge  went  on  to  conclude  that,  "the  key  reason  for  the
    overstaying, if not the Appellant's  original  entry  to  the  UK,  was
    because of the financial problems of his parents ..."  (paragraph  20).
    After the Appellant's arrival in the UK, two further children were born
    to his parents, "and his younger brother came to the UK notwithstanding
    those financial difficulties."  In terms of the impact of the  decision
    on the Appellant, the judge  observed  that,  "whilst  the  Appellant's
    education would clearly be seriously interrupted, he knew full well  at
    the time he entered that education  that  his  status  in  the  UK  was
    precarious" (paragraph 20).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to  give  proper
    consideration to paragraph 276ADE because the Appellant has  no  family
    ties to Nigeria and has not spoken to his biological parents  for  some
    years.  The judge also misdirected himself in  relation  to  Article  8
    because young adults who have not formed an  independent  family  unit,
    and are still financially dependent, will be considered to enjoy family
    life.

10. The judge also failed to take into account the significance of the fact
    that the Appellant arrived in the UK as a minor and even if  he  became
    aware of that fact, he was only 14 or 15 years old at  that  time,  and
    was still a minor.  Arrival or residence in the UK  as  a  minor  is  a
    weighty consideration in the balancing exercise.  The  Appellant  could
    not be responsible for his unlawful presence in the UK.  Moreover,  his
    brother who was two years younger, had been granted discretionary leave
    to remain in the UK.

11. On 30th March 2015, permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that
    the judge failed to have regard to the principles set out in  AA  v  UK
    and Ghising.

12. On 21st April 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered to the  effect  that
    the judge was entitled to make the findings that he did.  The Appellant
    was in the UK unlawfully and continued to remain here in the  knowledge
    that his immigration status was precarious.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on  28th  May  2015,  Ms  Nnamani  made  three
    specific submissions.  First, in  relation  to  paragraph  276ADE,  the
    judge erred in law in concluding at paragraph 18,  that  the  Appellant
    had social and cultural ties to Nigeria  because,  although  the  judge
    refers to the case of Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 60, the significance of that
    case was misunderstood because it referred to the fact that "ties"  are
    such that they "involve there being continued  connection  to  life  in
    that country; something that ties a Claimant to his or her  country  of
    origin", and in this case, the Appellant had not been to Nigeria  since
    coming to the UK and had next to no contact with his parents there.

14. Second, as far as Article 8 was concerned the judge did find  that  the
    Appellant was living with the  uncle  and  the  uncle's  wife  and  was
    financially dependent upon them.  However, he referred to Kugathas  and
    did not refer to the later decision of Ghising which refines  the  test
    in that case.

15. Third, as far as proportionality was concerned, whilst it was  accepted
    that the judge had to have regard to paragraph 117B of the 2014 Act, he
    was wrong to conclude that "little weight" should be  attached  to  the
    Appellant's  precarious  immigration  status  in  the  UK  because  the
    Appellant had come to the UK at the time when he was a minor and had no
    particular say in his living in the UK.

16. For his part, Mr Kandola submitted that paragraph 276ADE  was  properly
    applied.  This is because the judge specifically had regard to the case
    of Ogundimu (at paragraph 17) and then proceeded to apply  the  law  to
    the facts as he had found, such that it was his clear  conclusion  that
    he still had social and cultural ties to Nigeria, and  these  were  not
    diminished by his ties to his uncle (see paragraph 18).  The judge  was
    entitled to come to this conclusion.

17. Second, the case of Kugathas was the right case to apply  here  because
    the case with Ghising involved an actual son who had  during  adulthood
    developed ties with his parents, whereas in this case  we  are  talking
    about a nephew who remained throughout a family member of  his  parents
    living in Nigeria, rather than the family member of his uncle or  aunt.



18. Third, even if the younger brother had been granted discretionary leave
    to remain, the decision, on the facts  of  this  particular  case,  was
    entirely proportionate in relation to the Appellant's case.

19. In reply, Ms Nnamani submitted that the Appellant had not been in touch
    with his parents for more than two years.  He was living at  home  even
    though he had been a student at  the  University  of  Bolton  and  this
    matter was not rejected by the judge.  My attention was  drawn  to  the
    Appellant's skeleton argument at paragraph 7 (page 4).

Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    [2007]) such that I should set  aside  the  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision (see Section  12(2)  of  TCEA  [2007]).   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

21. First, the judge has misinterpreted the  decision  in  Ogundimu  [2013]
    UKUT 60.  The facts of the instant case are that the Appellant has been
    in the UK for 22 years.  There is no evidence that he has returned back
    to Nigeria.  The Tribunal in Ogundimu  described  the  word  "ties"  as
    importing "a concept involving more than  merely  remote  and  abstract
    links to the country of proposed ... removal."  In  the  instant  case,
    the judge has found there to be the existence of  social  and  cultural
    ties to Nigeria simply on the basis that, "the arrangement whereby  the
    Appellant came to, and stayed in, in the  UK  is  clearly  basically  a
    financial one, rather than based on any hostility towards him from  his
    parents" (see paragraph 18).  This does not show that the Appellant has
    something more than merely remote and abstract links to a country  that
    he has not visited or had any dealings with for the last 23 years.

22. Second, the judge erred in not looking at the latest case law following
    the decision in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  Although Ms  Nnamani  did
    not properly explain the implications of  Ghising  in  her  submissions
    before this  Tribunal  that  case  bears  further  consideration.   The
    Tribunal there held that, "we accepted the Appellant's submissions that
    the judgments in Kugathas had been interpreted too restrictively in the
    past and ought to be read in the light of subsequent decisions  of  the
    domestic and Strasbourg courts" (see paragraph  56).   The  uncontested
    evidence here is that the Appellant has not formed a family unit of his
    own.  He is not in a family unit with his  parents  in  Nigeria  either
    because he has been living in the UK for the last 22 years.  He has  no
    significant partner with whom he has or he intends to  settle  down  in
    the foreseeable future.

23. But even so, Kugathas does state in relation  to  ties  between  family
    members other than a parent and a son  that,  "whether  it  extends  to
    other relationships depends on  the  circumstances  of  the  particular
    case" and that "evidence of further elements of  dependency,  involving
    more than the normal emotional ties"  (at  paragraph  14)  would  be  a
    relevant consideration.  In the instant case, the evidence  before  the
    judge was that, "he lived with his adoptive parents, together with  his
    own younger brother,  and  his  uncle's  sister"  (paragraph  8).   The
    reference to "his adoptive parents" was a reference to  his  uncle  and
    aunt.  The judge erred in concluding that on this basis  the  Appellant
    was not enjoying a family life with his uncle and aunt.

24. Third, whilst the judge did reject all of  the  above,  he  did  accept
    that, "private life is clearly met, given the length of residence  that
    the Appellant has been here ..." (paragraph 19).  He then rejected  the
    claim on this basis given Section 117B of the 2014 Act.  However,  what
    Section 117B states is that "little weight is to be given," which  does
    not mean that no weight is to be given whatsoever.  In  this  case  the
    Appellant had been in this country for 22 years.

Re-Making the Decision

25. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.



26. First, that the Appellant has no more than merely remote  and  abstract
    links to Nigeria, for the reasons that I have given above,  given  that
    he has been in the UK for 22 years.

27.  Second, that given the jurisprudence in Ghising  and  the  other  ECHR
    cases, the Appellant has become a member of  the  family  unit  of  his
    uncle and aunt, who are his adoptive parents, and this evidence was not
    rejected by the judge.

28. Finally, as far as family life is concerned itself Section 117B has  no
    application to this because it is confined to private life rights only.
     I come to these conclusions notwithstanding my  misgivings  about  the
    manner in which, as  the  judge  has  very  rightly  pointed  out,  the
    Appellant and his younger brother have been brought to the UK, even  if
    this was on account of the financial problems of his parents, and  left
    here with his uncle and aunt.  As the judge rightly pointed  out,  "the
    Appellant has been here unlawfully since  February  2005  and  the  key
    person responsible, his uncle, was fully aware of that fact" (paragraph
    16).  However, the Appellant has nevertheless been in  the  UK  for  22
    years, and given the considerations that I  have  set  out  above,  the
    balance of considerations then fall  in  his  favour,  such  that  this
    appeal must be allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.   I  re-make  the  decision  as  follows.   This  appeal  is
allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    12th June 2015

