
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10523/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 January 2017                   |On 24 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                usman khalid
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance by the appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the  appellant  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Mr
    Usman Khalid, against a decision and reasons promulgated  on  1  August
    2016 before First-tier Tribunal (Judge Rodger)  ("FTT")  in  which  the
    appeal determined on the papers was dismissed on immigration and  human
    rights grounds.

2.    The appellant was granted permission to appeal  by  Designated  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald on 2 December 2016 on  the  grounds  that
    the FTT  did  not  have  the  appellant's  bundle  before  it  when  it
    considered this matter.  Permission was granted on the basis  that  the
    appellant therefore had suffered procedural unfairness.  The permitting
    judge also stated, or rather observed,  that  he  remained  unconvinced
    that the appeal would have  succeeded  even  relying  on  the  evidence
    adduced in the appellant's bundle.

3.     The facts are that the appellant entered the UK as a student  with  a
    visa  valid  until  29  October  2014  and   thereafter   applied   for
    discretionary leave to remain on 28 October 2014 to continue to  pursue
    his studies and to sit his outstanding  exams.   This  application  was
    refused and removal directions were made on 16  March  2015.   The  FTT
    considered the appeal with reference to paragraph 276ADE and outside of
    the Rules.  The FTT fully considered all  aspects  of  the  appeal  and
    referred to relevant case law, in particular Patel and  Others  v  SSHD
    [2013] UKSC 72.

4.     I have heard nothing further from the appellant who has not  attended
    the hearing this morning.  Mr Whitwell on behalf of the respondent made
    submissions as regards error of law. I have decided that there  was  an
    error of law to the extent that the FTT did not have all  the  evidence
    before it that the appellant wished to rely on.  The FTT did  not  have
    the appellant's bundle before it in reaching its decision.

5.      There is an error of law.

6.    Mr Whitwell made further succinct submissions and I agree  with  those
    submissions following the decision of Patel.  I find that the appellant
    would either now have had the opportunity to  re-sit  his  exams  which
    would have been in June 2015 or, alternatively, I take  the  view  that
    following Patel the opportunity to complete  one's  studies  is  not  a
    protected right under Article 8.  I find no evidence of any  compelling
    circumstances.  Therefore, having taken into account  evidence  in  the
    bundle that the appellant relied on, I am satisfied that  it  makes  no
    difference to the final decision and that the  error  of  law  was  not
    therefore material.  The appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed and the decision made shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 22.1.2017

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date 22.1.2017

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
