
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10863/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision on the Papers at Field House         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 August 2016                             |On 31 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                            mohammad lokman miah
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born  on  1  November  1964.
    He appeals against the decision of the respondent to deprive him of his
    British citizenship.

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002 as  a  work  permit
    holder.  After working in a restaurant for five years the appellant was
    granted indefinite leave to remain.  On 26 May 2009 he obtained British
    citizenship and was issued with a Certificate of Naturalisation.

3.   On 10 October 2012 the Home Office wrote to the appellant stating  that
    the Secretary of State had reason to believe  that  the  appellant  had
    obtained his status as  a  British  citizen  by  means  of  fraud.   In
    particular, the Secretary of State had received  information  from  the
    appellant's former employer, which indicated  that  the  appellant  had
    obtained indefinite leave to remain (ILR) fraudulently as he was not in
    employment at the time of his application.  The appellant  was  invited
    to submit a response and  any  representations  within  21  days.   The
    appellant's solicitors wrote to the Home Office denying  any  deception
    and confirming that the appellant was in employment at the time of  the
    ILR application.

4.   In March 2014 the Home Office decided to make an  order  depriving  the
    appellant of British  citizenship.   On  25  March  2014  a  notice  of
    decision was sent to  the  appellant  by  recorded  delivery.   It  was
    followed by a notice of order which was sent by recorded delivery on  2
    April 2014.

5.   On 22 April 2014 the  Home  Office  sent  a  letter  to  the  appellant
    enclosing notification that he was a person liable to removal from  the
    United Kingdom (form IS151A) together  with  a  removal  decision  made
    under Section 10(1)(b) of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999.   The
    appellant was informed that the removal decision was appealable outside
    the United Kingdom.

6.   The operative substantive decision would be that of 25 March 2014.   It
    was common ground that the notice of  appeal  was  lodged  over  twelve
    months after the notice  of  decision  was  served.   Two  issues  have
    occupied a considerable amount of judicial  time,  namely  whether  and
    when, the notice of decision was served and if  indeed  the  notice  of
    appeal was out of time. If so whether to extend time.

7.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal,  which  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimshaw on 8 July 2015.  It  was  the
    finding of the Judge that notice of the decision had  been  served  and
    the appeal out of time and in the circumstances it  was  adjudged  that
    extending time would not be permitted.

8.   The finding of service is perhaps a little obscured in  fact.   It  was
    noted in paragraph 22 of the determination that the  recorded  delivery
    letter, containing the notice of decision was said to be delivered  and
    a signature obtained, but on 9 April 2014 the Home Office were  alerted
    to the fact that the recorded delivery  letter  had  been  returned  to
    sender with little explanation as to the reason for its return.

9.   The appellant sought leave  to  appeal  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against that finding.  Leave was refused firstly by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Lambert and secondly by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy  on  the
    basis that no arguable error had been disclosed in the decision.

10.  An application by way of judicial review was  then  instigated  against
    the decision not to give permission to appeal against the  decision  of
    Judge Grimshaw, that there no valid appeal  and  a  refusal  to  extend
    time.  Permission was granted by His Honour, Judge John Behrens  in  an
    order dated 23 February 2016.  The decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    refuse permission to appeal was quashed by order of His  Honour,  Judge
    Kaye QC on 23 March 2016.  In light  of  that  decision  permission  to
    appeal against the First-Tribunal decision was granted  by  Mr  C  M  G
    Ockelton, Vice President of the Upper Tribunal on 9 May 2016.  Thus  it
    was listed for hearing on 30 August 2016 to determine  whether  or  not
    indeed Judge Grimshaw's determination was marred by  error  of  law  or
    should stand.

11.  Mr Deller, representing the respondent, in a letter of 23  August  2016
    has indicated that the respondent  accepts  that  there  were  material
    errors of law in Judge Grimshaw's determination.  He  agreed  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal ought properly to have extended time  and  admitted
    the appeals against the relevant decisions.

12.  It was suggested that the Upper Tribunal could  deal  with  the  matter
    without the need of the oral hearing and  the  appellant's  solicitors,
    through email dated 23 August 2016, have agreed.

13.  As I have indicated I have concerns as to the safety of the finding  as
    to actual service of the decision, also as to the  correctness  of  the
    refusal to extend time to appeal in any event.  A consistent  theme  of
    the various orders has been the importance to determine the  merits  of
    the application as British citizenship is involved.

14.  In those circumstances I set aside the decision of Judge  Grimshaw  and
    allow the appellant's appeal against that decision to that extent.

15.  Given the concession, that is made by the  respondent  that  timeliness
    is no longer an issue, I grant the  necessary  extension  of  time,  if
    required, and direct that the appeal be heard upon its  merits  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It is  important  that  all  parties  obtain  the
    necessary evidence to support their requisite positions.   I  note  for
    example in the course of the judicial review proceedings that there  is
    a  detailed  statement  of  facts  and  grounds  containing  a  witness
    statement of the appellant dated 30 June 2015.   That  seems  to  be  a
    statement  setting  out  the  circumstances  of  his   work   and   his
    relationship with his employer, Gulam, and that is clearly  a  document
    worthy of considerable attention by all parties.

16.  It seems to me, however, that the First-tier Tribunal is well  able  to
    issue  such  directions  as  it  considers  appropriate  in  order   to
    effectively hear the issues that are joined.

17.  I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in  accordance  with  the
    Senior President's Practice Direction, given the fact that  there  will
    need to be much consideration of the factual basis and  that  no  prior
    consideration as to the merits of the matter has been made.

18.  I raise one matter for consideration, which may or may not prove to  be
    material, and that is the form IS151A dated  22  April  2014  allegedly
    served  upon  the  appellant.   The  appellant  denies  receiving  that
    document which, if valid, raises the issue  of  whether  the  appellant
    still has an  in-country  right  of  appeal.    No  argument  has  been
    addressed as to that particular document.  Certainly nothing  has  been
    raised in the lengthy correspondence and legal  arguments,  submissions
    and orders concerning that particular  matter.   Given  the  importance
    attributed to a merits argument by the decisions of the  Administrative
    Court and the agreement by the respondent that that should be the case,
    it may be that the service  of  that  decision  of  22  April  was  not
    effective or, if it was, that it would be withdrawn to  enable  an  in-
    country right to be fully exercised before the First-tier Tribunal.   I
    mention the matter however simply for abundance of caution.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Applicant is allowed .The decision of  judge  Grimshaw  is
set aside to be remade by the first-tier tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 25 August 2016.

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered making a fee award  and  have
decided to make no fee award as the appeal has not yet been determined


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 25 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

