
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10471/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th July 2016                             |On 12th August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                 Rezaul [R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kumar of Newcastle Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Hands made
    following a hearing at North Shields on 4th November 2015.



Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  26th  November  1976.
    He came to the UK as a visitor in May 2014 and applied for an extension
    of his leave on the basis of his family and private life here which was
    refused on 16th October 2014.

 3. Mr [R] has entered into an Islamic marriage with the sponsor.  She  had
    three daughters from her previous marriage and the couple  now  have  a
    daughter of their own.

 4. Without further evidence, the judge was not satisfied  that  the  birth
    certificate alone was sufficient to  establish  the  paternity  of  the
    child.  She observed that the sponsor did not have indefinite leave  to
    remain in the UK, having only discretionary leave in order to take care
    of her three British citizen children.  She  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal and, in a full decision Judge
    Nicholson granted permission in the following terms.

         "Grounds 4 and 5 contend that the judge failed  properly  to  apply
         Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

         Pursuant to that Section there  would  be  no  public  interest  in
         removing the appellant if he had a genuine and subsisting  parental
         relationship with  the  children  of  his  wife,  who  are  British
         citizens, and if they could not reasonably be expected to leave the
         UK - see Treebhawon and Others (Section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674.

         It appears from paragraph 34 that the judge proceeded on the  basis
         that the children could not reasonably be expected to leave the UK.
          That conclusion was inevitable bearing in mind  the  Secretary  of
         State's Immigration Directorate Instructions on family migration of
         August 2015 which read:

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer."

         The judge was therefore required to consider whether the  appellant
         had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the  child.
         In this respect in R (on the application of  RK)  (Section  117B(6)
         "parental  relationship")  IJR  [2016]  UKUT  00031  the   Tribunal
         indicated that a non-biological  parent  may  have  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with a child if they have  stepped
         into the shoes of a parent.

         On this issue it is arguable that the judge did not properly  apply
         Section 117B(6).  The judge  accepted  at  paragraph  25  that  the
         appellant had formed a strong emotional bond with the children  and
         at paragraph 32 the judge found that there was no doubt the  family
         were a  unit.   However  the  judge  did  not  decide  whether  the
         appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
         child."

 6. Mr Diwnycz did not seek to defend the determination.

 7. The judge erred in law in failing to apply Section  117B(6),  to  which
    she did not refer, and which states that:

    In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation  the  public
    interest does not require the person's removal where -

      a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
         a qualifying child; and

      b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

 8. The appeal will have to be reheard and is remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be considered before a judge other than  Immigration  Judge
    Hands.

 9. Matters have now moved on.  Mr Kumar provided evidence  that  the  Home
    Office made a mistake  when  handling  the  sponsor's  application  for
    further leave in 2012 by putting her on the 10-year route and  granting
    her leave for two and a half years.  If that mistake had not been  made
    she would have been settled in 2015 since she  came  to  the  UK  as  a
    spouse in 2005.

10. The situation has now been rectified and she has  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  Her daughter is therefore  entitled  to  be  registered  as  a
    British citizen.  The appeal should not be listed for a period of three
    months to enable that registration to take place,  and  to  obtain  DNA
    evidence to confirm the child's paternity.

No anonymity direction is made.






[pic]
Signed                              Date 12 August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


