

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers IA/10119/2014
                                                               IA/10120/2014
                                                               IA/10121/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 14th November 2014  On 30th December 2014
Prepared 21st November 2014


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                          CHRISTONE JEREMIAH NYONDO
                                                             First Appellant
                                     And

                           PHALLES CHMWEMWE NYONDO

                                                            Second Appellant

                                     And

                              TAPIWA JOY NYONDO
                                                             Third Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                        Anonymity directions not made

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms V Laughton (counsel, instructed by Lighthouse
Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr P Armstrong (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are nationals of Malawi, the First and Second Appellants
    are the parents of the Third Appellant. The First Appellant entered the
    UK in 2007 as a student and was later joined by the  Second  Appellant,
    the Third Appellant was born on the 5th of December 2008 in the UK  and
    has remained here  since  then.  On  the  14th  of  December  2013  the
    Appellants applied for leave to remain on a number of bases.  The  only
    relevant ground for these purposes is that the Third Appellant and  the
    appropriateness of her return to Malawi which would involve  disruption
    and where circumstances are very different.

 2. The applications were refused and the Appellants appealed. The  appeals
    were heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones  Q  C  at  Hatton
    Cross on the 27th of May 2014. In a determination  promulgated  on  the
    2nd of June 2014 the appeals were  dismissed.  The  Judge  rejected  an
    application to adjourn the hearing made to obtain further  evidence  in
    relation to the Third Appellant and the effect  on  her  of  moving  to
    Malawi and also with regard to the need to look after  her  during  the
    hearing. The Judge found that the Appellants removal would  not  be  in
    breach of article 8 or section  55  of  the  Borders,  Nationality  and
    Immigration Act 2009.

 3. The findings are referred to more fully below where  relevant.  In  any
    event the Appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    in grounds of the 4th of June 2014. It was argued that the Judge  erred
    in considering inappropriate authorities  in  making  his  decision  to
    refuse to adjourn referring to the Civil Procedure  Rules  rather  than
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005, rule 21. It
    was also argued that the Tribunal erred  in  failing  to  consider  the
    evidence relating to the treatment of children with  autism  in  Malawi
    and the effect of the Third Appellant leaving school and relocating  to
    somewhere  with  very  different,  and  negative,  attitudes  to   such
    difficulties. Permission to appeal was initially refused but on renewal
    Upper Tribunal Judge Peter  Lane  granted  permission  on  the  1st  of
    October 2014 on both grounds.

 4. At the hearing the Appellants were represented by Ms Laughton  who  had
    had appeared below. In the course of submissions reference was made the
    recent case of Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418  (IAC)
    and the relevant Tribunal rules. The submissions are  set  out  in  the
    Record of Proceedings and referred to where relevant below.

 5. The relevant chronology relating to the Third  Appellant  is  that  she
    received her diagnosis concerning her educational needs on the 27th  of
    June 2013. The applications to the Secretary of State were made on  the
    20th of December 2013, the Refusal Letter is dated the 4th of  February
    2014 and served 2 days later. The Notice  and  Grounds  of  Appeal  are
    dated the 18th of February 2014, the Notice of  Hearing  is  dated  the
    17th of  March  2014  and  contained  directions  for  the  service  of
    evidence, the hearing took place on the 27th of May 2014.

 6. The question is whether the Appellants were deprived of their right  to
    a fair hearing. I agree with Ms Laughton that the Judge's references to
    the CPR were inappropriate, the  relevant  rules,  the  2005  Procedure
    Rules were the only relevant rules for the Judge to  consider.  However
    the question remains whether the Appellants were denied a fair hearing.

 7. The circumstances in Nwaigwe were different from those in this  appeal.
    In that case it appeared that the Appellant had been taken ill  shortly
    before the hearing and  there  were  legal  difficulties  in  obtaining
    supporting evidence. In this appeal the Third Appellant's  issues  have
    been known about for a long time  and  pre-date  the  applications  for
    leave  to  remain.  The  Appellants  were  not  taken  unawares  by  an
    unforeseeable change in circumstances, the matter on which evidence was
    sought related to an issue that had always been in existence, the Third
    Appellant's ability to cope with relocating to Malawi.

 8. Given the age of the Third Appellant alone clearly she was  reliant  on
    the adults to prepare her case for her.  All  the  Appellants  had  the
    benefit of legal representation and advice. They  had  since  the  just
    after the 17th of March 2014 that the hearing would be at  the  end  of
    May, a period of over 2 months which was in addition to the  time  that
    had been available since the applications were first made.

 9. It was implied by Ms Laughton that the appreciation  of  the  value  of
    such evidence was made late in the preparation of the case and that the
    Third Appellant ought not to be prejudiced by the failure of others  on
    whom she relied. The difficulty with that as an  approach  is  that  it
    overlooks the time that has been available to the  representatives  and
    the nature of the evidence which concerns a point directly in issue, it
    is not a new matter or one that was difficult to foresee.

10. Was it unfair for the Judge to refuse to adjourn on the basis of a very
    late application when there had  been  a  significant  amount  of  time
    available? I find that the Judge was entitled to refuse the application
    and for the reasons given. Fairness is obtained by giving  parties  the
    opportunity to prepare and present their case, whether that opportunity
    is taken is a separate issue and a party cannot complain that a hearing
    was unfair when they did not make use of the time they had been advised
    of by properly served notices. As the Judge noted  the  origin  of  the
    proposed evidence had not been identified.

11. The Judge went on to note that the First  and  Second  Appellants  were
    well educated and that the First  Appellant  had  held  a  position  of
    Principal Economist in the Ministry of Agriculture in Malawi  and  that
    he now has a PhD. He also found that the First  and  Second  Appellants
    were in a position to be able to pay for the private education that the
    Third Appellant would need in Malawi, there being no state education of
    the sort required. They do not appear  to  form  a  part  of  the  more
    traditional side of Malawian society.

12. No one would pretend that a child with autism  and  the  needs  of  the
    Third Appellant would find  relocating  easy,  clearly  any  transition
    would be difficult for the Third Appellant and her parents.  The  Judge
    could have stated that it  would  be  in  the  Third  Appellant's  best
    interests to remain in the UK but that would not  answer  the  question
    that arises with the balancing exercise. Article 8 was  dealt  with  in
    paragraphs 40 to 52. It is clear that the Judge had regard to the Third
    Appellant's significant problems and the family history, in Malawi  and
    the UK. The finding that removal would be proportionate was  a  finding
    that was open to the Judge and for the reasons given.


CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier  Tribunal  made/did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  and
I make no order.


Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 24th November 2014


