
[pic]
IAC-FH-aR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10173/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 9 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mr uchechukwu innocent okoro
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bajwa, Solicitor, Bajwa & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   It will be convenient to refer to the parties as they were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria.   On  22
    January 2014, the Secretary of State made a decision to refuse to issue
    him with a residence card, following his claim to be entitled to such a
    document as a  family  member,  or  alternatively  an  extended  family
    member, of an EEA national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He relied upon his relationship with his wife, a  citizen  of
    Hungary.

2.   The appellant's appeal against the  adverse  decision  was  allowed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart  ("the  judge")  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 15 April 2015.  In summary, the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant could not show that he was a family  member,  falling  within
    Regulation 7 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("the 2006 Regulations") but went on to find that he and his  wife
    were in a durable relationship, so that he fell within Regulation  8(5)
    of the 2006 Regulations.   In  this  context,  she  took  into  account
    substantial cross-examination of the appellant and  his  wife  and  the
    consistency of their accounts and found  that  any  discrepancies  were
    minor and of little consequence.   The decision  concludes  with  these
    words: "I allow this appeal".

3.   In grounds prepared on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  it  was
    contended that the judge erred in two respects.  First,  in  purporting
    to allow the appeal outright.  If the conclusion that the appellant and
    his wife were in a durable relationship were sustainable,  it  was  for
    the Secretary of State to exercise discretion under Regulation 17(4) of
    the 2006 Regulations, and then to decide whether  or  not  to  issue  a
    residence card.  This was made  clear  in  Ihemedu  [2011]  UKUT  00340
    (IAC).  Secondly, in failing to resolve inconsistencies  identified  in
    the  Secretary  of  State's  letter  giving  reasons  for  the  adverse
    decision, including an inability on the part of the appellant  and  his
    wife to communicate with each other using a common language.   Reliance
    was placed upon guidance given in Budhathoki [2014] UKUT 00341.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 23 July 2015  and  directions  were
    sent to the parties at the end of that month, requiring them to prepare
    for the hearing on the basis that, if the decision were set aside,  any
    further evidence that might  be  needed  could  be  considered  at  the
    hearing.

5.   There was no Rule 24 response from the appellant.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Ms Sreeraman began  with  the  second  ground.   The  judge  failed  to
    resolve material conflicts in the  evidence.   There  was  an  apparent
    absence of a common language, to enable the appellant and  his  sponsor
    to communicate with each other.  The importance of this aspect was  set
    out in the letter giving reasons for  refusing  to  issue  a  residence
    card.  At paragraph 15 of the decision, the judge noted the appellant's
    wife's evidence that she did not speak much English but had  been  able
    to manage using a Google translation application.  She no  longer  used
    Google by the time of the hearing but  her  vocabulary  was  still  not
    large.  The judge had not properly taken into account this evidence  in
    making her findings at paragraphs 22 to 24 that a durable  relationship
    existed.  When the language issues were taken into account, in addition
    to discrepancies noted by the judge at paragraph 19 as  having  emerged
    during the hearing, an error of law was shown.

7.   Turning to the first ground, the judge erred  in  allowing  the  appeal
    outright.  It fell to the Secretary of  State  to  exercise  discretion
    under Regulation 17(4) and a range  of  factors  would  be  taken  into
    account in the exercise of that discretion.

8.   Mr Bajwa said that, so far as the  second  ground  was  concerned,  the
    background and factual matrix were important.  The  appellant  and  his
    wife were interviewed and a transcript  presumably  existed  somewhere.
    The Secretary of State based her  case  on  discrepancies  between  the
    answers they gave.  The appellant's  witness  statement  answered  this
    point, particularly at paragraph 10, where he explained that he and his
    wife  were  able  to  communicate  although  their  accents  were  very
    different.  His wife's witness statement was in similar terms.  A clear
    challenge was made to this part of the Secretary of  State's  case.  In
    any event, the Secretary of State had simply elaborated her basic point
    regarding  discrepancies  even  though  a  transcript  had   not   been
    forthcoming.  The judge decided to proceed, as she was entitled to, and
    it was clear that the issue of discrepancies  was  fully  explored,  in
    examination and cross-examination of the witnesses.   The Secretary  of
    State was represented at the hearing.  At paragraph 15 of the decision,
    the judge noted the wife's evidence regarding the use of Google but the
    past tense was important in  that  context.   It  was  clear  that  the
    appellant's wife's English had improved.  This was  also  suggested  by
    her evidence that she no longer used Google when communicating with her
    husband.  The issue was addressed.

9.   Mr Bajwa said that he accepted the strength of the  first  ground.  The
    proper outcome was, perhaps, that the matter should have been  sent  to
    the Secretary of State for her to exercise discretion under  Regulation
    17(4).

10.  In a brief reply, Ms Sreeraman  said  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    challenge was fully set out in the  decision  letter.   The  point  was
    clearly made that there was no common language  when  the  relationship
    began.  The appellant's wife had said that she took two English lessons
    after the marriage, some four months later. The relationship was called
    into question.  Ms Sreeraman accepted, nonetheless, that  the  date  of
    assessment was the date of the hearing and that the judge was  entitled
    to give weight to the evidence which emerged on that occasion.

11.  I briefly discussed the proper course with the representatives, in  the
    light of their agreement that the first ground was made out.  So far as
    the second ground was concerned,  the  failure  to  resolve  evidential
    conflict was relied upon by the respondent but, on the other hand,  the
    judge's finding that a durable relationship existed was  clearly  based
    on the substantial consistency in the evidence given by  the  appellant
    and his wife, following extensive cross-examination. If that finding of
    fact were preserved,  as  a  sustainable  finding,  then  remaking  the
    decision would be a simple  matter  of  setting  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and then allowing the appeal, on the basis that the
    appellant would then await the exercise of discretion by the  Secretary
    of State under Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.

12.  Mr Bajwa suggested that this would be the proper  course,  taking  into
    account the extensive cross-examination.  Ms Sreeraman  said  that  the
    Secretary of State's stance was that the decision should be  set  aside
    in its entirety.  The judge had recorded at paragraph 6 of the decision
    that a transcript of the marriage interview existed.  She had not  seen
    it,  transcripts  not  being  routinely  provided.   In  remaking   the
    decision, that transcript would have weight and ought  properly  to  be
    taken into account.

13.  I observed, as the judge had, that a direction was made in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in October 2014, requiring  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    produce a copy of the transcript.  That direction was not complied with
    and the hearing of the appeal was then adjourned until March 2015.  The
    Secretary of State had been given an ample  opportunity  to  make  this
    evidence available.  Indeed, Mr Bajwa had sought to further adjourn the
    case but his application did not succeed and the appeal  was  heard  in
    the First-tier Tribunal on 13 March 2015.

Findings and Conclusions

14.  The parties are agreed that the judge erred  in  law  in  allowing  the
    appeal outright.  In the light of her finding of fact  that  a  durable
    relationship existed between the appellant and  his  wife,  the  proper
    course was to allow the appeal against the decision to refuse to  issue
    a  residence  card,  with  the  Secretary  of  State  then   exercising
    discretion under Regulation 17(4),  taking  into  account  a  range  of
    factors falling to be considered at that stage.

15.   The  more  difficult  question  concerns  the  second  ground  of  the
    Secretary of State's case.  Did the judge err  in  law  in  failing  to
    resolve  material   conflicts   and   discrepancies?    After   careful
    consideration, I conclude  that  this  ground  is  not  made  out.  The
    decision letter contained a summary of the discrepancies relied upon by
    the Secretary  of  State,  as  showing  that  no  genuine  relationship
    existed.  One feature, as noted earlier, was the absence of an apparent
    language in  common,  to  enable  the  appellant  and  his  sponsor  to
    communicate with each other.  Other discrepancies,  summarised  in  the
    decision letter, emerged from the  answers  given  by  the  parties  to
    questions in the marriage interview.  The transcript of that  interview
    was not produced, notwithstanding a direction made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in October 2014 and an adjournment of several months.

16.  In these circumstances, I accept Mr Bajwa's submission that  the  judge
    was properly entitled to decide the case on the basis of  the  evidence
    before her.  The appellant and his  wife  made  witness  statements  in
    which they addressed the absence of a language  in  common,  explaining
    that they were able to communicate, notwithstanding different  accents,
    by making use of Google and by means of gestures.  Mr Bajwa is right to
    draw attention to the judge's summary of the wife's  evidence,  at  the
    end of paragraph 15 of the decision.  The use of the past tense and her
    evidence that she no longer uses Google suggest that  her  English  has
    improved over time.  The date of assessment for the judge was the  date
    of hearing and a salient feature of the evidence which emerged was  the
    substantial consistency between the accounts given by the appellant and
    his  wife,  regarding  the  establishment  and  development  of   their
    relationship, his wife's journey to Hungary, their employment and  what
    the couple did together, from time to time and on different  occasions.
    The extent of the consistency is striking.  The judge was  entitled  to
    give weight to this evidence and  it  formed  a  sound  basis  for  her
    finding of fact that a  durable  relationship  existed.   Although  she
    expressed it as a finding that the burden of proof had been discharged,
    the conclusion she  reached  at  paragraphs  21  to  24  is  clear  and
    unambiguous.

17.  A careful reading  of  the  decision  shows  that  the  judge  had  the
    Secretary of State's case clearly in mind.  Some difficulty was  caused
    by the absence of the transcript but that was the result of  a  failure
    to comply with a clear direction.  The judge did not err in deciding to
    proceed with the case and  she  took  into  account  all  the  evidence
    available.   I  find  that  the  judge's  conclusion  that  a   durable
    relationship existed is sustainable and ought not to be set aside.

Remaking the Decision

18.  It follows that remaking the decision  is  a  simple  exercise.  I  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  light  of  the
    judge's legal error in allowing the appeal outright.  Her core  finding
    of fact that the appellant and his wife were in a durable  relationship
    is preserved as it is not tainted by that  error  and  no  other  legal
    error has been shown in  relation  to  it.    The  appeal  against  the
    adverse decision then falls to be allowed on the basis that it  is  now
    for the Secretary of State  to  exercise  discretion  under  Regulation
    17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.  The appellant awaits a decision on  his
    application for a residence card.

Notice of Decision

19.  Appeal allowed: the decision to refuse to issue  a  residence  card  is
    not in accordance with the law; the appellant awaits  a  decision  once
    the Secretary of State has exercised discretion under Regulation  17(4)
    of the 2006 Regulations.

Anonymity

20.  There has been no application for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
    proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.

Fee Award

21.  In allowing the appeal, the judge made a fee  award.   I  have  reached
    the same overall conclusion that the appeal should be allowed but it is
    readily apparent that this favourable outcome has been reached  in  the
    light of the evidence which emerged at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing
    and  the  outcome  was  certainly  not  a  foregone  conclusion.    The
    appellant's  case  that  he  fell  within  Regulation  7  of  the  2006
    Regulations was not made out.  In these circumstances,  I  make  a  fee
    award in  respect  of  half  the  fee  that  has  been  paid  in  these
    proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

