
[pic]
SELF-TYPED

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10279/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 20 January 2016                   |On 26 February 2016                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr MAURICE MALCOLM STENNETT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Ms R Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Ms A Imanovic, Counsel instructed by Peer &
Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pacey sitting  in  Birmingham  on  13
    July 2015) allowing under the immigration rules the  claimant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to remove  him  pursuant
    to Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, his human  rights
    (Article 8) claim having been refused  The First-tier Tribunal did  not
    make an anonymity direction, and I do not consider  that  the  claimant
    requires anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On  22  October  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  E.B  Grant  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "For the reasons set out in the grounds it  is  arguable  that  the
         FtTJ erred in law by failing to apply  and  make  findings  on  the
         relevant paragraphs of the Immigration Rules in Appendix FM."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 3. Ms Amanovic for the claimant accepted that the judge had erred  in  law
    for the reasons given in the application for permission to appeal  read
    with the grant of permission, and invited me to remit the appeal to the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing. I  was  not  satisfied  that
    this was the appropriate course,  in  the  light  of  the  unchallenged
    evidence pertaining to the  claimant's  family  circumstances  and  the
    unchallenged primary findings  of  fact  made  by  Judge  Pacey.  After
    exploring the application of Appendix FM to  the  facts,  Ms  Petterson
    agreed with me that it would be appropriate  to  allow  the  claimant's
    appeal under paragraph EX.1(a) of Appendix FM.

Discussion

 4. Judge Pacey expressly allowed the appeal under the rules,  as  distinct
    from allowing it on Article 8 grounds outside the  rules.  She  thereby
    implied that the claimant  succeeded  under  the  parent  route  within
    Appendix FM. However she did  not  adequately  explain  why.  She  made
    reference to some of the eligibility  requirements,  but  she  did  not
    address EX.1(a). Instead, she made a finding which was more appropriate
    to a proportionality assessment outside the rules, namely that  it  was
    in the best interests of child "K" that her father remained present  in
    her life.

 5. As it is now agreed that the outcome was correct, it is  arguable  that
    the inadequacy of reasoning is not material. But justice must not  only
    be done, but be seen to be done. The losing party is entitled  to  know
    why he or she has lost, and I find that the decision is vitiated  by  a
    material error of law on this account.

The Remaking of the Decision

 6. The claimant, who is  a  national  of  Jamaica  -  a  majority  English
    speaking country listed in GEN.1.6, is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with Child K (date of birth 15.02.03), a  British
    national. At the same time, he is not in a relationship or living  with
    Child K's mother, a British  national  with  whom  the  child  normally
    lives. The mother is thus the child's primary carer. As found by  Judge
    Pacey at [20] - [24], the claimant has established that  he  takes  and
    intends to continue to take an active role  in  Child  K's  upbringing,
    with the blessing of her mother who allows him to have regular  contact
    with, and access to, the child, who is autistic  and  requires  a  high
    degree of care and supervision.  No point is taken against the claimant
    on the ground that his right of  access  to  the  child  has  not  been
    formally ratified by a family court. Thus, as Ms Petterson accepts, the
    claimant meets the relationship requirements contained  in  E-LTRPT.2.2
    to 2.4.

 7. Despite having a criminal conviction, it is  accepted  in  the  refusal
    letter that the claimant meets the suitability requirements of Appendix
    FM.

 8. Unless EX.1(a) applies, the claimant has to show he  will  be  able  to
    adequately maintain and accommodate himself and any dependants  without
    recourse to public funds. The claimant has not sought to show  that  he
    meets the financial requirements. Unless EX.1(a) applies, the  claimant
    will also be ineligible on immigration status grounds, as he is present
    in the UK in breach of immigration laws.

 9. The claimant meets the criteria of EX.1(a) as  he  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a British Citizen child, and it would  not
    be reasonable to expect this child to leave the UK.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law,  and
    accordingly the decision is set aside and  the  following  decision  is
    substituted: the claimant's appeal is allowed under Appendix FM of  the
    Immigration Rules.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

