
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10503/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 June 2015                               |On 9 July 2015                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              Ms Cynthia Nyarko
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    C Newberry  dismissing  her  appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 against a refusal by the respondent  to
    issue her with a residence card on the basis of her  asserted  marriage
    to an EEA national.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider that the appellant should be  accorded
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission

 2. On 20 May 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson  granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         "In the grounds of application it is submitted the judge  erred  in
         failing to state what weight if any he  [gave]  the  expert  report
         from Professor Woodman and evidence from the Belgium  Home  Office.
         It is clear that the appellant's  bundle  contains  a  report  from
         Professor Woodman, and this has not been referred to by  the  judge
         and the impact of the report on his findings is not clear.  It  may
         be that the report  cannot  establish  that  the  marriage  of  the
         appellant is a valid marriage pursuant to  TA  and  Others  (Kareem
         explained) Ghana [2014]  UKUT  00316  (IAC),  but  the  failure  to
         consider its contents is an  arguable  error  of  law.   Similarly,
         there is no reference to any evidence,  within  the  determination,
         from  the  Belgian  Home  Office.   Again,  the  evidence  may   be
         insufficient to establish that the marriage  is  a  valid  marriage
         [but] again, the ground is arguable.  All grounds are arguable."

The Background

 3. The background is that the appellant, a national of Ghana, applied  for
    a residence card as the family member of an  EEA  national  (a  Belgian
    national) who was exercising free movement rights in the UK.

 4. The application was refused by the Secretary of State  on  15  February
    2014 on the ground that she had not shown that she was married  to  her
    sponsor.  On the basis of the documents provided, she was claiming that
    the marriage had taken place in Ghana by proxy.  The burden rested with
    her to prove that such a marriage was valid, and she had not discharged
    this burden.  She had not  shown  that  the  requirements  of  Ghanaian
    national law were satisfied.

 5. There were also irregularities  in  the  statutory  declaration  relied
    upon.  Among other things, the statutory declaration stated her  spouse
    was represented at the customary wedding by his parents.  But  she  had
    not provided any evidence in the form of birth certificates or marriage
    certificates etc. to show that the persons who represented  the  spouse
    at her wedding were related to her spouse  as  claimed.   It  was  also
    noted that she had provided a different statutory  declaration  in  the
    present application from  the  one  she  had  provided  in  her  failed
    application  of  9  November  2012.   The  purpose  of  the   statutory
    declaration was to provide the registrar with information regarding the
    parties of the marriage in their absence so that he could register  the
    marriage legally under the  Ghanaian  Customary  Marriage  and  Divorce
    (Registration) Law 1985.  The fact that she  had  provided  an  updated
    statutory declaration was completely self-serving, as the document  she
    now relied upon was not presented to the registrar at the time  of  the
    marriage.  The document was only created for immigration purposes,  and
    so it cast serious doubt on her credibility and on the  credibility  of
    the documents provided.



The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant's appeal came before Judge  Newberry  sitting  at  Taylor
    House in the First-tier Tribunal on 6 October 2014.  Both parties  were
    legally represented.  In his subsequent decision,  Judge  Newberry  set
    out his findings at paragraph [17] onwards.

 7. The appellant's case was that the sponsor had been born in  Ghana,  and
    had subsequently become a Belgian national.  But the  sponsor  had  not
    produced his birth certificate.  So the sponsor  had  not  demonstrated
    that he was related to his claimed parent in Ghana.

 8.  Further,  the  sponsor's  signature  differed  between  the   marriage
    certificate, the application form and the Belgian identity  card.   The
    judge said that this was something that had  been  highlighted  in  the
    refusal letter, but the sponsor failed to deal with  the  variation  of
    his signature in his witness statement.

 9. The judge proceeded to dismiss  the  appeal  on  the  ground  that  the
    appellant had not discharged the burden of proving that  the  sponsor's
    representation as to his nationality was true, and  that  both  parties
    were in fact related to the declarants in the statutory declaration.

The Error of Law Hearing

10. The appellant's nominated representatives, BWF Solicitors, informed the
    Upper Tribunal in advance of the hearing before me that they  were  not
    instructed to make an appearance.

11. I was satisfied that the appellant herself had been  notified  in  good
    time by first class post when her appeal in the Upper Tribunal was  due
    to be heard, and so I considered it was appropriate to proceed with the
    hearing in her absence.

Discussion

12. The expert report of Professor Woodman is directed at the issues raised
    in the refusal letter with regard to compliance with Ghanaian  national
    law.  Professor Woodman does not purport to  address  the  question  of
    whether a customary marriage by proxy is recognised in Belgian law.

13. The appellant's solicitors sought information on this question from the
    Belgian Migration Office.  Unhelpfully, the solicitors did not  include
    in the bundle the four questions which they posed, but only the answers
    to the questions which they received from the Belgian Migration Office.
     On my reading of the responses, the  asserted  marriage  by  proxy  is
    probably not  recognised  by  Belgian  law;  and,  in  any  event,  the
    appellant would have needed to have presented the documentary  evidence
    to the Belgian Embassy in London  in  order  for  the  foreign  act  of
    marriage to be validated by the  Belgian  authorities.   In  answer  to
    question 4, the conditions which have to be met for the foreign act  of
    marriage to be valid in Belgian law include:

       . the act has to be made by a Ghanaian legitimised authority and  the
         marriage has to be registered, despite the fact under Ghanaian  law
         such registration has been no longer mandatory since 1991

       . the proxy has to be made in writing by the parties involved and has
         to be made prior to the conclusion of the marriage.

14. It is apparent from the documents produced by the  appellant  that  the
    documents relied upon as proving the proxy marriage were all  generated
    after the marriage was allegedly concluded, and so the requirement  for
    the proxy to be made in writing by the parties involved "prior  to  the
    conclusion of the marriage" is plainly not satisfied.

15. I note that in his report Professor Woodman disputes  that  a  Ghanaian
    proxy marriage has to be registered in order to be valid.  Whilst he is
    no doubt right from a Ghanaian law perspective, he clearly has not been
    asked to consider the implications of the information obtained from the
    Belgian authorities as to what is required in a Belgian law context.

16. A possible justification for  Judge  Newberry  not  engaging  with  the
    report of Professor Woodman, and  the  information  received  from  the
    Belgian Migration Office, is that, in his view, the appeal fell  to  be
    dismissed at a preliminary stage: the appellant had not discharged  the
    burden of proving one of the key primary facts relied upon, namely that
    the sponsor was a Ghanaian national and that his parents  were  present
    as his representatives at the proxy wedding.  So  in  effect  the  line
    taken by the judge was that the claim did not get of  the  ground,  and
    therefore it was not necessary to consider the application of  Ghanaian
    law (or indeed the application of Belgian law).

17. Nonetheless, the judge ought to have explained why he did not  consider
    it necessary to engage with the report of Professor  Woodman,  and  the
    judge also ought to have considered  the  impact  of  the  decision  in
    Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24.

18. Accordingly, the ground on which I uphold the judge's decision is  that
    his lack of reasoning, or lack of engagement  with  the  two  areas  of
    evidence discussed above, does not translate  into  material  error  of
    law.

19. The head note of TA and Others reads as follows:

         'Following the decision in Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]
         UKUT  24,  the  determination  of  whether  there  is   a   marital
         relationship for the purposes of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
         2006 must always be examined in accordance with  the  laws  of  the
         Member State from which the Union citizen obtains nationality.'

20. The decision reflects the following  passage  in  Kareem  at  paragraph
    [18]:

         "Therefore, we perceive EU law as requiring the  identification  of
         the legal  system  of  which  a  marriage  is  said  to  have  been
         contracted in such a way as to  ensure  that  the  union  citizen's
         marital status is not at risk of being  differently  determined  by
         different  member  states.   Given  the  intrinsic   link   between
         nationality of a member state and free movement rights, we conclude
         that the legal system of the nationality of the union citizen  must
         itself govern whether a marriage has been contracted."

21. The evidence  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not purport to establish  that  the  appellant's  asserted
    customary marriage by proxy to the sponsor was valid under Belgian law.
     So no reasonable Tribunal properly directed  on  the  law  could  have
    reached any other conclusion than that the appeal against the  decision
    under Regulation 7 should be dismissed.

22. I note that the appellant also appealed  against  the  judge's  finding
    that she had not shown in  the  alternative  that  she  had  a  durable
    relationship with an extended family member, such as to  bring  herself
    within the scope of Regulation 8(5).

23. The appellant had not in terms sought a residence card on  this  basis.
    The question of a durable relationship was raised by the  Secretary  of
    State of her own motion.   She  said  the  appellant  had  provided  no
    evidence that she had resided with the sponsor as a couple at the  same
    address "prior to the date of your customary  certificate",  which  was
    apparently dated 19 December 2011 (the date is cut off in my copy).

24. At paragraph [22] of his decision, the judge observed that according to
    the appellant's witness statement she had not moved in with the sponsor
    until 1 November 2011, which is a little over a month before  the  date
    of the certificate, and therefore the two year test was not met.

25. The relevant date for assessing whether the  relationship  between  the
    parties was a durable one was the date of the appeal hearing,  not  the
    date on which the parties had  purportedly  entered  into  a  customary
    marriage by proxy.

26. But in the light of the judge's adverse findings on the  primary  issue
    before him, I do not consider there was a material error in his finding
    on the subsidiary issue  that  the  appellant  had  not  shown  in  the
    alternative that she was in a durable relationship with her sponsor.

27. Finally, the notice also argues that the judge erred in law in  failing
    to address a claim under Article 8 ECHR.  This ground of appeal has  no
    merit: see Lamichhane [2012] EWCA Civ 260. The appellant is not  facing
    removal and she was not served with a Section 120 notice.

Conclusion

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of
    law, and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal by the appellant
    to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
