
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10944/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th September 2016               |On 22nd September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                  ANJUM [N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji, Counsel, instructed before Mayfair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 9th November, 1977  and
    is the wife of [MS], a British citizen born on  5th  April,  1949  (the
    "sponsor").  The appellant married the sponsor on 11th April, 2005  and
    together they have three children, R, born on 12th March, 2010, A, born
    on 9th February, 2008 and M, born on  2nd  January,  2006.   All  three
    children are British citizens, but were  born  in  Pakistan  and  lived
    there until they entered the United Kingdom with their  mother  on  7th
    July, 2014.



The Immigration History

2.   The appellant  applied  for  entry  clearance  as  a  visitor  on  14th
    December, 2006,  but  this  was  refused.   She  did  not  appeal  that
    decision.

3.   The appellant again applied for entry clearance as a  visitor  on  13th
    November, 2009.   This was granted from 22nd November, 2010 until  22nd
    May, 2011, but no  visa  was  actually  issued.   The  appellant  again
    applied for entry clearance as a visitor on  19th  November,  2012  and
    this application was refused.  On 24th March 2013,  she  again  applied
    for a visit visa and in the original application stated that her  visit
    would be for two weeks.   On 10th April, 2013, the  respondent  refused
    the application because the appellant had not satisfied the  respondent
    that she genuinely sought entry to the United Kingdom as a visitor  and
    would leave the United Kingdom at the end of her visit.

4.   Dissatisfied with this decision, the appellant appealed and her  appeal
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell was allowed.  The appellant was
    issued with a visa valid from 24th June, 2014 to 24th December, 2014.

5.   On 7th July, 2014 the  appellant,  in  the  company  of  her  children,
    entered the United Kingdom.  It was the first time that  the  appellant
    and her children had  entered  the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant's
    children entered using their own passports as  British  citizens  since
    the sponsor was himself was a British citizen.

Decision Under Appeal

6.   On 23rd December, 2013, the appellant applied for leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom on the basis of her family and private life  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The respondent refused this application on 4th  March,
    2015 and decided that the appellant should be removed from  the  United
    Kingdom by way of directions  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The  respondent  concluded  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE of Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 395, as  amended
    ("the Immigration Rules").  The respondent also  concluded  that  there
    were no circumstances which might justify the grant of leave to  remain
    on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's  Article  8  rights  outside   the
    Immigration Rules.

7.   The appellant appealed and her appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M Whitcombe at Newport on 16th December, 2015.  The  judge  heard
    evidence from the appellant and sponsor in a Punjabi  language  through
    an interpreter.  The judge concluded that the appeal must be dismissed.
     The appellant, dissatisfied with the application applied for leave  to
    remain to the Upper Tribunal which was granted.

The Hearing Before Me

8.   Mr Jafferji on behalf of the appellant drew my attention  to  paragraph
    39 of the determination, where the judge said that the appeal could not
    succeed under the Rules, because the appellant is present in the United
    Kingdom on a visit visa.  The judge found that Appendix FM could not be
    satisfied and then considered Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules.
    However, submitted Mr Jafferji, the judge failed  to  consider  Section
    117(B)(6) of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.    The
    appellant's children are each of  them  British  subjects.   The  judge
    failed to consider whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  them  as
    British citizens to leave the United Kingdom  and  return  to  Pakistan
    with their mother.

9.   The judge accepted that the children were  British  citizens  and  have
    the right to remain in the United Kingdom, but went  on  to  find  that
    they could live satisfactorily with their father even though their best
    interests would lie with their being with their mother, with whom  they
    had lived for the whole of their lives.   Mr  Jafferji  suggested  that
    the evidence before the judge in the form of letters at  paragraphs  10
    and 11 of the appellant's bundle from Dr H Kumar, the sponsor's general
    medical practitioner, was sufficient to raise the  question  which  the
    judge did not ask, "Is the children's father (the sponsor)  capable  of
    providing adequate care for each of the three children bearing in  mind
    their ages and his medical conditions?"  The most recent letter from Dr
    Kumar refers to the sponsor suffering from hypertension, chronic kidney
    disease stage 3 and gout. He was  also  reported  as  having  seen  the
    accident and emergency department  of  Wrexham  Park  Hospital  on  5th
    October, 2015, for acute joint pains and has been  on a  reducing  dose
    of steroids. He has been referred to the rheumatology clinic.

10.  In any event, suggested Mr Jafferji, the judge would went  to  consider
    Zambrano.

11.  Mr  Jafferji  accepted  that  in  her  application  the  appellant  had
    indicated in answer to question 12, that she intended to  stay  in  the
    United Kingdom for two weeks.  He suggested that this did not  identify
    any lack of candour on the part of either the appellant or the sponsor.
     That was clearly her intention at that time.

12.  The determination of Judge Powell, promulgated on 8th  April,  2014  in
    respect of the  appellant's  visit  visa  appeal,  suggested  that  the
    sponsor gave evidence that his wife (the appellant) was not  interested
    in studying or working in the United Kingdom and it was  unlikely  that
    she would wish to exchange her lifestyle in  Pakistan  for  the  modest
    lifestyle offered by her husband in this country.  The judge also noted
    that the appellant's three children were not accompanying the appellant
    to  the  United  Kingdom.   They  would  be  looked  after   by   their
    grandparents whilst she was away.  They attended school and it was  the
    sponsor's intention that they would be well educated in private schools
    in Pakistan.  The judge also recorded that the sponsor had been  unwell
    for a time and that the appellant wished  to  provide  him  with  care.
    However, the judge noted that he had  since  recovered  and  no  longer
    needs care.  He simply wanted his wife  to  visit  him  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

13.   Mr  Jafferji  emphasised  that  these  apparent  discrepancies  merely
    highlighted the fact that the parties' intentions changed. He submitted
    that it was not the case that the parties had deliberately  misled  the
    immigration authorities.   However, even if there was a lack of candour
    on her part  she  entered  the  United  Kingdom  with  entry  clearance
    lawfully and the question for the judge was whether her  removal  would
    cause a breach  of  Article  8.   He  was  bound  to  consider  Section
    117(B)(6) and whether it was reasonable to expect the children to leave
    the United Kingdom.  If it were reasonable then it would be a factor to
    take  into  account  in  the  Article  8  balancing  exercise.   Having
    considered that question he would then need  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant's British children could remain in the United Kingdom because
    there is another carer who can adequately care for them.

14.  I enquired whether Mr Jafferji was in a position to  proceed  today  in
    the event that I found an error of law.  He told me that he was not and
    that his instructing solicitors had not complied  with  directions.  He
    thought that there had been insufficient time.

15.  For the respondent Miss Ahmad  suggested  that  paragraph  117B(6)  had
    been  considered at paragraph  51.   Taking  what  the  judge  said  at
    paragraph 27 of the determination where she was unable  to  accept  the
    sponsor's evidence that he had no  one  who  could   support  him,  and
    paragraph 51 of the determination where the judge  said  that  she  was
    satisfied that the children could live satisfactorily with their father
    in the United Kingdom even if their interests lie in being  with  their
    mother it is implicit that she was satisfied that  the  sponsor  could,
    desptie his ailments, look after the three  children  adequately.   She
    submitted that at paragraph 48 the  judge  demonstrates  that  she  was
    considering Section 117.

16.  Counsel submitted that there was a clear error at paragraph 46  of  the
    determination where the judge suggested that private  and  family  life
    had been enjoyed at a time when the appellant's immigration status  was
    precarious. The correct test was whether family life  had  been  formed
    when the appellant's immigration status was precarious and  the  answer
    to that was very clearly,  "no".   The  parties  had  been  married  in
    Pakistan many years beforehand. As to Section 117B(6), this has  simply
    not  been considered.  It is an important  question  that  should  have
    been  asked  which  has  not  been.  Neither  has  the  judge  properly
    considered whether the three children could be properly  looked  after.
    Paragraphs 50 and 51 of the determination give conclusions but  do  not
    given the reasons for conclusions.  The judge  was  simply  considering
    the sponsor's need for a carer, not whether the sponsor  himself  could
    look after three young children.

17.  At paragraph 48 the judge says that there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant could  meet  the  English  language  test  or  the  financial
    requirements of Appendix FM and so her  finding  for  present  purposes
    must  be  that  she  cannot.  That,  she  said,  had   a   bearing   on
    proportionality since they are public interest considerations.

18.   Paragraph  48  raises  matters  which  were  not  in  issue   in   the
    respondent's refusal. They were  raised  for  the  first  time  at  the
    hearing by the judge.  The judge  conflated  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules under Appendix FM with Section 117B.

19.  I reserved my determination.

20.  Having carefully examined what the appellant said in  her  application,
    I am satisfied that she has deliberately sought  to  conceal  the  true
    intentions behind the visit,  as  has  the  sponsor.   The  appellant's
    immigration history shows the previous attempts the appellant has  made
    to come to the UK.  She clearly stated in her visa application that she
    intended to visit the United Kingdom for two weeks.  She  gave  details
    of her three children and indicated that they would not  be  travelling
    with her.  She suggested  that  the  children  would  be  supported  by
    "spouse/partner or other family member".  She indicated that she had  a
    monthly income from employment or  occupation  of  between  45,000  and
    50,000 rupees per month and additionally received support  from  family
    members and other dependants of 15,000 rupees per month.

21.  The appellant indicated that  she  had  her  own  house  and  that  her
    husband had agricultural and commercial property generating income  for
    her and the children who are in education in Pakistan.   The  appellant
    said that she had a brother in the United Kingdom and "many more other"
    family members.  In Part 8 of the application she  indicated  that  she
    was leaving her children in Pakistan while making a short visit to  the
    United Kingdom and that her mother would look after the children.

22.  When the appellant's visit visa appeal was heard  she  noted  that  the
    three children were to be looked after while she was away and that they
    attended school and that it was the sponsor's intention that they would
    be  educated  in  private  schools  in  Pakistan.    She  accepted  the
    sponsor's evidence that his wife was  not  interested  in  studying  or
    working in the United Kingdom and that it was unlikely that  she  would
    wish to exchange her lifestyle in Pakistan for the modest lifestyle she
    had in the United Kingdom.  The judge  was  led  to  believe  that  the
    appellant enjoyed good circumstances in Pakistan,  "with  servants  and
    close family members nearby".  She recorded that although  the  sponsor
    was unwell for a time and his wife wished to provide him with care,  he
    has since recovered and no longer needs care.

23.  I have no doubt that the  appellant  and  sponsor  have  given  answers
    which were deliberately designed to mislead and hide the true intention
    of the sponsor which was to come to the UK for settlement.

24.  I bear in mind that the issue is whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant's three  British  children  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

25.  Distasteful though it is that the appellant  should  benefit  from  her
    deceit, I am mindful that the actions of their parents  should  not  be
    visited on the children. They are entirely innocent  and  it  is  their
    interests that I am concerned with.  I have concluded that in  all  the
    circumstances it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the  appellant's
    three children to leave the United  Kingdom  and  travel  with  her  to
    Pakistan.   They have been in the United Kingdom for two years now  and
    I have no doubt that they have settled in at school and  made  friends.
    They are entitled as British subjects to continue to enjoy their rights
    to live in the United Kingdom and everything that that brings with  it.



26.  The making of the decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Whitcombe  did
    involve a material error on a point of law.  The judge simply failed to
    consider and apply Section 117B(6).  I set aside the judge's  decision.
    I have concluded on the basis of the foregoing that this appeal  should
    be allowed.

27.  No anonymity order was requested or is made.  I have,  however,  simply
    referred to the appellant's children as being, "A", "B", and "C".


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

