
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10325/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 October 2013                            |On 21 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                  HINA AYUB

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and her date of birth is 28 July
    1983.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    White who in a determination of 18 June 2013 refused her appeal against
    the respondent's decision dated 14 March  2013  to  issue  her  with  a
    Residence Card as a family member of an EEA national exercising  Treaty
    rights.

 3. In a Rule 24 letter dated 15 August 2013 the respondent indicated  that
    the appeal was not opposed.  It was accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    submitted additional documents for the appeal hearing but  that  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge White was not provided with them.

 4. Although no criticism attaches to First-tier Tribunal Judge White, when
    he stated at [13] that the appellant had not provided further  evidence
    in support of appeal, that was factually incorrect and materially so.

 5. I  therefore  found  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    disclosed an error on a point of law such that it should be  set  aside
    and re-made.  I proceeded to re-make the appeal.

 6. The appellant did not attend, nor did  her  husband  and  she  was  not
    represented.  In a letter faxed to the Tribunal on 28 October 2013  the
    appellant stated that she would not be attending as she was unwell  and
    that she wanted the case to be heard in her absence.  The appellant did
    not provide any evidence concerning  any  ill-health.  There  was  also
    nothing to indicate why her husband, whose work status is at the  heart
    of this appeal, was not able to attend.

 7. It was my view that it was possible for me to proceed as the  appellant
    clearly had notice of the hearing and the appeal could be heard  fairly
    and justly without an adjournment being required.

 8. I heard submissions from Mr Wilding.  He maintained that  the  evidence
    provided by the appellant with her application and later for the appeal
    was not, even in combination, sufficient to show that  the  appellant's
    husband was exercising Treaty rights.  Where that was  so  the  husband
    could not be considered to be a qualified person under Regulation 6  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA
    Regulations"). The appellant was therefore not entitled to a  residence
    card as she was not a family  member  of  an  EEA  national  exercising
    Treaty rights as required under Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations.

 9. Given that the appellant was not represented and  did  not  attend  the
    hearing before me, I considered  the  evidence  that  she  provided  in
    support of her case with great care.

10. A great deal of what has been submitted to show  that  the  appellant's
    husband is a self-employed cleaner is  founded  solely  on  information
    provided by the husband. This is so for the letters and profit and loss
    accounts from Raza & Co, a firm of accountants. There is  nothing  from
    HMRC to show that the self-declaration of earnings in  the  tax  return
    for the year 2011 to 2012 of the husband was accepted as accurate.

11. The appellant also provided an undated statement from her  husband.  As
    indicated above, Mr Rimvydas did not attend to  confirm  his  statement
    and I placed less weight on the  statement  as  a  result.   Where  his
    employment status was the sole and central to the appeal and there  was
    no explanation for his decision not to attend the hearing, I found that
    this further reduced the weight that I could place on his statement and
    on the documentary evidence that was based on information  provided  by
    him.

12. The bank statements of the appellant and her husband do  not  show  any
    payments specifically relating to the husband's work, just payments  of
    varying amounts into the accounts from time to time.

13. The appellant also provided five invoices from April and May  2013  for
    cleaning work her husband had done.  Those  invoices  are  very  basic,
    identical in format and could  have  been  prepared  on  any  computer.
    There is nothing from any of the clients named to confirm the  contents
    of the invoices.  It was not  clear  to  me  why,  if  the  appellant's
    husband has been working in this manner from 2010, there were only five
    invoices from April and May 2013 to confirm his work.

14. In summary, I did not find that the documents before me were sufficient
    to show that the appellant's husband has been exercising Treaty  rights
    and was therefore a qualified person under  Regulation  6  of  the  EEA
    Regulations. The appellant cannot qualify for a Residence Card in  line
    with Regulation 7, therefore and I dismissed the appeal.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error on  a  point
    of law such that it is set aside.  I re-make the appeal  by  dismissing
    it.


Signed: [pic]                                Date: 14 November 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


