
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10069/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 November 2016                  |On 30 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                          ASEMOTA FRIDAY AGBONLAHOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss R Manning, of Counsel, instructed by Rodman
                    Pearce Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal S J Pacey (hereafter "the Judge") promulgated on 21
    March 2016.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 12 July 1993. It  is  not
    necessary to set out the Appellant's  background  in  full  but  it  is
    germane to note that  his  application  for  a  Residence  Card  as  an
    extended family member of an  EEA  national,  namely,  his  sister,  an
    Italian national, was refused by the Respondent on 24 February 2015 and
    upheld by the Judge essentially because it was not accepted that  there
    was a relationship of dependency between the Appellant and his sister.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal granted the Appellant permission to  appeal  on
    20 October 2016 on the basis that it was arguable the  Judge  erred  in
    law in that his conclusions were contradictory and he  failed  to  make
    material findings on the issue of dependency. It was  also  noted  that
    the effect of the Upper Tribunal's decision in  Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of
    Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) must also be considered.

4.   The Judicial head  note  to  the  decision  in  Sala  (ibid)  reads  as
    follows: "There is no statutory right of appeal against the decision of
    the Secretary of State not to  grant  a  Residence  Card  to  a  person
    claiming to be an Extended Family Member." At the outset of the hearing
    before me, the representatives agreed that in light of  this  decision,
    the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal and both
    invited me to find accordingly.

5.   The decision in Sala is declaratory of the law as it  currently  stands
    and must be applied notwithstanding that it  was  a  decision  reported
    subsequent to the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  I  thus  apply
    that decision to this appeal and I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal as there is no right  of  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision not to grant a Residence Card to  the
    Appellant as an extended family member.

Disposal

6.   The Appellant has no right of appeal. The First-tier  Tribunal  had  no
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal. It erred  in  law  in  doing  so.  Its
    decision is set aside and I substitute a decision  that  there  was  no
    valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral
