

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10448/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 April 2015                              |On 5 May 2015                |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                KAN WAH CHHOI
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. J. Kirk, counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitor
                   LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
                   Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 History of Appeal


   1. The Appellant, who was born on 19th October 1962,  is  a  national  of
      Malaysia.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 25th February 2002,  as
      a work permit holder, with a visa which was valid until 25th  February
      2007. On 13th March 2007 he applied for further leave to remain  as  a
      work permit holder but his application was refused on 23rd March 2007,
      as he had  used  a  form  which  was  no  longer  in  use.  A  further
      application on the same basis was refused on 8th May 2007 for the same
      reason. On 8th March 2011 the Appellant applied for  leave  to  remain
      relying on his rights under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
      Human Rights. This application was refused on 8th April 2011 without a
      right of appeal.


   2. Meanwhile, the Appellant's wife and older daughter had arrived in  the
      United Kingdom as visitors on 13th March 2003  and  were  subsequently
      granted leave to remain which also expired on 25th February  2007.  On
      12th February 2014 the Respondent decided to remove the Appellant, his
      wife and his younger daughter from the United Kingdom.  All  three  of
      them appealed against this decision but on 6th March  2014  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Herlihy held that  the  Appellant's  wife  and  younger
      daughter did not have any right of appeal.


   3. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Talbot
      on 29th August  2014  and  he  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
      promulgated  on  16th  September   2014.  The  Appellant  then  sought
      permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.  The  Appellant  asserted
      that the Judge had failed to  consider  adequately,  or  at  all,  the
      expert evidence on the impact of removal on  the  Appellant's  younger
      daughter and had also  failed  to  give  sufficient  reasons  for  his
      apparent conclusion that she could  adapt  to  life  in  Malaysia.  In
      addition, he asserted that the Judge had failed to apply section  117B
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 properly or at all
      and that he also failed to consider relevant factors in his Article  8
      assessment.

   4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta refused him permission to appeal  on
      30th October 2014.  She found that the Judge had  taken  into  account
      the fact that the Appellant's older daughter had leave  to  remain  in
      the United Kingdom until September 2015 and that she wished to  embark
      on an independent life and that, therefore, separation from  the  rest
      of her family was inevitable. She also noted that  the  Appellant  had
      had no leave to remain in the United Kingdom since February  2007  and
      that he had worked illegally and  breached  the  laws  of  the  United
      Kingdom. She also found that the Appellant's and his  family's  rights
      to family life would not be breached as they would return to  Malaysia
      as a family unit and the elder daughter  only  had  limited  leave  to
      remain and could join them at will.

   5. The Appellant renewed his application for permission, relying  on  the
      same grounds of appeal but added that  the  contention  was  that  the
      Judge had failed to consider the expert's comments on the  many  other
      ways in which removal would be damaging to the younger  daughter.   He
      denied that he was relying on any "near miss" principle  but  asserted
      that the Judge should have diminished the weight that he  attached  to
      the legitimate aim pursued by the Respondent because  the  Immigration
      Rules recognised the importance of seven years residence  by  a  child
      and because the Appellant met most of the requirements of Appendix FM.
      He also asserted  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pirotta  had  not
      engaged with his grounds  of  appeal.  On  13th  February  2015  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Eshun simply said  that  all  three  grounds  raise  an
      arguable error of law for the reasons given.



 Error of Law Hearing

   6. At the hearing the Appellant's  counsel  submitted  that  the  Judge's
      consideration of the  Independent  Social  Worker's  report  had  been
      limited to her  comments  on  the  impact  on  the  younger  child  of
      separation from her older sister. In addition, he submitted  that  the
      Judge's  conclusion  in  paragraph  25  of  her  decision   that   the
      Appellant's younger daughter could adapt to life in  Malaysia  was  at
      odds with the expert evidence.  He  also  confirmed  in  answer  to  a
      question from us that no CV was available for the  independent  social
      worker. Counsel also submitted that the Judge had failed to take  into
      account  the  fact  that  the  Appellant's  younger  daughter  was   a
      "qualifying child" as defined in  section  117D  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  asserted  that,  therefore,  the
      Judge was required to undertake a discrete assessment as to whether it
      was reasonable to expect her to leave  the  United  Kingdom.  He  also
      submitted  that  this  should  precede  any   consideration   of   the
      proportionality of any breach of Article  8.   Finally,  he  submitted
      that the Judge had failed to take into account the Article 8 rights of
      the   Appellant's   wife   and   older   daughter   when   considering
      proportionality.


   7. In her reply, the Home Office Presenting Officer  submitted  that  the
      Judge had been  alert  to  the  entirety  of  the  independent  social
      worker's report and had referred to a number of  its  paragraphs.  She
      also asserted that it had been purely speculative for her to say  that
      the younger child would become depressed in Malaysia.  She  said  that
      this was particularly the case as the Judge had found in paragraph  25
      of her decision that the younger child was a relatively  normal  well-
      adjusted 7 year old child living with her parents  and  older  sister,
      attending primary school and with an appropriate  social  life  for  a
      child of that age.  She also noted  that  the  Judge  had  taken  into
      account the fact that the younger child had spent all  her  life  here
      and was well integrated but had found that it did not tip the  balance
      in favour of it being disproportionate to remove  the  Appellant.  She
      also submitted that the factual matrix of the case did not render  her
      removal unreasonable and referred to the cases of EV  (Philippines)  &
      Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
      874 and MK India (Best interests  of  the  child)  [2011]  UKUT  00475
      (IAC). In addition she noted that the older daughter had been  granted
      leave in her own right  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
      Rules. She  then  noted  that  Section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 stated that the public interest  "does
      not require" the removal of a qualifying child  if  it  would  not  be
      reasonable for her to  leave  but  submitted  that  the  other  public
      interests  considerations  in  Section  117B   of   the   Nationality,
      Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  still  applied,   including   the
      Appellant's immigration history and  his  level  of  integration  into
      society here.


   8. In the Appellant's renewed application for  permission  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal the Appellant clarified his first ground of appeal  and  said
      that he accepted that the Judge did consider the expert's comments  on
      the damage to the Appellant's younger daughter of separation from  his
      older daughter. Instead, the Appellant asserted  that  the  Judge  had
      failed to take into account the other ways in which removal  would  be
      damaging and the  expert's  conclusion  that  the  overall  impact  of
      removal would be severely damaging to her  psychological,  social  and
      educational development.  However, in paragraph 24 of his decision the
      Judge had confirmed that he  had  carefully  perused  the  independent
      social worker's report. We accept that he had concentrated on the high
      degree of interdependence which existed between the Appellant's family
      members, which was in keeping with their cultural heritage.  She  also
      commented on the close bond between the Appellant's two daughters.  We
      did not have the  advantage  of  a  copy  of  the  independent  social
      worker's CV but consideration  of  family  relationships  was  clearly
      within her experience and role as a social worker. But  we  find  that
      the independent social worker's comments in relation to the risk  that
      the Appellant's  younger  daughter  would  suffer  emotional  harm  if
      removed to Malaysia, that she would experience a  bereavement  by  the
      loss of all that was familiar and  that  her  parents  would  find  it
      difficult to support her were speculative given her present  emotional
      and psychological stability and the fact that she would be  travelling
      to Malaysia to live there with both of her parents.  It  is  also  our
      view that it was speculative to conclude that she would suffer a level
      of depression  which  would  most  likely  to  result  in  apathy  and
      withdrawal from trying to achieve at school. We also note  that  there
      was no medical evidence to support this view. As a consequence, we are
      not satisfied that the  manner  in  which  the  Judge  considered  the
      independent social worker's report gave rise to an error of law.


   9. The Appellant's second ground of appeal was that the Judge had  failed
      to take into account the fact that the  Appellant's  younger  daughter
      was a "qualifying child" for the  purposes  of  Section  117D  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This  was  clearly  the
      case as she had lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period or
      seven years or more since her birth  here  on  1st  July  2007.  As  a
      consequence, and because the Appellant was not liable to  deportation,
      section 117(6) did apply in the Appellant's case.

  10. At paragraph 24 of his decision the Judge had found that the Appellant
      enjoyed a close family life with his  younger  daughter.  He  did  not
      specifically  consider  whether  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine   and
      subsisting parental relationship with  her  or  whether  it  would  be
      reasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom for  the  express
      purposes of section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
      Act 2002 but this presumption could be read into his decision  in  its
      totality. He also did not specifically consider whether  it  would  be
      reasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom with reference to
      this particular sub-section. However, when he considered Section 55 of
      the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in paragraph  25  of
      his decision and return to Malaysia in paragraph 26,  he  referred  to
      factors which were relevant to any consideration of the reasonableness
      of expecting her to leave the United Kingdom  with  her  parents.  For
      example, he noted that she was a  relatively  normal  well-adjusted  7
      year old and would be travelling to Malaysia with parents who had been
      born and brought up there. At the hearing, counsel  was  not  able  to
      point to any factor which the Judge  had  failed  to  address  in  the
      totality  of  his  decision  which  would  have  been  relevant  to  a
      consideration under sub-section 117B(6).


  11. In EV (Philippines) &  Others  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 the Court of Appeal observed  that  the
      best interests of a child who was in education here would depend on  a
      number of  factors.  In  the  current  case  the  Appellant's  younger
      daughter is in the earlier years of  her  primary  education  and  her
      parents still speak a language which is spoken in Malaysia.  She  also
      had other relatives who  may  be  able  to  assist  her  to  adapt  to
      education there. We have also taken into account that in paragraph  36
      of EV Philippines the Court of Appeal suggested that it was likely  to
      be in cases where a child was at a more advanced or critical stage  of
      her  education  that  this  would  outweigh   other   factors   in   a
      proportionality consideration.

  12. The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge's  failure
      to give discrete and prior consideration to sub-section 117B(6 did not
      give rise to a material error of law as Section 117B(6) said  no  more
      than that removal was "not required" if the requirements of this  sub-
      section were  met.   As  a  consequence,  the  other  public  interest
      considerations in the other sub-sections  of  section  117B  were  not
      rendered of no account because of sub-section 118B(6)  and  the  Judge
      was still entitled to consider the Appellant's immigration history and
      the extent to which he was integrated into society here.  In this case
      the Appellant had not had any leave  to  remain  since  2007  but  had
      continued to live and work here since that date.  It  was  also  clear
      from the witness statements that he and his wife had not become fluent
      in English and depended on their daughters to translate and  interpret
      for them. For all of these reasons we find that the second  ground  of
      appeal did not identify any material  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
      decision.

  13. In addition, the Appellant asserted  that  the  Judge  had  not  given
      sufficient weight to the effect on his wife and older daughter of  the
      decision to remove him from the United  Kingdom.  However,  there  was
      nothing in  the  evidence  provided  by  the  Appellant's  wife  which
      suggested that she had developed a family and private life  here  that
      was distinct from his. Her statement was  mainly  concerned  with  her
      concerns about the well-being of her two daughters. We accept that she
      suffered a bereavement here when a further daughter was still-born but
      it would be possible to find ways of commemorating her  death  once  a
      year even if they returned  to  live  in  Malaysia.  In  addition,  in
      paragraph 21 of his decision the Judge had considered  the  effect  on
      the Appellant's removal on the  Appellant's  older  daughter  and  had
      taken into account the fact that she was now an  adult,  had  obtained
      leave to remain here in her own right and had decided  to  leave  home
      and study at university in Manchester, while the  family  proposed  to
      remain in London.  Therefore, in our judgment the third ground did not
      give rise to any material error of law.

  14. For all of these reasons we are satisfied that there were no  material
      errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and that his
      decision should stand.



          Conclusions:

    1. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed  and  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision is to stand.


[pic]



Upper Tribunal Judge Finch                           Date: 27 April 2015
