

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10476/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13th March 2014                            |On 2nd April 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between


                                     V M
                          Anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati, counsel, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appeals a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
      dismissed an appeal by her on asylum and human rights grounds  against
      a decision to remove  her  from  the  UK  in  accordance  with  s.  47
      Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.





      Background


   2. The appellant first came to the UK on 21st  October  2007  with  entry
      clearance as a student. She was granted leave  to  enter,  such  leave
      being extended until 15th October 2012. On 7th July 2011 she  returned
      to Sri Lanka and then came back to the  UK  on  23rd  July  2011.  She
      claimed asylum and international protection on 12th  March  2012.  Her
      claim was rejected by the respondent for reasons set out in  a  letter
      dated 25th May 2012 and a decision taken by the respondent  to  refuse
      to vary her leave to remain and to remove her  by  way  of  directions
      under s. 47 of the Immigration Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006  was
      taken the same date. Her appeal against that decision  was  determined
      by Designated Judge Shaerf after a  hearing  on  16th  July  2012;  he
      dismissed her appeal on all  grounds  (AA/05768/2012).  Permission  to
      appeal that decision was  granted  solely  on  the  grounds  that  the
      decision to remove her under s. 47 was arguably unlawful. Deputy Upper
      Tribunal Judge Monson, in a determination  dated  13th  December  2012
      found that the s. 47 decision was unlawful and allowed the  appeal  on
      that ground only.


   3. The appellant was then served with a decision to remove  her  pursuant
      to s. 10 Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 dated 6th February 2013;  the
      notice of decision stated that she did not have an 'in  country  right
      of appeal'. On 21st February 2013  she  submitted,  through  her  then
      legal representatives, grounds of appeal and an application to  extend
      time. On 22nd February 2013 the duty judge extended time and confirmed
      that the appellant had a valid in country right of appeal.

   4. The appellant's appeal against the decision dated 6th February 2013 is
      the subject of these proceedings. It was heard and determined by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Napthine on 3rd September 2013. By a determination
      promulgated on 17th September 2013 he  dismissed  her  appeal  on  all
      grounds.

   5. Permission to appeal that decision was granted by UTJ  Allen  on  16th
      January 2014.

      Error of law

   6. The grounds seeking permission submitted, in essence, that  the  judge
      had failed  to  approach  the  evidence  correctly.  Although  he  had
      referred to Deevaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00282 it was asserted that he had
      failed to correctly apply the guidance. In particular
    . he had taken the approach that he could not depart from Judge Shaerf's
      determination "without cogent reliable evidence" [20];
    . that nothing said by Dr Goldwyn had given him  "reason  to  doubt  the
      findings of Judge Shaerf" [30],
    . that "The Appellant has been found not to be credible. Nothing  in  Dr
      Smith's report alters that finding" [50];  that  "[T....K....]  ...did
      not give evidence.....and therefore his claims are untested";
    . that "having seen UK government ministers  and  UK  lawyers  going  to
      prison    for  attempting  to  pervert  the  course  of  justice...the
      assertion that a person in Sri Lanka is an  attorney  or  MP"  is  not
      reliable proof of their veracity.

   7. Mr Deller accepted that that the judge approached the earlier decision
      incorrectly. He said it  did  appear  that  the  judge  had  not  paid
      attention to a large body of new  material  and  had  failed  to  take
      account of material evidence. It was also  apparent  that  T..K..  had
      given oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and  that  evidence
      had gone unchallenged by the respondent.


   8. In all the circumstances and reviewing the material  that  was  before
      the First-tier Tribunal, the failure to approach the decision of Judge
      Shaerf correctly and the failure to acknowledge oral evidence, we  are
      satisfied that the judge erred in law such that the  decision  is  set
      aside to be remade.

    Future conduct of appeal



     9. Having regard to the nature  of  the  error,  no  findings  can  be
        preserved from the First-tier Tribunal decision. The scheme of  the
        Tribunals, Court and Enforcement  Act  2007  does  not  assign  the
        function of primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.


    10. When we have set aside  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
        s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 permits us to remit the case to the  First
        tier with directions or remake it for ourselves. Having  regard  to
        the Practice Statements by the Senior President and the nature  and
        extent of fact finding required,  we  conclude  that  the  decision
        should be remitted to the First tier judge to determine the appeal.



    11. There is no doubt but that the appellant has an in country right of
        appeal such appeal having been brought on asylum and  human  rights
        grounds, her claim for international protection  having  been  made
        prior to service of the decision to remove her.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    We set aside the decision and remit the appeal to be  heard  afresh  by
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  -  not  Judge  Napthine,  Judge  Monson   or
    Designated Judge Shaerf


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    We continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).






                                    Date 2nd April 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
