

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10973/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 16 April 2015                     |On 21 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MRS MELINDA RUPERTA VERIDIANO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms S Iqbal, Counsel
      (instructed by Alcantara Consultancy Services)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
         granted on 8 January  2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer
         against the decision  and  reasons  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         McIntosh allowing the Respondent's appeal against the Secretary  of
         State's refusal to issue her with a residence card under regulation
         9(2) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
         (as amended) ("the EEA Regulations").  The decision and reasons was
         promulgated on 23 December 2014.

    2.     The Respondent is a national of  the  Philippines,  born  on  27
         March 1969, who  had  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
         (General) Student Migrant in 2009.  In December 2013 the  Appellant
         had sought an EEA  residence  card,  sponsored  by  her  father,  a
         British Citizen by naturalisation who worked as  a  housekeeper  in
         London.  In the same capacity her father had been required to  work
         for his employers in Evian, France.  The Secretary of State had not
         accepted that the Respondent's father had been so employed or  that
         she was his EEA family member.  The judge found that the Respondent
         had proved her case: see [25] of the decision and reasons.

    3.     Permission for the onwards appeal was granted  by  Judge  Colyer
         because he considered it was arguable that the judge had  erred  by
         applying the previous unamended version of paragraph 9 of  the  EEA
         regulations,  and  had  also  failed  to  address  the   issue   of
         dependency.

    4.     By notice under rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,
         the Respondent indicated  that  she  opposed  the  application  for
         permission to appeal.  The Respondent was entitled to rely  on  the
         transitional provisions which were applicable, and which  had  been
         the basis of the Secretary of State's refusal decision.  Dependency
         had not been in issue and was not  mentioned  in  the  reasons  for
         refusal letter.  S and G v Minister voor Immigratie, Integratie  en
         Asiel (Articles 20  TFEU,  21(1)  TFEU  and  45  TFEU  -  Directive
         2004/38/EC) Case C-457/12 showed that a person would be entitled to
         a right under regulation 9 if their sponsor was  regularly  working
         in another EEA country.  The decision and reasons  was  accordingly
         correct.

    5.     Mr Duffy for the  Appellant  accepted  that  the  permission  to
         appeal had been made and granted on a mistaken basis.  He  accepted
         that the transitional  provisions  applied,  as  contended  in  the
         Respondent's rule 24 notice.  Nevertheless, it  remained  the  case
         that dependency had not been considered by the  judge  and  so  the
         decision and reasons was inadequate.

    6.     Ms Iqbal relied on the rule 24 notice.  Dependency had not  been
         an issue.

    7.     As the Secretary of State had  conceded  that  the  transitional
         provisions applied and had  not  challenged  the  judge's  positive
         findings about the sponsor's employment in France,  the  only  live
         point in the onwards appeal was whether the judge had been required
         to investigate the claimed dependency in more depth.  It is easy to
         see why the Secretary of State has  raised  the  dependency  point,
         since the Respondent is very much a mature adult and it appears has
         been working for long periods in the past.  But the  time  for  the
         dependency issue to be raised in the current proceedings was in the
         reasons  for  refusal  letter,  and  certainly  at  the  First-tier
         Tribunal hearing at latest.  It is  plain  that  the  Secretary  of
         State failed to raise any such issue  notwithstanding  its  obvious
         nature.  The judge was under no duty to raise  the  matter  herself
         and therefore had no obligation to consider the question.

    8.     It would be procedurally improper and wholly unfair to permit  a
         second bite at the cherry at this late stage.  If the Secretary  of
         State contends that the Respondent's claim for a residence card  is
         an abuse of EEA law other remedies are available.

    9.     The tribunal accordingly finds that there was no material  error
         of law in the decision and reasons, which stands unchanged.

    10.    No application  was  made  to  the  tribunal  for  an  anonymity
         direction and the tribunal can see no need for any such order.

    DECISION

    There was a no material error of  law  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and reasons stand unchanged.






    Signed Dated 16 April 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


