
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/10082/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   | Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 February 2016                    | On 26 April 2016              |
|                                          |                            |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                             Mr MUHAMMAD YOUNIS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Mahmood, legal representative at Zenith
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:      Ms S Sreeraman, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen dated  16  December  2015.
    The appeal relates to a decision by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Hagan
    in respect of a Decision promulgated on  19  August  2015.   The  Judge
    dismissed the appeal based on the Immigration Rules and  Article  8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.

2.    The  Appellant's  original  application  to  the  Respondent  was  one
    seeking further leave to remain as a partner based on Appendix FM-SE.

3.    The Appellant's grounds of appeal against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision can be summarised as:


    1) "The appellant submits that the reasoning of the Judge  of  the  FtT
       not finding the documents in the Home Office  Bundle  is  inadequate
       and insufficient"
    2) The Appellant had applied for an extension  of  his  stay  in  early
       January 2015 as his visa was about to expire.  He  had  submitted  5
       months of wage slips and a letter from  the  English  language  test
       centre confirming he had passed because the certificate was not then
       available. The Appellant had submitted the missing salary  slip  and
       the English certificate on 28 January 2015. It was not until 9 March
       2015 that the application was refused.
    3) The Judge should have used his discretion to allow the appeal.
    4) The Judge had failed to consider Article 8 in a structured  approach
       to the issue of proportionality.




4.    At the hearing before me Mr Mahmood said that before the decision  had
    been made the Appellant had submitted his 6th wage slip and his English
    Language Test Certificate.  The  documents  were  sent  in  before  the
    decision had been made by the Respondent. Section 85A should have  been
    used. As for Article 8, the Appellant has a son.

5.    Ms Sreeraman said that she relied on the Rule 24 Reply. She said  that
    the Judge had correctly approached his determination. It was  important
    to note that at paragraph 14 Mr Mahmood had conceded before  the  Judge
    that Appendix FM-SE was not met. The requirements for Appendix  FM  had
    evidential requirements. The salary slips had to  be  provided  at  the
    date of the application. There had to be a valid English language  test
    certificate prior to the date of  the  application.  Therefore  on  the
    factual premise it was conceded by the Appellant that he could not meet
    Appendix FM and therefore there was no error of law. The Rule 24  Reply
    state that Paragraph D of Appendix FM-SE is clear that the Secretary of
    State will only consider documents that have been  submitted  with  the
    application.

6.    Alternatively  in  respect  of  EX  1  the  appropriate  guidance  was
    applied. There was no insurmountable  obstacles  test.  Based  on  that
    acceptance there is no material error of law. Given the breadth of  the
    reasons why the application had failed there was no reason to  consider
    evidential flexibility. I was asked to  consider  paragraph  57  of  SS
    (Congo) v Secretary of State for the Home Department.

7.    Mr Mahmood in reply said that  the  evidence  was  submitted.  At  its
    highest there was already 5 months of salary  slips.  He  said  he  had
    conceded that there was only 5 months of salary but this was not a  PBS
    case. Therefore any documents submitted  thereafter  should  have  been
    considered by the caseworker.

8.    I had reserved my decision.

9.    Paragraph D Appendix FM-SE provides,

            "D. (a) In deciding an application in  relation  to  which  this
    Appendix states that specified documents must be  provided,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer or Secretary of  State  ("the  decision-maker")  will
    consider documents that have been submitted with the  application,  and
    will only consider documents submitted after the application where sub-
    paragraph (b) or (e) applies."

10.   This therefore does indeed limit the documents which the Secretary  of
    State can consider to those submitted  with  the  application.  However
    because this was not a  Points  Based  System  or  an  entry  clearance
    appeal, then as was stated when permission to appeal was granted,  such
    evidence could be submitted once at the appeal  was  at  the  Tribunal.
    Therefore the Judge did err when concluding that the  English  Language
    Test Certificate could not be considered.


11.   The matter does not end there  though.  As  paragraph  12(ii)  of  the
    Judge's decision shows, there  were  also  issues  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's income. It was not only that there were 5  months  payslips
    instead of 6 months payslips. The added deficiency was that there  were
    either no or at least not enough bank statements. Other inconsistencies
    were also  referred  to.  It  is  perhaps  for  that  reason  that  the
    concession noted in paragraph 14 of the Judge's decision was made.

12.   In my judgment, the error of law was therefore not material.  That  is
    because  there  remained  other  deficiencies  with   the   Appellant's
    application. Those deficiencies were not  dealt  with  to  the  Judge's
    satisfaction at the time of the hearing  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Therefore in respect of Appendix FM-SE the decision must stand. That is
    despite the evidential flexibility issues which arose  in  the  Supreme
    Court's decision  in  Mandalia  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. This was not a missing series of  bank  statements-type  of
    case. That is because  there  were  no  bank  statements  submitted  as
    required by the Rules.  The Judge explained  at  paragraph  20  of  his
    decision that there was a breadth of information missing. This  clearly
    refers to the missing bank statements and not just the payslip.

13.   Therefore although the Appellant was  able  to  rely  on  the  English
    Language Test  Certificate  submitted  after  his  application  to  the
    Respondent and indeed rely too on his later  payslip,  the  failure  to
    provide the bank statements as required by the Rules was fatal  to  his
    application. All parts of the relevant Rule had to be met.

14.   In so far as EX.1 to  Appendix  FM  is  concerned,  no  permission  to
    appeal was granted in respect of that aspect. Even if  there  had  been
    permission to appeal, it is clear that there is no  material  error  of
    law in the Judge's decision.  It  was  noted  by  the  Judge  that  the
    Appellant's partner is not British. The couple  have  had  no  children
    together. The Appellant has a child following a  previous  relationship
    but he had not had contact with that child for some  two  years.  There
    was  clearly  no  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  between   the
    Appellant and the child.

15.   The Judge referred  to  the  correct  insurmountable  obstacles  test.
    There was also correct reference to the Court of Appeal's decision in R
    on the application of Adyarko and others v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 440.  This relationship was  relatively
    recent. The Appellant and is partner are both citizens of Pakistan. The
    Judge noted that there would be hardship in them having to move back to
    Pakistan, but there were no insurmountable obstacles. Paragraph  276ADE
    was also considered and could not be met.

16.   In  respect  of  Article  8  outside  of  the  Rules,  the  Judge  had
    considered the correct case law and his legal approach  in  respect  of
    the House of Lords decision in Razgar was faultless. Section  117  NIAA
    and  the  House  of  Lords  decision  in  Huang  were  also   correctly
    considered.

17.    Therefore, although sympathetic to  the  Appellant's  situation,  the
    Appellant's appeal has to be dismissed as there is no material error of
    law. It has been made clear in numerous  cases  that  sympathy  for  an
    Appellant's situation is not a sufficient reason to  allow  an  appeal.
    Nor is Article 8 to be used as a general dispensing power.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge did not involve the making  of
a material error of law and therefore stands.

The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.

An anonymity direction is not made.

Signed                                       Date: 1 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
