
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10997/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 October 2014                             |On 24 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                           ms lilian kambua maluki

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Kenya and her date  of  birth  is  3  May
    1986.  On 11 September 2012 she was granted leave to enter the UK as  a
    Tier 4 Migrant.  She made an application  on  10  January  2014  for  a
    variation of her leave to remain in the  UK  in  order  to  attend  her
    graduation ceremony.  This application was refused by the Secretary  of
    State in a decision of 4 February 2014.  It  was  refused  because  the
    application to vary leave was one that was made outside the  Rules  and
    there were no exceptional circumstances.

2.   The appellant appealed and her appeal was dismissed  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal K Henderson in a decision that was  promulgated  on
    26 June 2014 following a hearing  on  19  June  2014.   Permission  was
    granted to the appellant on 7 August 2014 by Judge P J M  Hollingworth.
     The FtT made findings at paragraphs 14, 15 and 16 as follows:

         "14. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom with a valid  student
             visa.  I note from the documents provided that she was  funded
             to come to  United  Kingdom  for  postgraduate  studies.   She
             completed a Masters in Public Health which was funded  by  the
             Commonwealth Shared Scholarship Scheme which in turn is funded
             by the Department for  International  development.   Prior  to
             this she was working for  the  Norwegian  Refugee  Council  in
             Nairobi.  The Appellant successfully completed her studies  in
             September 2013.  She did not  provide  evidence  to  show  the
             successful completion of studies but I have no reason to doubt
             that she was being honest and straightforward  when  she  gave
             evidence.


         15.  I am not  aware  of  any  current  Immigration  Rules  or  IDI
             policies which allow a person  to  stay  in  excess  of  three
             months in order to attend a graduation ceremony.  I am unclear
             as  to  why  Leeds  Metropolitan  University  have  graduation
             ceremonies  so  long  after  the  completion   of   a   course
             particularly where a  student  is  from  overseas  and  it  is
             entirely conceivable that they may not be able  to  remain  in
             order to attend the graduation ceremonies so  long  after  the
             completion of a course particularly where a  student  is  from
             overseas and it is entirely conceivable that they may  not  be
             able to remain in order to attend the graduation ceremony.   I
             also appreciate that attending a graduation ceremony  is  very
             important for some students.  It is a highlight  in  terms  of
             their academic achievement.  I therefore sympathise  with  the
             Appellant in wishing to enjoy the rewards of her studies.


         16.  The Appellant has sought  further  leave  for  a  purpose  not
             covered under the  Immigration  Rules.   To  that  extent  her
             appeal must fail.  The Respondent indicated that it  would  be
             unlikely that the Appellant would be removed if she were  able
             to show that she had made arrangements for her  departure  and
             she provided evidence of the date of the graduation  ceremony.
             This would be the best possible solution  for  all  concerned.
             The Appellant indicated  that  she  would  be  providing  this
             evidence at the end of the hearing."


The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

3.   The grounds seeking leave  to  appeal  argue  that  the  Judge  made  a
    material error of law in failing to consider the  relevant  policy  (in
    relation to students who wish  to  remain  in  order  to  attend  their
    graduation ceremony) and failing to determine the appeal under  Article
    8.  The appellant attended the hearing before me and confirmed that she
    had attended her graduation ceremony on 22  July  2014  but  she  still
    wished to proceed with the appeal.

4.   Mr Shilliday accepted that the Judge made an error of  law  in  failing
    to determine Article 8 but that it was not material.

Conclusions

5.   The appellant with her application for permission  submitted  a  policy
    document   dated   June   2009   entitled   "Immigration   Directorates
    Instructions, Chapter 3,  Section  3,  Leave  to  Remain  for  Students
    (General) and the relevant section is 27.8 which is entitled "Leave  to
    attend Graduation" and reads as follows:

         "The additional leave, granted to a student after their  course  is
         finished, should be sufficient to allow a student to  attend  their
         graduation.  However there may be  instances  when  the  graduation
         takes place on a date beyond the  additional  four  months  already
         granted.  If this happens  the  student  will  need  to  apply  and
         satisfy the requirements of the visitor provisions of the Rules for
         any leave to remain  beyond  the  additional  four  months  already
         granted.  If successful, leave to remain is granted on code 3 which
         prohibits employment."

6.   The Judge did not refer to a policy and it is not clear to  me  whether
    it was brought to his attention.  Mr Shilliday was not able to  confirm
    whether the policy relied on by the  appellant  is  current  policy  or
    historical.  However, in my view it is not material. The sole basis  of
    the appellant's  application  was  in  order  for  her  to  attend  the
    graduation ceremony which has now come and gone.   The  Judge  did  not
    consider Article 8 but it is clear that it is not engaged in this case.
     The appellant's case was that she wanted to stay  for  her  graduation
    ceremony. No further evidence was submitted to the UT. The decision  of
    the Judge to dismiss the appeal under  the  Rules  is  maintained.   In
    addition I dismiss the appeal under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention on
    Human rights.





Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 22 October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
