
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10522/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 May 2016                       |On 28 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR GAURAV DHANDA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Stefan Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Vatish, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Majid whose decision and reasons  were
    promulgated on 29 October 2015.  The Claimant in the case is a national
    of India born on 15 May 1979 who appealed against the decision  by  the
    Respondent dated 4 March 2015 refusing  him  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The application that he made on 30 December  2013  was
    for further leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under
    the points-based system.  The Respondent refused that application on  4
    March 2015.  In his  decision  of  29  October  2015,  the  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal essentially at [12] on the basis that
    he found, "I think that this  appeal  should  be  allowed  because  the
    Appellant has a genuine business covered by  the  relevant  immigration
    rules."  Further findings are at [16] where the judge held:

         "I am fully conscious of the  'legal  requirements'  stipulated  by
         immigration law.  It is incumbent upon me  to  advert  to  the  new
         Rules giving respect to the animus legis dictated by the  supremacy
         of Parliament.  The rule of law demands that this Appellant  should
         be helped by the system because:

         (a)  He is carrying out a genuine business which  is  permitted  by
             our law in the UK and he is going to  create  jobs  for  other
             citizens here.

         (b)  The Rules (as they have been carefully looked at by me) permit
             that the required money is invested by him over the spread  of
             the visa.  There is good evidence  in  his  documents  showing
             that his business is growing over the period and he is  likely
             to comply with the rules for this visa.

         (c)  The Appellant is aware of the fact that his compliance of  the
             rules can justify the extension of his visa  (leading  to  the
             grant of ILR) if he does not  violate  any  of  the  governing
             rules."

 2. The grounds in support of the application  for  permission  to  appeal,
    which were made on 5 November 2015, assert that  the  Judge  failed  to
    give adequate or any reasons for  findings  on  material  matters.   In
    particular, it was submitted that there are no  reasons  given  by  the
    Judge which validate allowing the appeal.   The  overall  determination
    appears to be sparse and clearly overlooks the refusal  decision.   The
    Judge has failed to address the Respondent's reasons for refusal and it
    is not even clear what Immigration Rule the Judge considered and  there
    is an absence  of  reasoned  findings  in  this  determination  and  no
    indication of balancing the evidence put in by both parties.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on
    14 April 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that the reasoning  for
    the Judge's conclusion is wholly inadequate.  The Respondent is  unable
    to see why the Judge found against her.

     Hearing

 4. At the hearing before me on 12 May 2016, Mr Kotas,  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, invited me to look at the Respondent's refusal of 4
    March 2015, in particular pages 4 and 5  where  detailed  reasons  were
    provided  by  the  Respondent  for  questioning   the   viability   and
    credibility of the Claimant's business plans and market  research  into
    his chosen business sector and also his financial accounts.   Mr  Kotas
    submitted that Judge Majid simply had not engaged with the  refusal  or
    its reasons nor the issue of whether or not the Claimant's business was
    a genuine one.

 5. In response, Ms Vatish submitted that the Judge had the  transcript  of
    the Claimant's interview at D8 of the Respondent's bundle where he  had
    been found to be credible and had been able to answer questions without
    difficulty.  She submitted that whilst the  Judge  did  not  give  very
    detailed reasons for his decision he had had all  the  relevant  papers
    before him.  She relied on the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  SH
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 426 at [31] in respect of the  principle  of
    evidential flexibility.  In respect of the specific  points  raised  in
    the reasons for refusal decision, she  submitted  that  the  amount  of
    market research that needed to be done for a business varied,  that  in
    respect of business premises the claimant had a virtual office but this
    was not unusual in a modern age and that  if  the  Respondent  had  had
    concerns that these should have been put to the Claimant at  interview.
    She reiterated that the Judge had all the relevant information in front
    of him and had made a reasoned decision.

 6. In response, Mr Kotas submitted that if it was the Claimant's case that
    the outcome of the appeal was inevitable, even if that was correct this
    does not exempt the Judge from his duty to give reasons.

     Decision

 7. I found at the hearing that the Judge had erred materially in  law  and
    that the matter required remittal back to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    hearing de novo.  I now give my reasons.

 8. It is not apparent from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid
    what the case is actually about.   There  is  indirect  reference,  for
    example, at [12]  to  a  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine
    business, but  there  is  nowhere  in  the  decision  and  reasons  any
    reference to the relevant Immigration Rule viz paragraph 245DD  of  the
    Rules.  Nor is there any reference to the particular  points  taken  by
    the Respondent in her refusal decision.

 9. Whilst a First-tier Tribunal Judge is not expected to  necessarily  set
    out in great detail the entirety of the relevant Immigration  Rule  and
    the reasons for refusal, it is incumbent upon the  Judge  to  at  least
    make reference to the relevant Rule and to the core issues that are  in
    dispute between the  parties.   Regrettably  this  decision  failed  to
    properly engage with the evidence and  the  reasons  for  refusing  the
    application and to make proper and  adequate  reasoned  findings.   For
    these reasons it cannot be upheld and a fresh de  novo  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal will be required.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman     28 September 2016

