
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: IA/10221/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 5 January 2016                            | On 20 January 2016           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                              ERIYOMA IGHAVODHA
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. N. Ohanugo, Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nixon promulgated on 3 July 2015 in which  he  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to cancel  her
    continuing leave.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The grounds do sufficient  to  raise  the  issue  of  the  burden  and
    standard of proof where the respondent relies on dishonesty on the part
    of the appellant.  Insofar as the judge stated that the burden  lay  on
    the appellant she arguably erred in law: see JC (Part 9 HC395 -  burden
    of proof) China [2007] UKAIT 00027."

 3. At the hearing I heard submissions from both representatives, following
    which I reserved my decision which I set out below with reasons.

Submissions


 4. Mr. Ohanugo relied on the grounds of appeal.


 5. Mr. Bramble relied on the Rule 24 response.  He submitted that it was a
    single issue.  I was referred to paragraph [4]  of  the  decision.   He
    accepted that there had been an error in this paragraph as  the  burden
    had been incorrectly placed on the Appellant whereas,  as  this  was  a
    refusal under paragraph 321, the burden of proof was on the Respondent.
     However, he referred to paragraph [6] where the Appellant had accepted
    that the application was incorrect in stating that she had no immediate
    family members in the United Kingdom.  At paragraph [13] the judge  set
    out her findings and set out why she believed that what  the  Appellant
    claimed was an "honest mistake" was actually dishonesty.  Clear reasons
    had been given for why she had found against the Appellant.  She  found
    that it had not been human error on the part of the agent, but that the
    action had been taking knowingly.  Irrespective of the error, the judge
    had come to the correct conclusion and the decision should be upheld.


 6. In response Mr. Ohanugo questioned whether  the  judge  had  understood
    where the burden of proof lay.  He submitted that it  seemed  from  the
    decision that the judge believed that the burden of proof  lay  on  the
    Appellant and that this was a fundamental and material error.


 7. He referred to paragraph [11].  There was  no  reference  here  to  the
    Respondent having disclosed any material information which  could  show
    that the Appellant had been attempting to mislead.  He  submitted  that
    the standard of proof was very high.   The  judge  had  relied  on  the
    Appellant to discharge  the  burden.   In  placing  no  weight  on  the
    evidence of the agent, it showed that the burden had been placed on the
    Appellant, not on the Respondent.


 8. There had been no attempt by the Respondent to  discharge  the  burden.
    The decision showed that the judge had not relied  on  any  documentary
    evidence  from  the  Respondent  to  show  that  the  burden  had  been
    discharged.  The judge had not even had the copy of the application  or
    details of the information relating to the  application  process.   The
    immigration officer had relied  on  oral  evidence  to  show  that  the
    Appellant had misrepresented her position in the application, but there
    was no transcript of the interview carried out at Heathrow.  The burden
    was on the Respondent but no evidence had been  provided  to  discharge
    this burden.




Error of law


 9. I find that there is an error of law in paragraph [4]  when  the  judge
    states "the burden of proof is on the Appellant  and  the  standard  of
    proof required is a balance of probabilities".  Given that  this  is  a
    refusal under paragraph 321, as accepted by Mr. Bramble, the burden  of
    proof lies on the Respondent, and the standard of proof is higher  than
    the balance of probabilities.  I have carefully considered whether this
    error of law is material by reference to the judge's findings which are
    set out at paragraphs [12] to [14], entitled "Conclusions".


10. In paragraph [12] the judge states: "I remind myself  that  the  burden
    rests on the appellant".  This is immediately  prior  to  her  findings
    that there has been dishonesty on  the  part  of  the  Appellant  [13].
    There is reference in paragraph [13] to the evidence  provided  by  the
    Appellant.  By placing little weight on this evidence  from  the  agent
    [13], the judge shows that she is placing the burden on  the  Appellant
    rather than on the Respondent.


11. There is no reference in the decision to any evidence provided  by  the
    Respondent to discharge the burden of proof.  The  submissions  of  the
    Respondent's representative are contained in paragraph [11], but  there
    is no reference to any material on which the Respondent relied.   There
    is no reference in paragraph [2] entitled "Documents" to  any  evidence
    provided by the Respondent.  Mr.  Ohanugo,  who  also  represented  the
    Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal, submitted that the judge did  not
    have the application before her, nor the transcript  of  the  interview
    carried out at Heathrow.  In paragraph [13] the  judge  refers  to  the
    investigation by the immigration officer, but there is no  evidence  of
    this investigation referred to in the decision.


12. Although it appears from the decision that the Appellant accepted  that
    the application was incorrect, this alone is not enough  to  show  that
    the Appellant employed dishonesty.  The burden of  proof  lies  on  the
    Respondent to show this, and no evidence was provided by the Respondent
    to discharge this burden.  I find that the statement in  paragraph  [4]
    that the burden of proof lies on the Appellant has infected  the  whole
    of the decision.  I find that the failure to appreciate that the burden
    lay on the Respondent is a material error of law.


Decision


The decision involves the making of an error on a point of law and I set  it
aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


Signed                                  Date 15 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

