
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10979/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 3rd August 2015                            |On 14th August 2015           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                        mr Sithamparanathan Manoharan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Bexton (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Miles promulgated on 27th January 2015, following  a  hearing  at
    Richmond on  13th  January  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal  of  Sithamparanathan  Manoharan.   The  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, who was born  on  17th
    June 1972.  On 3rd October 2013, he applied for leave to remain in the
    UK on  the  basis  of  long  residence.   On  2nd  February  2014,  the
    Respondent rejected his application and made a removal decision on 17th
    February 2014.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he has been in the UK for sixteen  years,
    having come to the UK unlawfully in November 1998 and  made  an  asylum
    claim, which was rejected by the Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  and
    subsequently dismissed by the Adjudicator on 26th  October  2000.   The
    Appellant, however,  was  not  removed.   He  has  remained  physically
    present in  the  UK  ever  since.   The  Respondent  now  rejected  the
    application on the basis that the Appellant was not in  a  relationship
    with a qualifying partner, was not the parent of  a  qualifying  child,
    and that his application could not succeed under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In terms of paragraph 276ADE of HC 395, he had been
    in the UK for less than twenty years.  He had lived the majority of his
    life in Sri Lanka.  He had not severed all ties to that country.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed that before him on the day of the  hearing,  it  was
    conceded by the Appellant's Counsel  that  there  was  no  claim  under
    Appendix FM.  There was a reference to Article 3 of  the  ECHR  thereby
    suggesting that there was a claim  based  upon  inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment or the risk of torture.   In  addition,  however,  there  was
    evidence before the judge of the Appellant receiving treatment  by  way
    of injections for hepatitis C and for hepatitis B.

 5. When the Appellant was cross-examined, he  admitted  that  he  did  not
    inform the Home Office of his change of address "because he was  scared
    of being sent back to Sri Lanka".  (Paragraph 17).  The judge concluded
    that he had accepted that he had  avoided  giving  information  to  the
    Secretary of State "to  try  and  avoid  being  detected  and  removed"
    (paragraph 26).  He also held that the Appellant had come to the UK  in
    1978 aged 26 years and he still spoke  the  Tamil  language  (paragraph
    20).

 6. In applying the case law in  Ogundimu  [2013]  UKUT  00060,  the  judge
    considered the  meaning  of  the  word  "ties"  in  Rule  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules and  observed  that  this  "involves  there  being  a
    continued connection to life in that country" (paragraph 22).  He  held
    that the Appellant had not  terminated  his  ties  to  Sri  Lanka.   He
    concluded that,

         "In my judgment this case is finely balanced, but  given  that  the
         burden of establishing that he has no ties rests on the  Appellant,
         I am  not  satisfied,  despite  him  having  no  contact  with  his
         immediate family  members  Sri  Lanka  period  (sic)  that  he  has
         established, in accordance with the tests in Ogundimu, that he does
         not have any ties to Sri Lanka ... ..." (paragraph 24).

    The judge went on to say that  the  Appellant  did  speak  the  English
    language and that he did receive public  funds  for  the  provision  of
    medical treatment and that he had never had leave to remain in  the  UK
    to establish his private life as he alleged (see  paragraph  27).   The
    appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that in finding that the Appellant had
    not shown that he had no  ties  to  Sri  Lanka,  the  judge  overlooked
    material considerations, and did so also in coming  to  the  conclusion
    that there would be no disproportionate interference with his Article 8
    rights.

 8. On 10th June 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

 9. On 1st July 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect that the
    appeal amounts to  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  Judge  Miles'
    findings in a detailed and lengthy determination.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 3rd August 2015, Ms  Bexton,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that the Appellant's entire case was
    based upon his claim that he had now been in the UK for  sixteen  years
    and therefore should be granted leave to remain on a  permanent  basis.
    Yet, there was no reference to this period of stay in  the  UK  at  all
    when the judge carried out  his  assessment  under  the  principles  of
    Ogundimu at paragraph 22.  This was a serious flaw.  The only reference
    to the Appellant being in the UK for sixteen years was in  relation  to
    the fact that he had not in  any  way  become  integrated  into  United
    Kingdom culture (see paragraph 23).

11. Second, the judge had accepted the evidence of Mr Navaratnam, a British
    citizen, who had returned back to Jaffna in Sri Lanka, and had returned
    to confirm that the Appellant's family was no longer there for  him  to
    return to (see paragraph 16).  Finally, no consideration  is  given  to
    the fact that the Appellant has been giving medical care to a Mr Jagdev
    Singh Purewal (see his  witness  statement  at  pages  1V,  2V  in  the
    Appellant's evidence  bundle).   He  had  been  suffering  from  kidney
    problems and had an operation and the Appellant had provided  him  with
    care services.

12. At this stage, Ms Bexton applied for permission to amend the Grounds of
    Appeal because at paragraph 6(b) there is an express reference, to  the
    fact that the judge  had  in  this  case  failed  "to  acknowledge  the
    evidence relating to his care of and relationship with his friend,  the
    witness who attended the hearing, Mr Navaratnam ...".  This witness  is
    wrongly referred to as Mr Navaratnam by  the  person  who  drafted  the
    Grounds of Appeal, because it is not this person, but Mr  Jagdev  Singh
    Purewal, who was the person receiving such treatment.

13. I granted permission to amend the grounds.  Ms Bexton submitted that Mr
    Purewal had undergone a kidney transplant and  was  very  much  reliant
    upon the Appellant.  She asked that I set aside the decision and  remit
    it back to the First-tier Tribunal.

14. For his part, Mr Bramble submitted  that  there  were  two  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  First, as  far  as  Ogundimu  was  concerned,  the  judge  had
    properly addressed the issues in relation  to  the  Appellant's  "ties"
    with Sri Lanka.  He was  clear  in  stating  (at  paragraph  22)  that,



         "while each case turns on its own facts, circumstances relevant  to
         the assessment of whether a person has ties to the country to which
         they would have to go if they were required  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom must include, but are not limited to: the length of time  a
         person has spent in the country to which  they  would  have  to  go
         ...".

15. Second, the judge then states (at paragraph 23) that the Appellant  was
    clearly a mature adult aged 26 when he left Sri Lanka and that,  "while
    he has been out of Sri Lanka now for sixteen years he still speaks  the
    Tamil language ..." (paragraph 23).  This was the  clearest  indication
    that the judge had properly factored in the  Appellant's  time  in  Sri
    Lanka and the time that he had spent here, together with his failure to
    integrate into the UK.

16. Third, it is in  this  context  that  the  judge  then  summarises  his
    conclusions (at paragraph 24) by stating  that  this  case  is  "finely
    balanced" but that given that the burden of proof is upon the Appellant
    for establishing that he has no ties left in Sri Lanka, the  judge  was
    not satisfied that, "despite him having no contact with  his  immediate
    family and members Sri Lanka period (sic) that he has  established,  in
    accordance with the test in Ogundimu, that he does not have any ties to
    Sri Lanka ..." (paragraph 24).

17. That leaves the question of Mr Jagdev Singh Purewal, and the  tendering
    of medical and care services to this individual.  Mr Purewal, submitted
    Mr Bramble, was not in attendance at the hearing.  He  was  not  cross-
    examined.  It is not clear that Article  8  submissions  arose  in  the
    proper manner in relation to this particular witness.  He asked  me  to
    dismiss the appeal.

18. In reply, Ms Bexton submitted that paragraph 22 was the place where the
    judge should have addressed the  Appellant's  continued  residence  for
    sixteen years in the UK because that was the paragraph  where  Ogundimu
    was expressly discussed and the primary consideration here, in  a  case
    based upon long residence, was the length of time  that  the  Appellant
    had been in this country.  Yet, there is no reference whatsoever to his
    time of sixteen years in this country.  The determination  was  clearly
    flawed.

19. Second, the witness statement from Mr Purewal has not  been  considered
    at all.  It might have had a bearing upon the hearing.   It  might  not
    have.  The judge could not overlook it.  It had to be addressed.  There
    was, after all, medical evidence (at  page  8)  with  respect  to  this
    person in the bundle.

No Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA) such that I should set aside the  decision.   Notwithstanding  Ms
    Bexton's valiant efforts to persuade me otherwise, I  find  that,  even
    though this determination could have been better crafted (and not least
    in terms of the grammar employed) (see paragraph 24), the fact is  that
    the relevant considerations have been properly considered by the judge.



21. The claim was based upon long residence.  The judge does  consider  the
    Appellant's length of time in the UK when  he  discusses  Ogundimu  (at
    paragraph 22) and expressly refers to the sixteen years in this country
    at paragraph 23.  It does so in the context that the  Appellant  speaks
    the Tamil language "and there is no evidence before the  Tribunal  that
    he has become in any way integrated into the United Kingdom culture".

22. It is of course the case that the judge also noted here that, "I accept
    that he does not know where his parents and sister are  and  that  they
    may well all be deceased.  If they are not deceased I  accept  that  he
    has had no contact with  them"  (paragraph  23).   The  judge  in  this
    respect could have taken the view that  this  fact  establishes,  on  a
    balance of probabilities, that the Appellant does not  have  sufficient
    "ties" under Rule 39A of HC 395, with Sri Lanka.  However, as the judge
    himself pointed out "this case is finely balanced" (see paragraph  24).



23. Finally, this leaves  the  question  of  the  care  services  that  the
    Appellant apparently provides to Mr Jagdev Singh Purewal.  The  latter,
    however, was not in attendance at the hearing.   There  was  a  witness
    statement and there was some medical evidence.  However, this in itself
    would not have led to the judge concluding that the Appellant  did  not
    have sufficient ties with Sri Lanka.

24. The decision arrived at by the judge was open to  him.   Another  judge
    may well have taken a different view.  However, it is not  possible  to
    describe the decision as "perverse" or in any other way "irrational".

Decision

25. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

26. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12thh August 2015

