
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10306/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th May 2016                              |On 3 June 2016                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  ali akmal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Iqbal, instructed by Ashmans solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 6th October 2015.

 2. For the purposes of continuity and clarity I will,  in  this  decision,
    continue to refer to Mr Akmal as the Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 21st February 1978.   He
    had applied for indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of  ten  years
    lawful residence in the UK.  That application was refused on the  basis
    that there was a gap of 168 days in  his  period  of  lawful  residence
    prior to the application on  20th  May  2014,  such  that  he  had  not
    achieved ten years lawful residence.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal, in a Decision and Reasons promulgated on  13th
    October 2015, allowed the appeal.  In  the  Decision  and  Reasons  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the Appellant had first arrived in
    the UK on 30th June 2004 as a student.  After various applications  and
    failed appeals he had eventually exhausted his appeal rights, according
    to the Secretary of State, on 3rd December 2013 when the Upper Tribunal
    refused permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal.   The  Appellant
    thereafter  made  EEA  applications  in  March  2014  but  these   were
    withdrawn. The application made on 20th May 2014 for  Indefinite  Leave
    to Remain under the ten year Rule was the decision under appeal  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Before the First-tier Tribunal  it  was  argued,  successfully  by  the
    Appellant's representatives, that in fact  there  had  been  a  renewed
    application for permission to appeal direct  to  the  Court  of  Appeal
    after permission was refused by the Upper Tribunal.   That  application
    was decided on 24th February 2014  and  so  that  is  when  the  "clock
    stopped" bringing s.3C leave to an end. It  was  argued  that  the  gap
    referred to by the Secretary of State  did  not  exist.  The  Appellant
    claimed that on that basis he did qualify under the ten year provision.
     The Appellant had claimed that he could succeed because there  was  no
    gap as claimed by the Secretary of State.

 6. It is significant however that,  irrespective  of  whether  s.3C  leave
    expired in December 2013 or February 2014, by  the  time  he  made  his
    application in May 2014 he was without leave.

 7. Mr Duffy argued that the clock had stopped earlier than  February  2014
    because Judge Kekic, when refusing permission to appeal to the Court of
    Appeal had found the application to be way out of time.  Be that as  it
    may, neither Judge Kekic's decision to that effect nor the  application
    to the Court of Appeal, now relied upon by the Secretary of State,  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  What the First-tier Tribunal did  have
    was the Court of  Appeal's  decision  refusing  permission  to  appeal.
    However permission to appeal was not refused  because  it  was  out  of
    time. I agree with the Appellant that there was no gap and so his  s.3C
    leave expired only on the date  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision,
    namely 24th February 2014.

 8. Nevertheless, even finding in the Appellant's favour on that point,  he
    is still unable to succeed under the Rules.  The Appellant  arrived  in
    the UK on 30th June 2004.  He would have accumulated ten  years  lawful
    residence only on 30th June 2014.  His leave having expired in February
    2014, as I have found above, he was short by four months. Mr Iqbal  was
    unable to make any submissions to the contrary.  The  fact  that  there
    had initially been an EEA application does not add anything to the case
    because that application was withdrawn.

 9. The Judge in the First-tier Tribunal therefore, in allowing the  appeal
    under the Rules, erred and his decision to allow the appeal  under  the
    Rules must be set aside.

10. I note that in the Decision there are lengthy findings as to the nature
    of the relationship between the Appellant and his Polish partner all of
    which are positive; the judge finding that the relationship is genuine.
     However, whilst those findings may be of benefit at some  future  date
    they do not take this particular appeal any further because it was  not
    an EEA decision that was under appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    However, it is of note that  those  positive  findings  have  not  been
    challenged by the Secretary of State so could be  relied  upon  in  any
    future EEA application by the Appellant.

11.  The Decision to allow the appeal under the Immigration  Rules,  namely
    the ten year provisions, is tainted by a material error  of  law.   The
    Appellant cannot succeed on that  basis  and  his  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State' decision must fail.



Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed such that the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  In redeciding the appeal the  Appellant's
appeal against the Secretary of State's decision is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1st June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1st June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
