
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10075/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 December 2014                           |On 12 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

                        Mayankkumar Bhaskarbhai PATEL
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None (the Appellant appeared in person)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   On 6 March 2013 the appellant, who is a citizen of India,  was  refused
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student.  He had been in the UK  on
    that basis since 2009.  The refusal referred to  paragraph  322(1A)  of
    the Immigration Rules.  This was on the basis that  the  appellant  had
    made false representations in  his  application,  by  basing  it  on  a
    college to which he had not in fact been accepted.

2.   The appellant's appeal was dismissed,  on  the  papers,  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Glossop, in a determination promulgated on 18 July 2013.
     Permission to appeal was initially  refused,  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Sommerville, on  20 August  2013.   Some  twelve  months  later,
    however, permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Freeman.

3.   The point on which  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  was  that  it
    appeared arguably unfair that a request made by the appellant to switch
    to an oral hearing had not been properly  dealt  with.   The  grant  of
    permission made no reference to  the  fact  that  the  application  for
    permission to appeal was made about a year out of time.  The refusal by
    the first-tier had been on the basis that the application at that stage
    had not been admitted (it was seven days out of time).

4.   The appeal first came before me, and Upper Tribunal Judge  Pitt,  on  7
    October 2014.  We  attempted  to  communicate  with  the  unrepresented
    appellant but his English, although sufficient for normal conversation,
    was not good enough to explain legal issues.  There was then a  further
    adjourned hearing where the required Gujarati interpreter had not  been
    booked, and the appeal finally went ahead on 18 December 2014,  when  a
    Gujarati interpreter was available.

5.   After  the  initial  adjourned  hearing  on  7  October  2014,  written
    directions were sent out, making it clear  that  a  full  and  detailed
    explanation of the reasons for the long delay between August  2013  and
    the application to the Upper Tribunal in July 2014 should  be  provided
    (along with supporting evidence).

6.   The appellant, at the hearing on 18 December 2014,  confirmed  that  he
    had received these written directions, and that he had  understood  the
    need for an explanation of the delay.  I  then  gave  the  appellant  a
    number of opportunities to put forward such an explanation.  In essence
    this was that he had left everything to his solicitors, who had  always
    told him that they were busy, and that everything was in  hand.   Since
    July 2013 the appellant had been at home with his uncle,  not  working,
    and unable to study.  He now wanted to be allowed to reapply to  study,
    and he felt aggrieved that his lawyers had  wasted  time  when  he  had
    spent so much.

7.   As I indicated at the hearing, it is my view that there is  not  enough
    in  what  the  appellant  has  put  forward  to   amount   to   special
    circumstances justifying the extension of time.

8.    It  was  established  in  Boktor  and  Wanis  (late  application   for
    permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT 00442 (IAC) that, where an  out  of  time
    point had not been dealt with, the grant of permission  to  appeal  was
    conditional,  and  the  question  of   whether   there   were   special
    circumstances making it unjust not to extend  time  would  have  to  be
    considered.  In the light of this decision I attempted  to  explain  to
    the appellant, at the earlier hearings,  that  this  was  an  important
    point for him to address.  I also  wrote  the  directions  making  this
    clear.  By the time of the hearing on 18 December  2014  the  appellant
    had therefore been made aware of the issue, and had had plenty of  time
    to seek advice on it, and prepare to deal with the point.

9.   The written application made in July 2014  offered  no  explanation  at
    all for the delay of a year in making the  application,  following  the
    refusal in August 2013.  At the  hearing  the  appellant's  explanation
    referred solely to the delay being caused by his legal representatives,
    but it appears to me that that is not enough, without more,  to  amount
    to a reasonable explanation.  It is possible that the appellant  has  a
    valid complaint against his former representatives, but for time to  be
    extended  there  would  need  to   be   some   explanation   from   the
    representatives themselves as to the reason for the delay.  It is  also
    the case that we are concerned here with  a  very  considerable  delay.
    This is not a matter of a few days, but a delay of a whole year.

10.  The underlying issue in the appeal was one that the  appellant  clearly
    felt he could address, but that is not enough in itself  to  amount  to
    special circumstances justifying the extension  of  time.   It  remains
    open to the appellant to  put  forward  his  explanation  to  the  Home
    Office.  Given  the  serious  consequences  for  any  potential  future
    applications, this would be of significance in attempting to remove the
    false representations aspect of the refusal from his  record,  but  the
    appellant would need to understand that he would  now,  from  the  date
    with which he is served with this decision, need to  make  arrangements
    to leave the UK within 28 days  if  he  does  not  want  to  become  an
    overstayer.

11.  The application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    despite apparently being granted, was out of time.   Having  considered
    the explanation for the lengthy delay I have decided that there are  no
    special circumstances justifying extension of time.  As  a  result  the
    application made in July 2014 is not admitted.  The First-tier decision
    dismissing the appellant's appeal therefore stands.

Notice of Decision

Application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal not admitted.

The First-tier decision dismissing the appeal stands.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb



