
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10686/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 October 2013                            |On 5 November 2013           |
|Prepared on 17 October 2013                   |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                              mr jerome clayton

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Saifolahi, Counsel, instructed by Victory at
Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant is a national of Jamaica, and appears to have  been  born
    sometime between 1977 and 1980.  His date of  birth  cannot  be  stated
    with any certainty, because at  various  time  he  has  used  different
    identities, claiming different dates of birth.  It is however agreed by
    the parties that he first came to this country on 14 February 2002,  at
    that time using a passport in the name of Jerome Clayton (which is  the
    name by which he is referred to in these proceedings).  He was  removed
    to Jamaica under that  name,  having  been  deemed  to  be  an  illegal
    entrant.

 2. The appellant then returned to this country, this time using a passport
    in the name of Anthony Rowan Douglas, but was refused  leave  to  enter
    because the Immigration Officer was not satisfied that he only intended
    to remain  for  a  short  visit.   However  he  was  granted  temporary
    admission, on the basis that he would return to port on 17 January 2003
    for a flight back to Jamaica.  He did not do so, and on 20  March  2003
    he was listed as an absconder.

 3. Then, on 20 August 2004, the appellant was  arrested  on  suspicion  of
    possession of a class A drug with intent to supply.  It appears he  was
    granted bail by the Magistrates' Court,  but  he  failed  to  attend  a
    subsequent hearing, absconding yet again (and, it would seem, being  in
    breach of bail as well).

 4. The appellant next came to the attention of the respondent when he  was
    arrested in Slough for criminal damage.  He was given an eighteen month
    conditional discharge at Slough Magistrates' Court on 14 July 2010, but
    detained under the UKBA's power, removal directions being  set  for  21
    July 2010.

 5. The day before he was due to be removed, the appellant claimed  asylum,
    as a result of which removal directions  were  cancelled.   The  asylum
    application was refused, but on 10 August 2010, the appellant lodged an
    appeal against this asylum decision.

 6. Then, on 19 August 2010 the appellant was convicted (this time  in  the
    identity of Jerome Clayton, which he had originally used to enter  this
    country, rather than Anthony Douglas, in which he had  previously  been
    arrested) at Reading Crown Court of possession of a class A  drug  with
    intent to supply.  This related to thirteen grammes of  crack  cocaine.
    In respect of this offence, on a guilty plea he was sentenced to twelve
    months' imprisonment.  He did not appeal against this sentence.  On  18
    September 2010 he was detained into immigration custody  on  completion
    of his custodial sentence.  He was subsequently granted bail.

 7. The appellant's appeal against the refusal of asylum was  dismissed  by
    Immigration Judge Harmston on 8 October 2010, following  a  hearing  at
    Columbus House, Newport on 5 October.  Thereafter, on 12 October  2010,
    the appellant was served  with  a  notice  of  liability  to  automatic
    deportation in consequence of his most recent conviction, for which  he
    had received the sentence of twelve months' imprisonment.

 8. The appellant's appeal rights were exhausted on 3 December 2010  and  a
    deportation order was signed against him on 7  February  2011.   On  18
    February  2011  he  was  served  with  the  letter  setting   out   the
    respondent's reasons for deportation, in which  the  appellant's  human
    rights and asylum claims were certified.

 9. On 18 May 2011 the Jamaican High Commission agreed to  issue  a  travel
    document to the appellant,  this  time  in  the  name  of  Jerome  Otis
    Clayton,  which  is  apparently  the  name  in   his   original   birth
    certificate.

10. Thereafter, following consideration of further representations made  on
    behalf of the appellant, and DNA  evidence  submitted  on  his  behalf,
    showing that he was the biological father of two children, on 18  April
    2012, the respondent, having reconsidered whether  the  appellant  fell
    under any of the exceptions from automatic deportation in Section 33 of
    the UK Borders Act 2007, found that he did not.

11. The appellant appealed against this decision, and his appeal was  heard
    before a panel consisting of First-tier Tribunal Judge Callender  Smith
    and Mr C B O'Brian (Lay Member), sitting at Taylor  House  on  23  July
    2012.

12. In a determination promulgated on 6 August 2012,  the  panel  dismissed
    this appeal.

13. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on 21 August  2012,  and
    following a hearing before Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lewis  on  12
    November 2012, Judge Lewis found that the panel had made  an  error  of
    law such that its decision fell to  be  set  aside,  in  the  following
    terms:

         "1.  It is at least  well  arguable  that  the  panel  should  have
             granted  the  requested  adjournment  and  that  it  did   not
             determine the appeal under Article 8 of the  1950  Convention.
             At the hearing I said that it was unarguable  that  they  have
             determined it without regard to Immigration Rules 398, 399 and
             399A which applied to all deportation appeals irrespective  of
             the date of the decision, was an error of law.  This  is  less
             clear in the light of MF  (Article  8  -  new  Rules)  Nigeria
             [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC).  In any event I set the determination
             aside and direct that the appeal be re-heard on all issues.

         2.    The  hearing  has  to  await  the  outcome  of  the   custody
             proceedings in the Family Court.  To ascertain this, I  direct
             a Case Management Review Hearing on the first  available  date
             after 1 February 2013.  This can be before any judge and  does
             not need to be before me as I am not seized of the case."

14. It had been asserted in the grounds that  an  adjournment  should  have
    been granted, both in order to obtain medical evidence  regarding  this
    appellant, but also in order to await the outcome of proceedings in the
    family court relating to his young son.  It was also asserted that  the
    panel had erred by not considering Article 8 in accordance with the new
    Rules, although in light of what is set out below, it is  not  entirely
    clear how this could  possibly  have  had  a  material  effect  on  the
    decision.  However, permission to appeal was granted, although it  does
    not appear that there was any finding that the panel's findings of fact
    with regard to the credibility of the various witnesses should  not  be
    retained.  In light of my clear  findings  below,  it  is  of  academic
    interest only whether or not the panel actually made any material error
    of law.  I should however note that the application for an  adjournment
    had only been made the day before the hearing, and the panel noted,  at
    paragraph 19 of its determination, that "there had been plenty of  time
    to have addressed the issues being raised today [because] the appellant
    had known of the appeal hearing date for six weeks...".  The panel  was
    very concerned that "there was a danger that the matter would simply go
    off into limbo if not addressed today".  In the event,  it  would  seem
    the panel's fears were justified, because it is now some fifteen months
    after that hearing, and the appeal has still not been concluded.

15. In accordance with Judge Lewis's  directions,  the  appeal  was  listed
    before an Upper Tier panel consisting of The Hon. Mr Justice  McCloskey
    sitting as a Judge of the  Upper  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Goldstein, on 1 May 2013.  Prior to  that  hearing,  which  was  a  for
    mention hearing, the appellant's then solicitors, Mackesys, had applied
    for an adjournment, on the  basis  that  care  proceedings  which  were
    before the Principal Registry of the Family Division had been adjourned
    until  23  August  2013.   It  was  said  that  the  appellant  had  an
    outstanding application  for  parental  responsibility  (which  was  in
    effect an application for  contact)  and  that  the  issue  of  contact
    between the appellant and his son would be decided on that date.

16. This application for an adjournment was refused, it being considered by
    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor that a for mention hearing would serve  a
    useful purpose in progressing the appeal to a substantive hearing.  The
    appellant's solicitors  were  notified  that  they  should  attend  the
    hearing with three copies of  any  relevant  disclosable  documentation
    relating to the progress of the family matter.

17. At the hearing on 1 May 2013 the Tribunal issued directions, which were
    noted by Judge Goldstein as follows:

         "Parties Agree (mindful of the  guidance  in  RS  (Immigration  and
         Family Court Proceedings) India [2012] UKUT  00218  (IAC)  that  it
         would be appropriate, pending the outcome of the  present  parental
         responsibility proceedings/contact before the Family Division -  to
         be heard on 23 August next - to re-list for mention and  directions
         after 1 September 2013...".

18. Judge Goldstein also made the  following  directions,  "of  which  both
    parties have made a careful written note":

         "Appellant to serve upon the Tribunal and the respondent  no  later
         than 7 days before the next...  hearing  a  bundle  comprising  all
         documents upon which he  presently  relies  and  a  further  bundle
         comprising any  relevant  disclosable  documents  relating  to  the
         progress/outcome of  the  Family  Division  proceedings,  including
         medical evidence in relation to the appellant".

19. The appeal was then listed before me for mention on 3  September  2013,
    at which hearing the appellant was  represented  by  Mr  Lot,  a  legal
    representative  of  his  current  solicitors,   who   had   also   been
    representing the appellant at the previous  for  mention  hearing.   No
    bundle had been served in accordance  with  the  directions  which  had
    previously been made but Mr Lot informed the Tribunal "that there  must
    have been a misinterpretation  of  the  order,  because  his  firm  had
    understood that the files would not be  needed  until  the  substantive
    hearing".  This is plainly not what Judge Goldstein had  directed,  and
    as he noted, the parties had made a careful note of his  directions  at
    the time.

20. In any event, as I recorded in a note of hearing and further directions
    settled following this hearing, Mr Lot handed to the Tribunal a copy of
    a letter from the appellant's family solicitors,  Mackesys  (who  would
    appear to  have  previously  made  representations  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant in respect of his immigration status), dated 2 September 2013
    which  summarised  what  the  outcome  of  the  contact  and   parental
    responsibility proceedings were said to have been, and  which  said  in
    terms that "a copy of this order is herewith attached".   However,  the
    order was not attached to the copy of this letter which was  handed  up
    to the Tribunal (and, I can add, has never been  subsequently  produced
    either).

21. In any event, although the respondent's  representative  had  not  seen
    this letter, having read the letter, she considered there was no reason
    why the substantive appeal should not be re-listed for a full  hearing,
    now that the outcome of the family proceedings was known.  The Tribunal
    would now be in a position to consider any  Article  8  submissions  in
    light  of  the   decision   that   contact   (described   as   parental
    responsibility) had been granted to the appellant  in  respect  of  his
    son.

22. Accordingly, I gave directions, which were stated to the parties at the
    hearing, and subsequently set out in writing, that the appeal was to be
    listed for a substantive hearing before  me  on  Thursday,  10  October
    2013.  I also recorded that a time estimate  of  four  hours  had  been
    agreed by both representatives, on the basis that  there  would  be  at
    least three witnesses (the appellant, his mother and  his  sister)  and
    possibly a fourth (the appellant's brother) (in the  event  there  were
    four, because another  sister  of  the  appellant  gave  evidence;  his
    brother was not able to be present).

23. I directed that the respondent was to notify the appellant's solicitors
    by no later than Friday 13 September 2013  of  all  the  documents  the
    respondent required to be contained within a consolidated bundle  which
    was to be prepared on behalf of the appellant and that "the  appellant"
    must file with the Tribunal and serve on the respondent,  by  no  later
    than Friday 27 September 2013, a consolidated  bundle,  containing  all
    the documents upon which the appellant intends to rely, as well as  all
    the documents notified by the respondent" in accordance with my earlier
    direction.  I also directed that the bundle must  in  respect  of  each
    witness it  was  intended  should  give  evidence,  contain  a  witness
    statement capable of standing as evidence-in-chief  and  that  it  must
    contain all documents relevant to the family proceedings which  it  was
    said was concluded on 23 August 2013 "including in particular the order
    which was said to be attached to the letter  from  Mackesys  Solicitors
    dated 2 September 2013".

24. The bundle was not served in accordance with the directions which I had
    given, and on 9 October 2013, the day before the  hearing  was  due  to
    take place (for which four hours of court time had been allocated)  the
    appellant's solicitors wrote to the Tribunal in the following terms:

         "We are  concerned  as  we  have  not  yet  received  the  required
         authority to disclose documents from the family proceedings in  the
         hearing of this appeal as listed for tomorrow 10 October 2013.

         We are anxious to save costs both to the court and the parties  and
         would ask in the circumstances for the matter to  be  adjourned  to
         the first available date after four weeks.  We anticipated that the
         required consent/authority would have been granted by then.

         The court should kindly note that we have  the  papers  copied  and
         indexed but are unable to serve and file them without the authority
         of the family court."

25. This application was put before me, but I refused it, in the  following
    terms:

         "It is proposed to hear the appeal tomorrow.  This application  for
         an adjournment is made far too late.  The court  time  has  already
         been allocated.

         The Tribunal will expect the appellant to produce the bundle  which
         should  have  been  prepared  by  27/09/2013  in  accordance   with
         directions given on 03/09/2013 for use at the hearing."

26. Following receipt of my decision,  refusing  the  adjournment,  bundles
    were prepared on behalf of the appellant, and copies were  made.   They
    were delivered to the Tribunal about 30  minutes  before  the  hearing.
    Considerable credit must be given to the appellant's  Counsel  for  the
    efficient manner in which she ensured that clean copies of the  bundles
    were prepared at a very late stage for use by the Tribunal.  She should
    also be commended for  producing  a  skeleton  argument,  containing  a
    chronology, in circumstances where she was instructed very  late.   The
    Tribunal is extremely grateful to Ms Saifolahi for this, and  also  for
    the efficient manner  in  which  she  presented  the  appellant's  case
    throughout the hearing.

27. At the outset, Ms Saifolahi informed the Tribunal  that  she  had  been
    instructed to renew the appellant's  application  for  an  adjournment.
    However, it became clear from a perusal  of  the  chronology  which  Ms
    Saifolahi had prepared, and this was confirmed during the hearing, that
    the appellant's solicitors had not sought disclosure of relevant papers
    in respect of the family court proceedings  until  24  September  2013,
    which is some three weeks after I had given directions that the bundles
    must be with the Tribunal by 27 September 2013, in circumstances  where
    clearly, as a result of this delay it would not be possible  to  ensure
    that any relevant documents in relation to the family proceedings could
    be included in the bundle.  Also, I was  entirely  satisfied  that  the
    appellant and his family were  in  a  proper  position  to  inform  the
    Tribunal as to the effect of what had been ordered.  Accordingly, I did
    not consider any of the documentation which, as a result of the failure
    of the appellant's solicitors to  comply  with  the  directions  I  had
    given, would not be before the  Tribunal,  were  capable  of  having  a
    material effect upon my decision.  I  was  entirely  satisfied  that  I
    could deal justly with this  appeal  without  these  documents,  and  I
    accordingly maintained my original decision not to grant yet a  further
    adjournment.

28. In addition to the skeleton argument which Ms Saifolahi  had  prepared,
    she also relied on the  appellant's  bundle,  which  contained  witness
    statements of the appellant,  his  sisters  Nerva  Clarke  and  Claudia
    Williams, his  mother,  Pearline  Williams  and  his  brother,  Jeffrey
    Clayton.  All these witnesses, apart from  his  brother,  attended  and
    were cross-examined.  I was also  provided  with  a  copy  of  all  the
    documents contained in the respondent's bundle.

29. Ms Saifolahi produced a copy of the recent Court of Appeal decision  in
    MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, while Mr Jarvis, on  behalf  of  the
    respondent, relied upon four authorities which he  produced,  Baghli  v
    France - 34374/97 [1999] ECHR 135, r V Benaddas [2005] EWCA Crim  2113,
    JO (Uganda) and JT (Ivory Coast) v SSHD  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  10  and  SS
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  The respondent also relied  upon
    a bundle which was produced at the hearing.

30. As indicated above, I heard evidence from four of  the  witnesses  (the
    appellant, two of his sisters and  his  mother)  who  were  all  cross-
    examined.  I also heard submissions  on  behalf  of  both  parties.   I
    recorded the evidence and the submissions contemporaneously and this is
    contained in my Record of Proceedings.   I  shall  not  set  out  below
    everything which was said during the course of the hearing,  but  shall
    only refer to such of the evidence and submissions  that  is  necessary
    for the purposes of this determination.  I have,  however,  taken  full
    account of everything which was said to me as well as all the documents
    contained within the file, whether or  not  the  same  is  specifically
    referred to below.

The Appellant's Case

31. The case of both parties can be summarised  briefly.   The  appellant's
    case is essentially that insufficient weight was attached to  the  best
    interests of his very young son, who was referred to during the hearing
    as Jerome Junior.  Although the appellant has three other children whom
    he does not see (one of whom, a daughter, by a woman  in  this  country
    from whom he is estranged) it is said he has a very close  relationship
    with Jerome Junior, and that if he is to be removed from this  country,
    that removal will have a serious effect  on  his  son.   Jerome  Junior
    currently lives with the appellant's sister Nerva, and her family,  and
    she is his guardian.  His mother now has no contact with him, which, it
    is said, would make the appellant's removal from  his  life  even  more
    significant.

32. As already noted, in support of the appellant's claim I heard  evidence
    from various members of his family, including in particular his  mother
    and sister Nerva, the purpose of which evidence  was  to  persuade  the
    Tribunal that the appellant's relationship with his son  was  extremely
    close, and also that his removal would be disproportionate.  I refer to
    this evidence in a little detail below.

33. Essentially, it  was  argued  before  me  that  although,  because  the
    appellant's son was being brought up now by his sister,  he  could  not
    succeed  under  paragraphs  398  and  399  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    nonetheless when considering the appellant's Article 8 position in  the
    second stage of the two stage process which the Court of Appeal  in  MF
    had confirmed should be carried out, the  panel  should  have  accorded
    greater weight to the son's best interests.  If it had, it  is  argued,
    the  removal  of  the  appellant  would   have   been   found   to   be
    disproportionate.

The Respondent's Case

34. The respondent's starting point is that (subject to  the  second  stage
    assessment which the Court of Appeal in  MF  has  confirmed  should  be
    carried  out)  the  appellant  cannot  succeed   under   the   relevant
    Immigration Rules which apply where a person claims  that  his  or  her
    deportation would be contrary to the UK's obligations under Article  8.
    These are paragraphs 398 and 399 of the Rules.  The appellant could not
    succeed because he would have to establish under paragraph 399(a)(i)(b)
    that there was "no other family member who is  able  to  care  for  the
    child in the UK".  As has been accepted on behalf of the appellant, his
    sister is looking after Jerome Junior at the moment and  will  continue
    to do so.  Accordingly, the Tribunal would have to consider whether, in
    light of the guidance given not only in MF, but  also  in  other  cases
    upon which the respondent would rely,  the  removal  of  the  appellant
    would be proportionate.

35. Mr Jarvis  referred  the  Tribunal  to  various  discrepancies  in  the
    evidence which had been given on which he relied, and did not accept on
    behalf of the respondent that the appellant even had a family life with
    his son in this country.  Nor did he accept that it  would  necessarily
    be in that child's best interests to continue to  have  a  relationship
    with a person who had, by his previous conduct,  shown  himself  to  be
    such a bad father.  In any event, the Tribunal was  reminded  that  the
    purpose of removal was twofold; in addition to the prevention of  crime
    and disorder, it was also necessary for the purpose  of  maintaining  a
    fair and effective immigration system.  Mr Jarvis reminded the court of
    the  appellant's  immigration  history  which,  in  the  view  of   the
    respondent, was appalling.  Even if, which was  not  accepted,  it  was
    said that it was in Jerome Junior's best interests for him to remain in
    this country, this factor, while  a   primary  consideration,  was  not
    paramount and was substantially outweighed by the other  factors  which
    suggested he should be removed.

Discussion

The Law

36. I can summarise the way in which a decision  regarding  deportation  in
    circumstances where it is claimed that this would be in  breach  of  an
    applicant's Article 8 rights should be taken, briefly, in light of  the
    guidance which has now been given by the Court of Appeal  in  MF.   The
    first step to be taken is set out in that decision at paragraph 35,  as
    follows:

         "35. It is common ground  that  the  first  step  that  has  to  be
             undertaken  under  the  new  Rules  is   to   decide   whether
             deportation would be contrary to  an  individual's  Article  8
             rights on the grounds that (i)  the  case  falls  within  para
             398(b) or (c) and (ii) one or more of the conditions  set  out
             in para 399(a) or (b) or para 399A(a) or (b) applies.  If  the
             case falls within para 398(b) or (c) and one or more of  those
             conditions applies, then the new Rules implicitly provide that
             deportation would be contrary to Article 8."

37. In this case this is an easy  exercise.   The  appellant's  case  falls
    within paragraph 399(b) that is that his deportation is  deemed  to  be
    conducive to the public good because he has been sentenced to a term of
    imprisonment of less than four years, but at least  twelve  months  and
    none of the conditions set out in paragraph 399(a) or (b) or  paragraph
    399A(a) or (b) applies.  Paragraph 399(b) is not material in this case,
    and nor is it suggested that paragraph 399A(a) or  (b)  applies.   With
    regard to paragraph 399(a)  is  concerned,  this  does  not  apply,  as
    already set out above, because the appellant does have  another  family
    member present in this country who is able to care for his son  in  the
    UK.

38. In  circumstances  where  deportation  would  not  be  contrary  to  an
    individual's Article 8 rights on the specific grounds set out above,  a
    Tribunal nonetheless has to go on to consider  whether  in  any  event,
    removal would not be proportionate, because  if  it  is  not,  and  the
    removal of an applicant would be in breach of  his  or  her  Article  8
    rights, then he cannot be removed.

39. However, when undertaking the second part of  the  two  stage  approach
    which the Court of Appeal in MF has said must be adopted, the  Tribunal
    should have in mind that  although  it  should  not  adopt  a  test  of
    exceptionality, where it is said in the  Rules  (at  paragraph  398(c))
    that if an applicant cannot succeed under the first stage "it will only
    be in exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation
    will be outweighed by other factors",  what  was  meant  was  that  "in
    approaching the question of whether removal (in those circumstances) is
    a proportionate interference with an individual's Article 8 rights, the
    scales are heavily weighted in favour of deportation and something very
    compelling (which will be "exceptional") is required  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in removal" (at paragraph 42  of  MF).   The  Court  of
    Appeal went on to state, at paragraph 43 that "the general rule in  the
    present context is that, in the case of  a  foreign  prisoner  to  whom
    paragraphs 399 and 399A do not apply, very compelling reasons  will  be
    required to outweigh the public interest in deportation".  It is  these
    compelling  reasons   which   are   said   to   be   the   "exceptional
    circumstances".

40. In my judgment, this is entirely consistent  with  what  the  Court  of
    Appeal was stating in the earlier decision of SS (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 550.

41. Accordingly, in this case, when considering the second stage of the two
    stage approach,  I  must  ask  myself  whether  the  reasons  why  this
    appellant should not be deported (which are  said  to  be  largely  the
    harmful effect this will have on his young son) are so compelling as to
    outweigh the public interest  in  deportation.   When  considering  the
    weight to be given to  the  public  interest  in  deportation,  I  must
    consider not only that the deportation of foreign  criminals  has  been
    deemed by Parliament to be conducive to the public good, but also  that
    in this case there is a further need to  maintain  fair  and  effective
    immigration control.  I must also bear in mind that the deportation  of
    this appellant is conducive to the public  good  not  just  because  of
    whatever risk he might pose of continuing to offend but also because of
    the need both to deter other potential foreign criminals  and  also  to
    express the revulsion  felt  legitimately  by  members  of  the  public
    towards foreign criminals who commit  serious  offences,  particularly,
    but not exclusively, towards those who have been convicted  of  dealing
    in class A drugs.

42. In order to consider what weight I can attach to the various factors in
    this case, I must first make findings with regard  to  the  evidence  I
    have heard.  I do not propose to engage in a forensic analysis  of  all
    the evidence I heard, but shall restrict myself to  giving  my  reasons
    why I cannot accept that  any  of  the  main  witnesses,  that  is  the
    appellant himself, his sister Nerva (who is his son's guardian) and his
    mother can be relied upon as witnesses of  truth.   Their  evidence  on
    important aspects of the appellant's case was  so  inconsistent  as  to
    cause me to conclude that the motivation of all of them was to  advance
    the appellant's case rather than to give honest evidence.

43. I start with the evidence which was given with regard to whether or not
    the appellant would have a home available to him in Jamaica  should  he
    be deported.  In a previous hearing, the appellant had claimed that his
    mother's house in Jamaica (which might otherwise have been available to
    him) had burned down.  In cross-examination, when asked how he knew, he
    replied that his sister Nerva had told him that,  after  she  had  gone
    there for a holiday.  When it was pointed out to him  that  his  sister
    had previously said that this house had fallen into disrepair, and  had
    not said that it had burned down, he eventually said this:

         "I swear I heard she said it had burned down".

44. When the appellant's sister Nerva gave evidence,  in  cross-examination
    she agreed that it was correct that she had said the house  had  fallen
    into disrepair.  Her mother had left Jamaica about fifteen  years  ago,
    she could not remember exactly how long, and so the  house  had  fallen
    into disrepair because no one was there to look  after  it.   She  also
    thought that they (presumably being the authorities because it was what
    is known as a "capture home") had taken it  away  because  no  one  was
    there.  When asked why her brother  had  thought  that  the  house  had
    burned down, she said she did not know why he had said  this,  but  she
    knew that they did not have a house there anymore.  She  did  not  know
    what had happened to it.

45. When asked why she thought that it had been taken over, she  said  that
    her mother had left so long ago and she heard this from  people  there,
    that it had been taken over.  She had heard this from a friend of hers.



46. When asked whether she had been back to see the house for herself,  she
    said that she had not because she had a life in this country  now,  and
    when asked, said she had been told over  the  phone  from  contacts  in
    Jamaica that it had been taken over.

47. When it was put to her that she had gone back to  Jamaica  in  December
    2012, she confirmed that that was correct, and that she had been  there
    for two weeks, but she had stayed at a hotel in Kingston, which  was  a
    good distance away from the house and had not visited it.

48. When the appellant's mother, Mrs Pearline Williams, gave  evidence  and
    was asked about this house, she gave yet another account.  According to
    her, when asked, she claimed that she had never had any other  property
    in Jamaica.

49. Although the issue of whether or not the appellant's mother had a house
    in Jamaica, or even whether it might still  be  available,  is  not  of
    itself of any great importance, because the appellant could be returned
    to Jamaica whether  or  not  that  house  was  available  to  him,  the
    discrepancy in the evidence of the witnesses is a  matter  of  which  I
    must take note.

50. The foundation of the appellant's claim that his deportation  would  be
    disproportionate is based on the relationship he claims  to  have  with
    his young son, and on this point also the evidence  of  the  appellant,
    and that of  his  sister  Nerva  and  his  mother  was  also  seriously
    inconsistent.  The appellant, when asked, began by saying that  he  saw
    his son every day.  He maintained that this was so even when asked when
    was the last time he had seen his son before the date  of  the  hearing
    (which was on a Thursday).

51. When the question was repeated, he conceded that the last time  he  had
    seen his son was the previous Sunday and said  that  this  was  at  his
    mother's house.  He claimed, when asked, that he had taken his  son  to
    the park, next to his house, although he could not name the  park.   He
    said it did not have a name, it was just next to the  house  where  the
    kids go.  He said he had spent about three hours with him.

52. When then asked to think back  to  the  previous  week,  and  tell  the
    Tribunal on how many days that week he had seen his  son,  he  said  he
    thought it was about three, but he  could  not  actually  remember  the
    days.  When asked how long his son had been  living  with  his  sister,
    Nerva, he first said "a couple of months now", then when asked what  he
    meant by that said that it was "since last month".

53. When asked on average roughly over the last month how often he had seen
    his son every week, he then replied that  his  sister  lived  near  his
    mother, and during the week he would go to his sister's home  but  over
    the weekend she brought his son to his mother.  When it was put to  him
    what he had been asked was how often he saw him every week, he  replied
    "every week", when he was asked again how often every week he saw  him,
    he said again that it was "every day".

54. In re-examination, the appellant  was  referred  to  his  statement  at
    paragraph 6, where he had said that his son had been  living  with  his
    sister for a few  months  before  the  order  had  been  made,  and  he
    confirmed that this was correct.

55. Clearly, it must be troubling that the appellant does not  seem  to  be
    able to give a consistent account of how long his  son,  with  whom  he
    claims to have such a close relationship,  has  been  living  with  his
    sister, but it is even more significant that his sister, again, gave an
    account which was not consistent with his account.  There was  a  minor
    discrepancy  between  what  she  told  the  Tribunal  about  when   the
    appellant's son had first come to live with her,  which  she  said  had
    been 1 July this year, and what she had said in her statement which was
    that it was since about June this year, but when asked when her brother
    had last seen his son, her first  reply  was  "almost  every  weekend".
    When asked when was the last time he had seen him, she  said  that  she
    "can't quite remember".  At this point in her evidence,  the  appellant
    was seen (both by Mr Jarvis and independently, by myself) trying to say
    something to his sister and he had to be stopped by the Tribunal.  This
    is a matter to which I will  refer  below,  as  it  was  not  the  only
    occasion on which this happened.

56. When pressed, Nerva said that sometimes Jerome Junior was at her sister
    so she could not say, she thought it was yesterday (which, as I  noted,
    was not what the appellant had said).

57. It was pointed out to this witness that it was her duty as guardian  to
    decide when the appellant saw his son, which  the  witness  agreed  was
    correct, but when asked when she had decided how  often  Jerome  Junior
    should see his father, she said that the court had agreed four times  a
    month "and when I say" (in fact, from the letter sent to  the  Tribunal
    from Mackesys, it appeared that the  order  was  four  times  a  year).
    However, again when pressed, the witness said that she  had  not  given
    him a definite time.  She was mostly with her mother at weekends.

58. When Nerva was asked how many times her brother had seen Jerome  Junior
    the previous week, having taken time to think  about  what  answer  she
    should give, she replied "mostly over the weekend".   She  also  agreed
    when asked that the son was with her during the week and she cared  for
    him during the week.

59. Nerva was pressed as to how many times on  average  the  appellant  had
    seen his son since July, when he had been living with her, to which she
    replied "at weekends".

60. Clearly, again the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  his  sister  was
    inconsistent, and the situation was not made clearer on this  issue  by
    the appellant's mother's evidence.  She  confirmed  that  her  daughter
    brought her grandson with her to see her  every  Sunday  and  that  she
    would remain with them during the day.  When asked when  was  the  last
    time that the appellant had seen his son that she  knew  of,  she  said
    "not last weekend, every day he sees him".  Again, both Mr Jarvis and I
    at this stage noted that the appellant was trying to say something, and
    I again explained why he must not try to speak, especially to  indicate
    to witnesses what they should say, whilst evidence was being given.  In
    answer to this, both the appellant and his sister Nerva claimed that he
    had not been speaking, which was simply not true.  I had seen him doing
    so.

61. I should note with regard to how often the appellant saw his son,  that
    his other sister, Claudia Williams, said in cross-examination that  she
    did not know how often her brother saw his son during the week.

62. After the appellant's  sister  Claudia  had  given  her  evidence,  the
    appellant's mother was recalled by the Tribunal and asked  whether  she
    could remember whether her son had seen his son on the previous weekend
    (her evidence earlier had been that the last time had not been the last
    weekend, but that he had seen his son every day, which was inconsistent
    with the evidence given both by her son and by her daughter Nerva).  On
    this occasion, she replied that he had seen his son  on  Sunday.   When
    asked whether she remembered what they did,  she  said  that  they  had
    played and that her  grandson  had  said  "dad  dad"  and  they  played
    together and he jumped up with his father.  After  that  they  had  had
    dinner.  This had all apparently taken place in her home, and there was
    no mention of a park at all.

63. When I consider the inconsistencies in the evidence of the witnesses on
    major parts of his case, and take  into  consideration  also  that  the
    appellant appeared to be trying to indicate to the witnesses what  they
    ought to say, and further that both he and his sister  Nerva  told  the
    Tribunal what they knew to be untrue,  namely  that  he  had  not  said
    anything at all (which as I have indicated above, I saw myself was  not
    true) I have to conclude that these three witnesses can be relied  upon
    as witnesses of truth.  I should add that this appellant  has  on  many
    previous occasions been found not to be a  witness  of  truth,  and  my
    conclusions following the hearing  merely  confirms  that  he  has  not
    changed in this regard.

64.  Asking  myself  the   normal   Razgar   questions   when   considering
    proportionality,  as  I  must  do   (even   though   when   considering
    proportionality in my second stage assessment  I  would  have  to  give
    proper weight  to  the  fact  that  Parliament  has  decreed  that  the
    appellant's removal would be conducive to the public good) I must first
    consider whether the appellant even has a family  or  private  life  in
    this country such that his Article 8 rights are engaged.   Clearly  his
    removal would be both lawful and  necessary  for  legitimate  purposes,
    being both the prevention of crime and disorder and the maintenance  of
    a fair and effective system of immigration control (which advances  the
    economic well-being of the country).  Then, assuming that his Article 8
    rights were engaged, I would have to consider whether his  removal  was
    proportionate.  For this purpose, I would have to consider whether  the
    reasons he has put forward are so compelling that they  would  outweigh
    the very  strong  factors  which  would  indicate  that  he  should  be
    deported.

65. Turning to the first  issue,  then,  clearly  the  appellant  has  some
    private life  in  this  country,  because  he  has  been  here  (albeit
    unlawfully) since around 2003.  I am more doubtful as to whether he can
    be said to have a family life, on the basis  of  the  evidence  I  have
    heard.  Obviously, if he did have a close relationship  with  his  son,
    that would amount  to  family  life,  but  given  my  findings  on  the
    evidence, namely that I cannot accept the  witnesses  as  witnesses  of
    truth, I find that he has not established that  his  relationship  with
    his  son  is  as  claimed.   However,  for   the   purposes   of   this
    determination, and so that there can be no doubt  as  to  the  decision
    which must, on the facts of this case, be reached in any event, I shall
    proceed on the basis that the appellant's Article 8 rights are engaged.



66. It being clear that removal would be both lawful and necessary, I  must
    then consider proportionality, and in this regard I have to assess  the
    weight to be attached to such private or family life as  the  appellant
    has.  Clearly, the weight to be attached  to  the  appellant's  private
    life is extremely low, given the circumstances in which he has remained
    in this country, but in any event I would not consider the weight to be
    attached to his relationship with his son should be very  much  higher.
    He has shown himself to be a feckless individual, who has had little or
    no  relationship  with  any  of  his  children  except  now,  when   in
    consequence of claiming such a relationship, it is hoped that he  might
    avoid deportation.  He has, by becoming involved in family  proceedings
    in relation to his son, been able to extend the period in which he  has
    been able to remain in this country beyond the time he would  otherwise
    already have been removed, but as the decision of the family  court  is
    now clear, I am able to factor into my decision the best  interests  of
    his son.

67. I  reach  the  conclusion  that  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    relationship between the appellant and his son is not high.  While  for
    the purposes of this determination I am prepared to accept that it  is,
    or might be, marginally in Jerome  Junior's  best  interests  that  his
    father remains in this country, especially as  his  mother  is  not  in
    contact with him at present,  and  that  his  "best  interests"  are  a
    primary consideration (which means they must be considered  first),  it
    must still be acknowledged, when considering the weight to be given  to
    the various competing factors, that his father's influence would not be
    a wholly positive one.  I will  turn  to  the  appellant's  immigration
    history in a moment, but I must take note of his appalling record as  a
    father also, to which I have referred above.  The risk of disruption to
    Jerome  Junior's  life  should  his  father  build  up  some  sort   of
    relationship with him and then desert him, as he appears to  have  done
    in respect of his other children, would be extremely harmful, and  this
    is a risk of which this Tribunal must take note.  I also have  to  have
    in mind that even though the best interests  of  Jerome  Junior  are  a
    primary consideration, as has been  made  clear  in  all  the  relevant
    jurisprudence, in particular by the House of Lords' in  ZH  (Tanzania),
    they are not  the  only  consideration,  and  the  Tribunal  must  give
    appropriate weight to the other factors also.

68. Accordingly,  I  now  turn  to  consider  those  other  factors.   This
    appellant's immigration history is absolutely  appalling.   As  already
    recounted, having been removed from this country, he then  returned  in
    another name, using a false identity, as I  so  find.   It  is,  in  my
    judgment, more likely than not  that  the  second  identity  was  false
    rather than the first.  It follows that this appellant has relied on  a
    false passport, which itself is a serious criminal offence.

69. The appellant's  presence  in  this  country  has  further  aggravating
    features.  He has committed a number of criminal offences, in  addition
    to the passport offence with which he has still not been  charged,  and
    these include serious drug offences.  He has absconded,  and  has  also
    been in breach of bail.  It is not at all clear why  he  had  not  been
    charged with the criminal  offence  of  breaking  his  bail  conditions
    initially, nor is it clear why the original proceedings which had  been
    brought against him were not re-opened.  It is also the case, as I have
    found, that he has lied consistently to the court, and that he has  not
    given honest evidence even to this Tribunal.

70. Accordingly, I am considering the case of a person  who  has  not  only
    committed serious criminal offences (while not  necessarily  the  worst
    offences which can be committed,  dealing  in  class  A  drugs  in  any
    circumstances is serious, and a sentence of twelve months' imprisonment
    is sufficient that his removal is deemed to be conducive to the  public
    good in any event), but he has also been in breach of  bail  conditions
    and has absconded.  Clearly, unless people such as this  appellant  are
    removed, public  confidence  in  the  respondent's  ability  either  to
    maintain a fair and effective system of immigration control or to deter
    other foreign criminals from committing serious criminal offences  must
    be seriously diminished.  Public confidence would be greatly reduced.

71. Against this, I have to consider whether what I have found to be a very
    weak Article 8 claim  is  so  compelling  as  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deportation.

72. In my judgment, in this case,  it  is  overwhelmingly  clear  that  the
    factors in favour of deportation outweigh by a huge margin the  reasons
    why he should not be deported.  Even if the First-tier Tribunal made an
    error of law by not considering the appellant's  appeal  under  Article
    398 and 399 of the Rules (which for the reasons I have set out above  I
    do not consider could in fact have been a material error in the  event)
    having considered very carefully the appellant's  Article  8  claim  in
    light of existing jurisprudence, I am in no doubt whatsoever  but  that
    his removal would not be in breach of such Article 8 rights as he might
    otherwise have.  It follows that his appeal must be dismissed, and I so
    find.

Decision

The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  having  been  set  aside  as
containing a material error of law, such that its decision must  be  re-made
by the Upper Tribunal, and I substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Signed:                                 Dated: 29 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

