
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10573/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th February 2015                         |On 27th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                              md abadur rahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara of Counsel instructed by Edward Alam &
Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  with  permission  is  made  by  the
    Appellant in relation to a determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Walters promulgated on 14th July 2014.  The Appellant  claims  to  have
    been in the UK since December 1991 and to have made an  application  on
    21st July 2006 for indefinite leave to remain on the basis that he  had
    been here fourteen years.  This was made under Rule 276B, which was  in
    force at the time but subsequently deleted from the Rules on  9th  July
    2012.  However the application fell to be decided under that old  Rule.
    Unfortunately, and for reasons best known to herself, the Secretary  of
    State did not actually make a decision until some eight years later  on
    11th February 2014 when she refused it.  The matter  then  came  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and it was accepted by the  Secretary  of
    State that the Appellant had been in the UK since  November  2001.   It
    was not accepted that he had been so for the  previous  ten  years  and
    that was the issue essentially that was before the Judge.

 2. The grounds first of all suggest that the Judge erred in  that  he  did
    not specifically refer to paragraph 276B and the provisions thereof and
    that it is not at all clear what law the judge was applying.  I find no
    merit at all in that submission and I think to be fair Mr  Bellara  did
    not press the point.  It is quite clear throughout  the  decision  that
    the Judge was dealing with the long residence Rule and he  was  dealing
    with fourteen years and given that the only issue in the appeal was the
    length of continuous residence there was no other applicable Rule.

 3. The second ground of appeal  concerns  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the
    evidence itself.  It is argued that the Judge unreasonably rejected the
    oral evidence of the witnesses and did not take into account  that  the
    Appellant came to the UK as a child.   The  witnesses  gave  consistent
    evidence that the Appellant had been in the UK since 1991 and  that  in
    requiring corroborative evidence  the  Judge  erred.   Before  me  this
    submission was made in particular in relation to the second witness, Mr
    Miah. Mr Bellara submitted that the Judge did not give reasons why  his
    evidence was vague and why he attached no weight  to  it.  The  grounds
    criticise the Judge's comment that "there is not a shred of documentary
    evidence" and that the judge erred by  requiring  documentary  evidence
    and not  taking  into  account  the  oral  evidence  which  could  have
    corroborated the Appellant's claim.

 4. Finally there is criticism of the way in  which  Article  8  was  dealt
    with.

 5. I deal firstly with the evidence and what the judge  said  about  that.
    The oral evidence criticised before me or rather the  treatment  of  it
    that was criticised before me was that of Mr Miah.  I was provided with
    his statement, which for some reason is no longer on  the  court  file,
    which is brief in the extreme and says very  little.   It  simply  says
    that he met the Appellant in the UK at his  workplace  and  since  then
    they have known  each  other  and  maintained  their  relationship  and
    contacts but he was aware the Appellant had been waiting  a  long  time
    for a decision.  Beyond saying they were good friends and he would miss
    him if he had to leave, he says very little.

 6. In the determination that evidence is dealt with  in  paragraph  18  in
    particular.  The Judge noted that the Appellant claimed that he started
    work when he was 16 years of age.  At the  hearing  he  summarised  his
    work record broadly consistently with what was said in  the  bundle  of
    documents except that the Appellant was wholly unable  to  provide  him
    with precise particulars of the  restaurants  where  he  worked,  their
    addresses, the names of his bosses and so forth.  The Judge states that
    the Appellant said he had approached the restaurants that are still  in
    business but they were not willing to  provide  any  corroboration  and
    would not assist him, fearful for the consequences for them if they did
    so.  The Judge  refers  to  the  lack  of  any  contracts,  documentary
    evidence, payslips, anything at all in  relation  to  that  employment.
    The Judge refers to the total lack of any documents prior  to  November
    2001.  The Judge went on to say that the Appellant's witnesses  claimed
    that he had been in the UK from that time and that Mr Sabu Miah claimed
    to be a friend of the Appellant who had  worked  with  him  during  the
    1990s, but his account was vague  and  lacking  in  particularity.   Mr
    Bellara, who was not at that hearing was unable to say  what  the  oral
    evidence had been and therefore was unable to say that his evidence was
    anything other than vague and lacking in particularity.  The Judge  has
    said, and I have no reason to disbelieve him that that was the case and
    that Mr Miah only had a loose friendship with the Appellant. The  judge
    goes on to say that other than the accounts provided by  the  Appellant
    and his witnesses there was nothing to support his claim to  have  been
    in the UK prior to November 2001.

 7. The Judge takes note of the fact that he is not required by law to  ask
    for corroboration but he is not obliged to accept oral evidence  if  he
    has other reasons to doubt the Appellant's reliability and  credibility
    and in that regard he goes on to consider other matters  which,  whilst
    not strictly dealing with matters prior to 2001,  directly  affect  the
    Appellant's credibility and he does so in the following paragraphs.  He
    finds Mrs Rehana Chowdhury, another witness,  at  paragraph  19  to  be
    lacking in credibility on the basis she cannot remember the dates  when
    the Appellant arrived in the UK despite linking it to her birthday.  At
    paragraph 20 he  noted  a  discrepancy  in  the  evidence  between  the
    Appellant himself and his witness, Mrs Chowdhury because the  Appellant
    said he had not worked since 2007 whereas Mrs  Chowdhury  said  he  had
    been working  throughout.   At  paragraph  21  he  points  out  another
    discrepancy where the Appellant had said that for  the  last  seven  or
    eight years he had been living with  Mrs  Chowdhury  along  with  other
    people but her evidence was that he had been working and  only  dropped
    in from time to time.  Those are very significant discrepancies and the
    Judge was entitled to  take  those  into  account  in  looking  at  the
    Appellant's credibility overall.  They clearly impact on  the  lack  of
    evidence prior to 2001.  I also pause to note at this point that if the
    Appellant is  able  to  produce  evidence  sufficient  to  satisfy  the
    Secretary of State and no doubt the Judge of what  had  been  going  on
    since 2001 there was no good reason why he should not have been able to
    provide it before then.  Accordingly, I do not find that the Judge  has
    erred in his finding in that regard.

 8. Another matter raised is that there were photographs  produced  to  the
    Secretary of State and referred to in the Respondent's  bundle  and  in
    the refusal letter.  Although they are referred to  in  the  Letter  of
    Refusal only some of them appear in the papers  that  I  have.   I  was
    provided with copies.  There are six photographs  in  total,  each  one
    with a date handwritten beside it.  However there is nothing about  the
    photographs themselves which date them and thus all they are are a  set
    of photographs which show nothing other than the Appellant  in  various
    places, some of which are obviously in the  UK,  others  not  so.   The
    Judge did not refer to the photographs in the judgment but  given  that
    those photographs cannot add anything, I do  not  find  that  to  be  a
    material error.  He should have dealt with them, he did not,  but  that
    error is immaterial.

 9. Before me the Article 8 criticism was not pursued, whether that was  by
    accident or design I am  not  sure.   However,  the  Judge  dealt  with
    Article 8 between paragraphs 31 and 35.  Obviously the Article 8  claim
    is reduced by the fact that the judge only found him to have been  here
    since 2001 and not 1991.  He noted it was plain from the evidence  that
    most of the Appellant's family are in Bangladesh; that the Appellant is
    not married, has no partner and no child in the  UK.   He  has  distant
    relatives in the UK.  Although he claimed to have brothers  in  the  UK
    there was no evidence from them.  The Judge noted at paragraph 35  that
    the Appellant had spent his childhood in Bangladesh and has  only  been
    in the UK since 2001, he had retained ties with Bangladesh  and  speaks
    the language.  His parents and other close family members are there and
    according to him he has not been employed for a number of years in  the
    UK.  He could only possibly rely on private life and not family life on
    the evidence and as the Judge found he does not succeed on the basis of
    private  life.   The  Judge  has  given  full  consideration   to   the
    Appellant's private life and on the facts of the case no other  outcome
    would have been possible, particularly in  light  of  recent  case  law
    concerning the relationship between the Immigration Rules  and  Article
    8.

10. For the above reasons I find that the Judge's decision is one which  is
    not tainted by material error of law and I uphold it.

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

12. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 27th February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

