

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal number: IA/10963/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated       |
|On November 19, 2014            |On November 24, 2014            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                              MRS MANSOOR BEGUM
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Blundell, Counsel, instructed by Maliks and Khan
                  Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born January 1, 1990, is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.  She
    entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on  May  27,  2013  with  entry
    clearance as a multi entry visitor  valid  until  March  28,  2015.  On
    November 23, 2013 she applied for leave to remain  on  the  grounds  of
    family and private life. The  respondent  refused  her  application  on
    February 10, 2014.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  on  February  26,
    2014. On July  10,  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Graham
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") heard her appeal.  She  refused
    her  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  human  rights  in   a
    determination promulgated on August 13, 2014.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  on  August  29,  2014  and  on
    September 30, 2014 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  McDade  granted
    permission to appeal. He found it arguable the FtTJ  had  not  followed
    the step-by-step approach required of her assessment under article 8.

 4. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response dated October 21, 2014 in which
    she stated there was no error in law  and  the  FtTJ  applied  the  law
    correctly and her findings were open to her.

 5. The appellant attended the hearing with her family and was  represented
    by Mr Blundell.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 6. The appellant received the FtTJ's determination  on  August  14,  2014.
    Permission to appeal was not lodged with the First-tier Tribunal  until
    August 29, 2014. The appeal should have been lodged by August 19,  2014
    and was therefore ten days late.


 7. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McDade did not consider the  fact  the
    application was out of time although an application to  appeal  out  of
    time was included.

 8. Both  representatives  agreed  that  the  "time"  issue  needed  to  be
    addressed at the hearing and both parties agreed that  I  was  able  to
    consider this as a First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 9. I had regard to Mohammed (late application-First-tier Tribunal)  [2013]
    UKUT 00467 (IAC) and Samir (FtT Permission to appeal:time) [2013]  UKUT
    2 (IAC).

10. Mr Blundell relied in the grounds of appeal that explained  the  appeal
    had been dictated by the solicitor with conduct but due  to  illness  a
    secretary had not  typed  the  appeal.  He  submitted  time  should  be
    extended because:

      a. The delay was limited.
      b. The appellant was blameless for the delay.
      c. First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade had found  an  arguable  error  in
         law.
      d. There was no prejudice to the respondent.


11. Mr Avery argued that the application was late and there was no evidence
    to support what was contained in  the  grounds  of  appeal.  Procedures
    should be in place so that  this  situation  did  not  happen  and  the
    grounds themselves were weak.


12. The points made by Mr Blundell were all relevant  to  my  consideration
    and having considered the case law and the submissions I extended  time
    finding there were special circumstances.

    SUBMISSIONS


13. Mr Blundell adopted his grounds of appeal and submitted:


      a. The issue with the determination is paragraph [21]  of  the  FtTJ's
         determination.   The  FtTJ   found   there   were   no   compelling
         circumstances and this was an error in law.


      b. The FtTJ did  not  consider  the  appellant's  health  problems  in
         sufficient detail. The High Court in Ganesabalan [2014]  EWHC  2712
         made it clear that in any adult dependency case the focus should be
         on whether long term personal care is needed and whether  care  can
         be obtained in their country of origin as  well  having  regard  to
         their length of stay. Whilst the FtTJ considered these  issues  she
         did not begin to dispose of the appellant's article  8  claim.  She
         should have followed the approach set out  in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
         00027  and  having  found  there  was  family  life  then  as   the
         Immigration Rules were not a complete code  the  FtTJ  should  then
         have had regard to the proportionality test. If she had  considered
         proportionality and dismissed her obligations the  claim  then  she
         would have complied with Razgar. By failing to do so she erred.


14. Mr Avery responded to the appellant's grounds of appeal  and  submitted
    there was no error in law. He submitted:

      a.  The FtTJ properly  considered  the  appeal  and  found  there  was
         nothing exceptional  that  merited  consideration  outside  of  the
         Rules. She had considered the evidence and made a number of adverse
         findings and concluded that in light of those  findings  there  was
         nothing further that needed considering outside of the Rules.


      b. The appellant's family chose to settle in the United Kingdom and in
         light of the FtTJ's findings it is submitted that the result  would
         have been the same in any event.


15. In response to Mrs Mr Avery's submissions and questions posed by me, Mr
    Blundell further submitted:


      a. The respondent and FtTJ should consider a proportionality test when
         considering exceptional circumstances or unjustifiable hardship and
         asking whether removal would be disproportionate.


      b. The FtTJ should have followed the approach set  out  in  paragraphs
         [37] to [44] of Ganesabalan.


16. I reserved my decision on all issues having confirmed that  no  further
    evidence would be called in the event there was an error in law.

    MY FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

17. The appellant came to the United Kingdom as a visitor and  whilst  here
    submitted an application to remain. As her  application  was  submitted
    after July 9, 2014 the respondent and later  the  FtTJ  considered  her
    application under the Immigration Rules.


18. The respondent considered the appeal having regard to paragraph  276ADE
    but did not consider the application  under  Appendix  FM  because  the
    appellant did not have a partner  or  dependant  child  living  in  the
    United Kingdom. Her application  under  paragraph  276ADE  was  refused
    because  she  did  not  meet  the  requirements.  The  respondent  then
    considered whether there were any exceptional circumstances  consistent
    with the right to respect family and private life contained in  article
    8 ECHR but she concluded there was not. The respondent  had  regard  to
    the following factors:

      a. She claimed to be separated from her husband.
      b. There was no one in Pakistan to care for her.
      c. She had come here for the purpose of a three-month visit only.
      d. She claimed to be fragile and her health was deteriorating.
      e. She was living with her son who provided care for her and  she  had
         regular contact with her daughters.
      f.    She had no property in Pakistan and no job.


19. The respondent rejected her claims that she would be unable to maintain
    herself and that she had  a  serious  medical  condition,  which  would
    prevent her from living in Pakistan.


20. The matter came before  the  FtTJ  who  took  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant, her son and daughter-in-law  and  considered  that  evidence
    alongside the written  evidence  that  had  been  submitted.  She  made
    findings on the evidence that were open to her and which have not  been
    challenged in the grounds of appeal.

21. The FtTJ found none of the witnesses to be credible and  at  paragraphs
    [15] to [19] of her determination she gave detailed reasons.

22. The  FtTJ  then  considered  the  evidence  available  to  her  and  in
    particular she had regard to the medical claims of  this  seventy-three
    year old appellant. She noted there was a lack of medical evidence  and
    found that any problems she did have pre-existed her trip to the United
    Kingdom and she concluded that she was able to access medical treatment
    for them in Pakistan.

23. Mr Blundell's submission is that the FtTJ erred by not setting out  the
    five stage approach in Razgar. She had already found in paragraph  [12]
    of her determination that the Rules were not met-a fact conceded by her
    representative in the First-tier Tribunal. She found that  because  she
    came as a visitor she could not switch  to  a  dependant  adult  status
    under Appendix FM and this finding has not been challenged.

24. At paragraph [13] of her determination  she  considered  whether  there
    were any additional  compelling  circumstances  and  she  concluded  in
    paragraphs [14] to [21] that were none.

25. Mr Blundell brought to my attention the case of  Ganesabalan  but  this
    case is effectively a summary of  what  the  law  is.  He  argues  that
    because she has some financial dependency on her son that this  amounts
    to either family or private life and I am invited to  ignore  the  fact
    she is an adult as are her children. If  the  FtTJ  had  made  positive
    findings about her claim then a failure to consider  those  factors  in
    article 8 claim would be an error.

26. However, as Mr Avery submitted, this application has to  be  considered
    in light of the unchallenged credibility findings.  The  FtTJ  rejected
    all of her claims and did  not  accept  that  family  or  private  life
    existed. She found that whilst she had close family they had chosen  to
    come and live in the United  Kingdom  many  years  ago  and  there  was
    nothing to prevent them visiting her in Pakistan or her  visiting  them
    in the United Kingdom in the way she had been doing for many years.  If
    she wished to stay as an adult dependant she should  make  the  correct
    application and not seek to circumvent the Rules.

27. The FtTJ only needed to consider this appeal outside of  the  Rules  if
    she concluded there were exceptional and compelling circumstances  that
    would make removal unjustifiably harsh. She concluded there  were  none
    and as the appellant failed  to  satisfy  the  Rules  she  refused  the
    application.

28. Having considered Mr Blundell's submissions I am satisfied the FtTJ did
    not err in law and having decided there  was  no  article  8  claim  to
    consider, she was not required to consider the application  outside  of
    the Rules. There is therefore no error in law.



    DECISION


29. There was no material error of law  and  the  original  decision  shall
    stand.

30. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.



Signed:     Dated: November 24, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not alter the fee award decision.

Signed:     Dated: November 24, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
