
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/10681/2014
     IA/10728/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th March 2015                            |On 26th March 2015            |
|Extempore Judgment                            |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SHABEER UGUNGAL
                            SHAHEEN THONIKKADAVAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss K Pal (SeniorHome Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Benson (instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to the Decision  and  Reasons  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Callow promulgated on 24th November 2014 following a  hearing  on  10th
    October at Taylor House.  Both sides were represented on that  occasion
    but by different representatives.

 2. There are two Appellants in this case,  and  they  are  partners  in  a
    business who had sought leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1  Entrepreneurs.
    Their applications were refused by the Secretary of  State  principally
    for three  reasons.   She  doubted  the  genuineness  of  the  proposed
    business; she doubted the prospects of the business and the ability  of
    the Appellants to conduct the business and she doubted that  the  funds
    were genuinely available.

 3. The appeal came before Judge Callow and in his decision promulgated six
    weeks after the hearing; he set out at great  length  the  Respondent's
    case by quoting the Refusal Letter.  That took up several pages of  the
    decision.  He then noted on page 8 the grounds of appeal.  He sets  out
    two paragraphs dealing with the hearing and then set out  the  law  and
    findings of fact from paragraph 12. That involved a complete recitation
    of paragraph 245DD at paragraph 14.  His  findings  in  this  ten  page
    decision take up three paragraphs, 15, 16 and 17.  He simply says  that
    in giving their evidence the Appellants were plausible. He accepts that
    they have established the business, that the  business  has  commenced,
    that they have the money and the appeals were allowed.

 4. However he does not engage at all with the reasons why the Secretary of
    State refused the applications.  He does not engage  at  all  with  the
    evidence. It is impossible  to  see  from  the  decision,  particularly
    paragraphs 10 and 11 what actual evidence was given. He does  not  even
    say that the Appellants  adopted  their  witness  statements  as  their
    evidence. He simply says

         "The Appellants gave evidence.  The Appellants explained in  detail
         the sources of the funds held in a NatWest Bank account in the name
         of the first Appellant. The detailed business plans were  traversed
         during the course of the evidence as was the  contract  with  Rajan
         and Sons Ltd."

 5. That tells us absolutely nothing about what the evidence was  that  the
    Judge found plausible.  He gives no reasons for finding the Appellants'
    evidence plausible or credible and as was said by the Judge who granted
    permission, the determination is entirely devoid of recitation of facts
    or conclusions drawn therefrom. It failed to recite  or  refer  to  any
    evidence  or  statutory  provisions  which  were  to  be  met  by   the
    Appellants.  There was no documentary evidence to support  the  claimed
    funds, their source or holding.   The  Judge  failed  to  consider  the
    evidence, mention how he reached the conclusions in the  decision,  did
    not attribute any weight or significance to  the  evidence  and  showed
    nothing to support his cursory findings.

 6. It follows from the above that the decision cannot possibly stand and I
    set it aside in its entirety.  It cannot be said in these circumstances
    that the case has  been  properly  dealt  with  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and for that reason it would  be  unfair  on  the  Appellants,
    particularly as they won below, that that should now  have  to  reargue
    the appeal in the Upper Tribunal and for that reason I am remitting  it
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a full hearing on all issues by a  Judge
    other than Judge Callow.

 7. To the limited  extent mentioned above the appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    is allowed.





Signed                              Date 25th March 2015



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
