

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/10908/2014
                                                               IA/10913/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre |                  Decision and Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|On 13 October 2015                    |                   On 22 October 2015   |
|                                      |                                        |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                              abu zar khan (1)
                               zarda begum (2)
                            (NO ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Ali, instructed by Brys Immigration Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 20 February 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce granted  permission  to
    appeal  against  the  decision  and  reasons  statement  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal that was promulgated on 18 September 2014.

 2. There was no application for anonymity in the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    there has been no application since the appeal was determined.  I  find
    there is no reason to make an anonymity order in the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The appellants are husband and wife.   Both are  citizens  of  Pakistan
    and their dates of birth are respectively 4 December 1926 and 1 January
    1934.

 4. The appellants were  granted  entry  clearance  on  21  March  2013  as
    visitors.  They arrived in the UK on  6  April  2013  and  their  entry
    clearance acted as leave to enter  until  21  September  2013.   On  11
    September 2013 they applied to vary their leave to be allowed to settle
    here outside the rules because of their age and health  concerns.   The
    Home Office refused these applications on 10 February 2014 and  on  the
    same day gave notice that variation of leave was refused  and  for  the
    appellants to be removed by way of directions.   It  is  against  those
    decisions that the appellants appealed as  they  were  entitled  to  do
    under s.82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. At the start of the hearing I asked Mr Mills and Mr  Ali  whether  they
    thought   Judge   Hawden-Beal   had   properly   considered   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the  immigration  rules  insofar  as  it  requires  an
    assessment as to whether there are very  significant  obstacles  for  a
    person to integrate into the country to which they would be removed.

 6. During our discussion, Mr Mills acknowledged that this version  of  the
    rules applied to the appellants because of the proposed removal,  which
    meant paragraph 400 of the immigration rules had to be considered.   He
    pointed out that the earlier version of the rules which related to  the
    ties a person might have to the country they would return also  applied
    but only to the decisions to refuse to vary.  Nothing  turned  on  this
    complexity of immigration law because it was  sufficiently  clear  from
    paragraph 22 of Judge Hawden-Beal's decision that she  considered  both
    versions.

 7. Mr Mills submitted that integration cannot be understood to be a  fixed
    or measurable threshold and that whether someone  can  be  expected  to
    integrate into a particular society will depend in many cases on  their
    abilities and, in situations where their  abilities  are  limited,  for
    example because of health issues, on a range of factors  including  the
    availability of people to care for them so they can be accepted as part
    of the society in which they live.

 8. Mr Ali accepted this approach and submitted that integration had to  be
    viewed as a broad term.  Where a person such as the appellants would be
    unable to live a safe life on their own in Pakistan, then  there  would
    be an issue of whether they could integrate.  In this way  safeguarding
    issues would be relevant in  some  cases  to  whether  a  person  could
    integrate into a particular society.   In  addition,  the  presence  of
    potential carers had to be  assessed  in  relation  to  the  particular
    society.  By way  of  example,  Mr  Ali  submitted  that  although  the
    appellants had two daughters in Pakistan, neither could be expected  to
    provide care to the appellants for  cultural  reasons  and  because  of
    their family responsibilities to their  husbands,  their  children  and
    their parents in law.

 9. Both Mr Mills and Mr  Ali  accepted  that  Judge  Hawden-Beal  did  not
    approach the current version of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) in this  manner
    and that this  meant  there  had  been  no  proper  evaluation  of  the
    appellants' appeals under the immigration rules.

10. I should mention that neither representative sought  to  criticise  the
    judge's approach.  Mr Ali admitted that he had not directly  approached
    the appeals in this  way  although  his  arguments  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did touch on some of these points.  Mr Mills acknowledged that
    the Home Office defence of the  decision  did  not  fully  explore  the
    question of  whether  the  appellants  could  integrate  into  Pakistan
    because of their health and age issues.  However, he  argued  that  the
    failure was immaterial because the appeal was bound to  fail  on  human
    rights grounds.

11. I have considered the arguments relating to the human  rights  grounds.
    Judge Hawden-Beal found that the appellants had failed  to  show  there
    was any need for her to examine article 8 directly.  Mr  Mills  and  Mr
    Ali agreed that the Court of Appeal did not say in Singh and  Khalid  v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74  that  there  was  an  intermediary  hurdle  an
    appellant had to overcome to move from considering private  and  family
    life rights under the immigration rules to under  article  8  directly.
    The issue was that the First-tier Tribunal was obliged to carry  out  a
    proportionality assessment.  If that  had  been  fully  completed  when
    considering the immigration rules, then it did not have to be repeated.
      But  if  it  had  not  been  fully  completed  when  considering  the
    immigration rules, a judge was required to complete it.

12. Mr  Ali  submitted  that  although  Judge  Hawden-Beal  identified  the
    relevant factors that needed to be considered in respect of  article  8
    proportionality, she did not make clear findings.  I agree.  The  judge
    did not make clear  findings  in  relation  to  the  reasonableness  of
    expecting the appellants' son to look after them if  they  returned  to
    Pakistan, in relation to whether the  appellants'  daughters  could  be
    expected to look after them given the cultural issues, and  whether  it
    was reasonable to expect the appellants to return to Pakistan merely to
    submit adult dependent relative applications given their age and health
    concerns.

13. Having heard from the parties and having considered  the  evidence  and
    arguments, I decided  that  the  decision  and  reasons  statement  was
    infected with errors of law that  required  it  to  be  set  aside.   I
    announced this at the hearing and invited Mr Ali and Mr Mills to  share
    their views as to how the decision should be remade.

14. Mr Ali requested that the appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    for a fresh hearing because of the degree of errors.  He also  reminded
    me that the appellants were  vulnerable  adults  and  further  evidence
    needed to be sought to provide up to date information.

15. Mr Mills objected to remittal because the Upper Tribunal  had  directed
    that should an error of law be found  then  the  Upper  Tribunal  would
    proceed to remake the  decision  itself.   Mr  Ali  admitted  that  his
    solicitors had failed to comply with that direction.

16. Having considered both submissions  I  have  decided  that  the  appeal
    should be remitted for a fresh  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This is because it is not the  appellants'  fault  that  they  did  not
    comply with directions.  They are vulnerable adults and relied  on  the
    advice and support of others which did not materialise on  this  point.
    It would be unjust to  proceed  in  such  circumstances  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In addition, I  agree  with  Mr  Ali  that  the  errors  are
    significant enough to make this a case which has to begin again.

17. For the sake of clarity, I make the following directions regarding  the
    remitted hearing.  Of course, these directions can be  altered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

        a. The remitted hearing can be before any First-tier Tribunal Judge
           other than Judge Hawden-Beal.

        b. The judge determining the  remitted  appeal  will  consider  all
           issues raised in the grounds of appeal other  than  whether  the
           appellants can meet the requirements of appendix FM relating  to
           adult dependent relatives.  It is accepted they  cannot  because
           such applications can only be made from overseas.

        c. The judge at the remitted hearing will focus  on  the  principle
           issue, which are to  decide  if  the  appellants  succeed  under
           paragraph 276ADE or article  8  applied  directly.   The  points
           discussed above will help the parties prepare for  the  remitted
           hearing.

        d. The appellants' solicitors should advise the First-tier Tribunal
           as  soon  as  possible  if  an  interpreter  is  required.    An
           interpreter is unlikely to be required if the appellants are not
           to give oral evidence.



Decision

The decision and reasons statement of Judge Hawden-Beal  contains  an  error
of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing as  per  the
above directions.




                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
