
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10431/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 2 July 2015                       |On 14 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                         MRS VANUSA GUDES GONCALVES
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Lee of counsel instructed by M Reale,
Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary  of  State.  She  appeals
    against the decision of Judge K. ST. J. Wiseman, a Judge of  the  First
    Tier Tribunal who for reasons given in his determination promulgated on
    9 October 2014 allowed the appeal of Mrs Vanusa G Goncalves, a national
    of  Brazil.  The  appellant  had  refused  the  application  of  Vanusa
    Goncalves for a Derivative Residence Card which she had sought  on  the
    basis that being a third country national upon whom a  British  citizen
    is dependent in the United Kingdom, relying on the Court of Justice  of
    the European Union in the case of Ruiz Zambrano (c-34/09). Reasons  for
    the Secretary of State's decision are given  in  her  letter  dated  13
    February 2014. Judge  Cheales  a  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted
    permission to appeal stating in decision dated 15 March  2015,  "It  is
    arguable that the Judge has not addressed clearly the issue of  whether
    or not the children would be compelled to leave the UK to follow  their
    mother. The grounds show an arguable error of law."

 2. The appeal raises a short but important point. It is contended  by  the
    appellant that as the children for whom the respondent is the carer are
    not being removed, Judge Wiseman erred in law in allowing the appeal of
    the respondent. I heard submissions from Mr Tufan and Mr Lee. Mr  Tufan
    relied on the paragraph 41 of the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  MA
    and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 00380  (IAC)
    in the context of paragraph 10 of the decision of Judge Wiseman in this
    case. He contended that the two children whose primary carer  has  been
    found to be the respondent are not being compelled to leave  and  hence
    in allowing the appeal, the Judge had erred in law.

 3. Mr Lee responded by arguing that there was no material error in law  in
    the decision of Judge Wiseman. The Judge had looked  carefully  at  all
    the relevant facts of the case and had  made  reasonable  and  rational
    findings as to what would happen to the two children in practical terms
    if the respondent were removed as the appellant was contemplating.  The
    findings made by Judge  Wiseman  have  not  been  challenged  as  being
    irrational or perverse, I  was  reminded.  Mr  Lee  asked  me  to  look
    carefully at the contents of paragraphs 90 and 171 of the  judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in Sanneh [2015] EWCA Civ 49. The Court  of  Appeal
    has  urged  that  a  realistic  view  be  taken  of  all  the  relevant
    circumstances and that is precisely what  Judge  Wiseman  had  done  in
    deciding the appeal. The two children for who  the  respondent  is  the
    primary carer are 6 and 3 years old. In paragraph 37 the Judge  states,
    indeed common sense dictates that a  normal  responsible  mother  would
    almost invariably be the primary carer of such young children. She says
    that she deals with everything for them in terms of school, health  and
    minute by minute feeding and caring for their other needs and there  is
    no reason whatsoever not  to  accept  that  is  indeed  the  position,"
    Addressing the contention of the Secretary of State that "the father is
    a carer as well." Of course he is in the sense that he  works  to  keep
    the family and  makes  direct  financial  provision  but  it  would  be
    impossible on the facts known to describe him as a "primary carer" or a
    person who realistically could be. It may suit the appellant's case  to
    say that he would be hopeless caring for such young children but to  be
    blunt he probably would be: there are not many fathers even these  days
    who would feel  remotely  comfortable  in  that  role".  The  Judge  in
    paragraph 39 states, "The only other matter that has to  be  considered
    is whether Zambrano is only  meant  to  deal  with  a  case  where  the
    appellant  is  the  only  available  carer  for  British  children  and
    therefore they would inevitably have to go with the  appellant  in  any
    event. However there is no indication from the  judgement  in  Zambrano
    that the principle is restricted in such an extreme way.  Although  the
    facts of each case have to be carefully considered (particularly on the
    issue of ages of relevant children) it would in my view  be  impossible
    to find in the circumstances of this case that the appellant is not the
    primary carer and in my view it would be inevitable that  the  children
    would have to go with her back to Brazil were she required to go:  this
    would be totally in breach of Zambrano principles." As is evident  from
    the Court of Appeal decision in Sanneh, this analysis of relevant facts
    and the conclusions reached are in accord with the  principles  of  law
    set in that judgment.

 4. In paragraph 90 of the Sanneh decision Lady Justice  Arden  said,  "The
    law must here be interpreted in the  real  world  and  freed  from  the
    shackles of unreality. The need to find that someone will be forced  to
    leave the UK is therefore equivalent to saying that the Zambrano  carer
    and the EU citizen child must not be left without the  resources  which
    are essential for them to live in this jurisdiction. In  paragraph  171
    of the Sanneh judgement Lord Justice Elias whilst  agreeing  with  Lady
    Arden said, "EU law focuses on the  substance  of  the  right  and  not
    merely the form and will require the State to take steps to ensure that
    the essence of  the  right  is  respected".  Judge  Wiseman  found,  on
    evidence before him that the respondent would be forced to take the two
    young children with her if she were removed from the UK and that  is  a
    finding of fact arrived at with care. In  the  circumstances  therefore
    the argument that since the children are not being "compelled" to leave
    the UK, the appeal should not have been allowed by Judge Wiseman is not
    a valid argument. Their departure is made inevitable by  causing  their
    primary carer to leave.

 5. Accordingly I find no error in law in the decision of the  First  -tier
    Tribunal and it must stand.


K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 9 September 2015

