
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10360/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London           |Decision & Reasons promulgated      |
|On 09 February 2016                    |On 23 March 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               NAZAK SADEGHIAN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

Appellant:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mr K Behbahani, of Oaks Solicitors


                                  DECISION

Introduction

 1. While this is the Secretary of State's  appeal,  I  shall  continue  to
    describe Nazak Sadeghian, who brought  the  original  appeal,  as  "the
    Appellant".

 2. The origins of this appeal lie in the decision made on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    dated 16 January 2014, whereby the  application  of  the  Appellant,  a
    national of Iran now aged 51 years, for indefinite leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom on the basis  of  continuous  lawful  residence  was
    refused.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") allowed the  ensuing  appeal.   The
    essence of its decision is encapsulated in the final paragraph:

         "For the reasons stated above, the  Appellant's  removal  from  her
         family unit would constitute a disproportionate  interference  with
         her family life especially when the interests of  her  parents  are
         taken into consideration.  In addition, the Appellant satisfies the
         Respondent's requirements under section 117B of the  2002  Act  for
         the reasons stated above."

    The main point canvassed in the Secretary of  State's  application  for
    permission to appeal was that the FtT failed to adequately grapple with
    the issue of the availability  of  care  for  her  parents  from  other
    sources, described  as  "her  brother  and  third  party  support".   I
    construe this as a complaint of a failure to  make  necessary  findings
    and/or a failure to take into account material evidence.  The Secretary
    of State's representative  was  driven  to  accept,  unavoidably,  this
    analysis of the two key passages in the grounds of appeal  viz  Section
    C(a) and (b).


 4. The Secretary of State's  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was
    initially refused, firstly, on the ground that whereas the deadline for
    receipt was 17 October 2014, it was not received by the Upper  Tribunal
    until 23 March 2015.  It was, therefore, significantly out of time  and
    the Judge recorded that no reasonable explanation  for  this  egregious
    delay had been provided.  In a carefully reasoned decision, the  Judge,
    having referred to relevant authority, further decided (in terms)  that
    the proposed appeal had no realistic prospect of success.

 5. However, the application  for  permission  was  renewed  with  success,
    permission to appeal being granted in the following terms:

         "There was an arguable error  in  the  Judge  concluding  that  the
         appeal could succeed on Article 8 grounds notwithstanding that  the
         evidence did not indicate that [the Appellant's] role as a carer of
         her parents was indispensable.  On the  Judge's  own  findings  the
         brother was in a position to provide some care  and,  in  addition,
         the Judge failed to engage with the  Respondent's  submission  that
         there were adequate care agency sources of help if need be."

    It is far from clear that the Judge granting permission  was  aware  of
    the initial refusal and the primary reason therefor, given that neither
    this decision nor the issue of time features at all  in  the  grant.  I
    shall revisit this issue infra.

Factual Matrix

 6. I derive the following  history  from  the  impugned  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State:

    (a)  Between February  and  August  2001  the  Appellant  was  lawfully
         present in the United Kingdom as a student.


      b) Between July 2001 and  December  2006,  her  leave  to  remain  was
         extended three times.


      c) A further such application, dated 20 December 2006, was refused and
         the Appellant's ensuing appeal was dismissed on 20 June 2007.


      d) With effect from 04 April 2008 the Appellant's appeal  rights  were
         exhausted.


      e)  Between  March  2010  and  January  2012  the  Appellant  was  the
         beneficiary of further leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  qua
         student.


      f) On 08 April 2011 the Appellant's application for settlement on  the
         basis of 10 years lawful residence was refused.


      g) Between June 2012 and July 2013 the Appellant was the benefit of  a
         further grant of leave to remain as a student.


      h) On 07 July 2012 the Appellant made a further  indefinite  leave  to
         remain application based on ten years' continuous lawful  presence.
         This was refused on 01 May 2013, "with no right of  appeal  as  you
         had leave to remain in the UK at the time of the decision".


      i) On 03 June 2013 the  Appellant  submitted  written  representations
         which elicited no response.


      j) On 26 July 2013 she made a further application which generated  the
         decision lying at the heart of this appeal.


 7. The first reason given for refusing  the  Appellant's  application  was
    that she had not demonstrated a period of continuous  lawful  residence
    of ten years.  Next, the decision maker  stated  that  the  Appellant's
    suggestion that she had been badly served by her legal advisers was not
    considered sufficient to justify the grant of  discretionary  leave  to
    remain.  Third, the decision maker noted that the Appellant's case  did
    not satisfy the requirements of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules.
    Fourth, her application was considered not to satisfy Immigration  Rule
    276ADE.  The decision maker's final conclusion was that it would not be
    appropriate to permit the Appellant to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    exceptionally outwith the framework of the Rules.

FtT Error of Law?

 8. The appeal to the FtT was presented and argued on the  sole  ground  of
    whether the Secretary of State's refusal  decision  was  in  breach  of
    Article 8 ECHR.  The central question to  be  determined  was  whether,
    outwith the framework of the Rules, the impugned decision gave rise  to
    a disproportionate interference with the Article 8 family  and  private
    life rights of the three persons concerned, namely  the  Appellant  and
    her parents, both of whom are British citizens.  The Judge recorded the
    following:

         "The Appellant adopted her witness statement .... [describing] ....
         the dependency that her parents have developed towards her ....


         Her mother, in particular, has been diagnosed with dementia in  the
         last year.  The Appellant provided evidence that she  provides  all
         her parent's care needs ....  She attends to her parents'  toiletry
         needs and her brother helps with shopping and cooking."

         [My emphasis.]

    Evidence was also given by the Appellant's brother, who testified  that
    he -

         ".... provides care to  his  parents  by  preparing  breakfast  and
         attending to his father's ablutions, a role which  he  shares  with
         the Appellant.  Due to the brother's work  commitments  he  assists
         the Appellant  with  their  parents  in  the  morning  and  in  the
         evening."

The Judge further recorded:

         "In addition the mother's temperament is inconsistent  due  to  her
         mental health.  Enquiries have been made  with  care  agencies  but
         this is not a viable option  due  to  the  mother's  reluctance  to
         receive strangers to the family home.  Additionally neither of  the
         parents can speak English."

 9. In submissions it was specifically argued by the Secretary  of  State's
    representative that ".... the brother can provide care to  the  parents
    with third party support from care agencies" [my emphasis].  I pause at
    this juncture.  As the passages reproduced above demonstrate,  evidence
    had been given that, following enquiries of care agencies, this was not
    considered a viable option for the reasons provided.  Furthermore,  the
    care which the  Appellant's  brother  was  capable  of  providing  was,
    plainly, heavily constrained by his full time employment.

10. In the "Findings" section of  his  decision,  the  Judge  unequivocally
    accepts the Appellant's evidence on the ground that  it  is  considered
    "consistent and credible".  He continues:

         "Since her last appeal to the  Tribunal  the  Appellant's  personal
         circumstances have changed to the  effect  that  family  ties  have
         developed beyond normal emotional ties .....


         I have had the benefit of having witnessed the Appellant's  parents
         interact with the Appellant and her brother.   There  is  no  doubt
         that the Appellant's  mother  suffers  from  a  significant  mental
         incapacity which requires active  and  constant  supervision.   The
         Appellant's father is clearly infirm and his need for a  wheelchair
         makes it reasonable to conclude that he  requires  attention  above
         and beyond conventional family relationships."

    The Judge  further  described  the  "shared  responsibility  for  their
    parents" undertaken by the Appellant and her brother.  This is followed
    by:


         "It is also reasonable to conclude  that  the  Appellant's  brother
         provides essential respite care to relieve  the  Appellant  of  the
         unrelenting responsibility she endures in the care of her  parents,
         which is undoubtedly offered with sincerity and affection."


         [Emphasis added]

    In the concluding paragraphs of  his  decision  the  Judge  also  gives
    consideration to the operative provisions of section 117B of  the  2002
    Act, making appropriate findings and  conclusions  in  doing  so.   His
    omnibus conclusion is reproduced in [3] above.

11. I have analysed the decision of the FtT in some detail above.   I  note
    in particular the assertion/submission  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds of appeal:

         "The Appellant's brother can take  a  primary  role  and  seek  the
         support of relevant agencies/provisions."

    The exercise of juxtaposing the grounds of appeal with the decision  of
    the FtT  is  an  illuminating  one.   The  assertion/submission  quoted
    immediately above is made in a distant vacuum.  First, it  ignores  the
    reality of the  family  circumstances,  which  entail  the  Appellant's
    brother working full time.  Second, it  ignores  the  Judge's  specific
    conclusion that the Appellant's evidence was accepted  in  full.   This
    included, as highlighted above, her testimony that she  provides  "all"
    her parent's care needs.  I accept that this is  not  to  be  literally
    construed, given the (plainly limited) role played by her brother also.
     However, I consider it highly significant that the Judge characterised
    this "respite care".  Simultaneously, he couched the  Appellant's  care
    of her parents in the terms of "unrelenting responsibility".   Finally,
    the Judge's acceptance of the Appellant's evidence in  full  entails  a
    finding,  readily  to  be  inferred,  that  third  party  care  of  the
    Appellant's parents was not a reasonable  or  viable  option,  for  the
    reasons given.  Fundamentally, the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of
    appeal are confounded by the Judge's findings, both express and readily
    inferred.

12. Given my analysis above, I  conclude  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds of appeal are unsustainable.  The complaints made of the  FtT's
    decision have no tenable basis.  Furthermore, there  is  no  suggestion
    that the Judge misdirected himself in law.


The grant of permission to appeal

13. In retrospect, it is  clear  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  renewed
    application for permission to appeal  should  have  been  refused.   It
    amounted to nothing more than a mere quarrel with a  judicial  decision
    which satisfied the requirements of adequate findings and reasons:  see
    VV (grounds of appeal) Lithuania [2016] UKUT 00053  (IAC),  at  [22]  -
    [26] and MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC).  The
    Judge who was persuaded to grant permission did so on the basis that  a
    question of law, namely whether it was incumbent on  the  Appellant  to
    demonstrate that her care for her parents was indispensable, arose.  As
    my analysis above of the grounds of appeal demonstrates, this  question
    of law did not arise in this appeal.  It simply did not belong  to  the
    framework of the Secretary of State's impugned decision,  that  of  the
    ensuing appeal, the decision of the FtT or  the  Secretary  of  State's
    application for permission to appeal.

FtT Decisions: late applications for permission to appeal

14. Finally, the second permission Judge made no decision  on  whether  the
    Secretary of State's heavily  delayed  application  for  permission  to
    appeal should be admitted.  This issue should  have  been  specifically
    confronted and determined: see Rules 5, 7, 12 and 21  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  While I entertain little  doubt
    that if the second permission Judge had been  alert  to  the  preceding
    analysis of the first permission Judge a concurring  refusal  to  admit
    the renewed application for permission would have  ensued,  I  consider
    the correct analysis to be the following.

15. Since the second permission Judge made no decision  on  admittance  and
    extension of time, I consider that the grant of permission to appeal is
    incomplete.  In such circumstances it falls to  me  to  determine  this
    issue.  In doing so, I concur fully with the analysis and conclusion of
    the first permission Judge.  While it is correct that  in  the  renewed
    permission application there was an assertion - pure and simple -  that
    the application for permission had been transmitted  "by  digital  fax"
    within time (on 17 October 2014) no supporting  evidence  was  provided
    and none has been assembled at this stage.  Accordingly, while  I  have
    no power to reverse the second permission Judge's decision that, on its
    merits, the Secretary  of  State's  renewed  application  overcame  the
    threshold of demonstrating an arguable case,  this  is  but  a  partial
    grant of permission to appeal.  I  now  rectify  the  omission  in  the
    incomplete order by refusing to admit the second  application  for  the
    reasons adumbrated in the first permission  Judge's  refusal  decision.
    It follows that permission to appeal is refused.  If I am wrong in this
    analysis and conclusion, the appeal is dismissed on its merits  in  any
    event on the grounds and for the reasons elaborated above.

16. Although I received no argument from either parties  representative  on
    the time issue, I note with interest that my analysis above,  expressed
    in the ex tempore decision given at the conclusion of the  hearing,  is
    consistent with the jurisprudence of this Chamber.  See AK  and  others
    (Tribunal Appeal - out of time) Bulgaria [2004] UKIAT 00201,  at  [22]-
    [23] (a "starred" decision), Boktor and  Wanis  (late  application  for
    permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT 00442  (IAC),  at  [16]  and  Samir  (FtT
    permission to appeal: time) [2013] UKUT 00003 (IAC), at [18]-[21].

Decision

     17. (a)  The Secretary of State's application for permission to  appeal
         is  not  admitted  on  the  ground  of  excessive  and  unjustified
         lateness.

    (b)  Further, or in the alternative, the appeal  is  dismissed  on  its
         merits in any event.







                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 29 February 2016
