
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10760/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8 December 2017                           |On 8 January 2018              |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                         mr syed mohammad ahsan shah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Ilahi, Wilsons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  Following his appeal  against
    a decision made by  the  respondent  on  25  March  2015  refusing  his
    application for leave to remain, he appealed.

2.   The hearing was fixed for 17 March 2015 and on that  date  came  before
    Judge Greasley of the First-tier Tribunal who in a decision sent on  21
    March dismissed it.  The appellant did not attend nor did solicitors on
    his behalf.

3.   The only ground of appeal argued before me by Mr Ilahi  is  that  there
    had been procedural unfairness because neither the appellant,  nor  his
    solicitors received the notice of hearing for 17  March.   On  checking
    the file, it is clear that notice was not sent to the appellant at  the
    new address he had furnished at a previous hearing.

4.   Notice was, however, shown as sent to  the  appellant's  solicitors  at
    the correct address.  I reserved my decision  so  that  I  could  check
    Tribunal records. Having done so, I cannot exclude that the notice  may
    have been sent to the previous solicitors.  There is a  History  Report
    dated 21 September 2016 saying that Wilsons were not  shown  as  acting
    with an entry "I have sent a fax".  Then, curiously, there is an  entry
    for the same day stating the representative as Norbert & Co.  There  is
    no subsequent entry noting that Wilsons were  (or  had  come  onto)  on
    record, even  though  the  sticker  on  the  file  gives  them  as  the
    solicitors.  I note also that the appellant attended the last hearing.

5.   Given the inconsistencies as between History Records and the hard  copy
    file, I afford the benefit of the doubt to the appellant  and  conclude
    that it would be unsafe to find there  was  effective  service  of  the
    notice of hearing.

6.   Whilst no fault  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal  judge,  the  defective
    service of the notice means that there has been  procedural  unfairness
    in the appeal process.

7.   Accordingly I set aside the decision of the FtT  judge  and  remit  the
    case to the FtT to hear afresh.


Signed                                  Date: 4 January 2018
[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
