

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10008/2015
     IA/10014/2015
     IA/10021/2015
                   IA/10023/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3rd August 2016                            |On 4th August 2016           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  GA BLACK

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR IMRAN ALI
                             (and 3 Claimants )
                                                         Claimant/Respondent
                          NO  ANONYMITY OrDER MADE


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin (Senior Home Office Presenting officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Malik (Counsel instructed by Maroof solicitors)



                            DECISION  AND REASONS


   1. The appellant in this error of law hearing is the Secretary of   State
      and I shall refer to the parties as " the Secretary of State"  and  to
      the appellants from the First-tier Tribunal as " the Claimants".


   2.  The Secretary of State appeals against a decision made by the  First-
      tier Tribunal ( Judge DA Pears) ("FTT") promulgated  on  5th  February
      2016 in which the appeal against a refusal of leave to remain  outside
      of the Rules was allowed to the extent that the decision made was  not
      in accordance with the law and  it was remitted  for   reconsideration
      by the Secretary of State of her obligations under section 55  Borders
      Citizenship  &  Immigration  Act  2009,  paragraph  276  ADE  of   the
      Immigration Rules and Article 3 ECHR.  The appeal  was  determined  on
      the papers.

   3. In grounds of application for permission the Secretary of State argued
      that the FTT erred because the refusal letter had considered  all  the
      relevant issues and that the FTT ought to have decided the  appeal  on
      the papers before it.

   4. Permission was granted on the grounds that the decision  made  by  the
      Secretary of State was not unlawful and that all the  relevant  issues
      had been dealt with in the refusal letter. It was unclear how the  FTT
      came to the decision that it did in paragraph 11 of the decision where
      it is asserted that the Secretary of State  failed  to  give  detailed
      consideration to the issues.

   5. At the hearing before me Mr  Melvin  relied  on  the  grounds  of  the
      application and Mr Malik produced a skeleton argument.  He argued that
      the decision for reconsideration was not an error  of  law  given  the
      limited  consideration  made  of  the  matters   submitted   in    the
      application and which had not been  given  detailed  scrutiny  by  the
      Secretary of State.  Mr Melvin submitted that it was incumbent of  the
      FTT to determine the appeal on the papers and for the FTT to  consider
      the evidence before it in the  light  of  the  points  raised  in  the
      refusal letter. In any event there was no longer any power for the FTT
      to remit for reconsideration.

   6. I decided that there was a material error of law in the  decision  and
      reasons which I set aside.  The Claimants who were legally represented
      requested a hearing on the papers and produced evidence in support  of
      their appeal. There was before the FTT a  detailed  skeleton  argument
      setting out the relevant evidence and submissions.   It was  a  matter
      for the FTT to consider all of the evidence before it and make finding
      and conclusions accordingly.  I am satisfied  that  the  Secretary  of
      State did consider all the  relevant  issues  raised  in  the  refusal
      letter.  There was no indication on the part of the Claimants in their
      grounds of appeal that the refusal decision was inadequate and in  any
      event the FTT was able to take into account all the evidence relied on
      by the Claimants.   It was not made clear how the Secretary  of  State
      erred  in her failure to consider section  55  having  regard  to  the
      evidence relied on.   The  Secretary  of  State  considered  that  the
      interests of the children lay in remaining with  their  parents  as  a
      family unit.  Further  it  was  open  to  the  Claimants  to  make  an
      application for asylum as was indicated in the refusal letter.

   Decision


   7.  The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. There is a material error
   of law in the decision which is set aside.  I remit  the  matter  for  re
   hearing at the FTT (excluding Judge Pears) at  Hatton  Cross.   As  there
   were no findings of fact made nor any engagement with  the  issues  under
   appeal a hearing de novo is required.


                               Signed
                                                     Date 3/8/2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy  Judge of the Upper Tribunal








                               No anonymity order


                               No fee award.




                               Signed                     Date 3/8/2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy  Judge of the Upper Tribunal


