
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10629/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 October 2013                              |On 22 January 2014         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                               Muhammad rasheed
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Hashmi, instructed by Kingswell Watts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Spence, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Muhammad Rasheed, was born on 8 June 1976 and is a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant  had  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Reed) against the decision of the respondent to  remove
    him from the United Kingdom as  an  illegal  entrant.   The  first-tier
    Tribunal  dismissed  his  appeal.   The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal make a number of  challenges  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination.  First, it is asserted that the judge reached
    perverse and irrational findings and failed to  give  adequate  reasons
    for findings on  material  matters.   This  appellant  claims  to  have
    entered the United Kingdom in November 1997 and, on  6  June  2012,  he
    made an application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis that he
    had been living in this country for  more  than  fourteen  years.   His
    application had been refused and the decision taken to remove him.  The
    application to the respondent had been made under paragraph 276B of  HC
    395 (as amended):
    276B. The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite leave
    to remain on the ground of long residence in the United Kingdom are
    that:

    (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence in the
United Kingdom.

    (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons why it
    would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to remain on
    the ground of long residence, taking into account his:

    (a) age; and

    (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and

    (c) personal history, including character, conduct, associations and
employment record; and

    (d) domestic circumstances; and

    (e) compassionate circumstances; and

    (f) any representations received on the person's behalf; and

    (iii) the applicant does not fall for refusal under the general grounds
for refusal.

    (iv) the applicant has demonstrated sufficient knowledge of the English
    language and sufficient knowledge about life in the United Kingdom, in
    accordance with Appendix KoLL.

    (v) the applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration laws
    except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28 days or less
    will be disregarded, as will any period of overstaying between periods
    of entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain of up to 28 days
    and any period of overstaying pending the determination of an
    application made within that 28 day period.




 3. Paragraph 276A provides:
    276A. For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D and 276ADE and 399A.

    (a) "continuous residence" means residence in the United Kingdom for an
    unbroken period, and for these purposes a period shall not be
    considered to have been broken where an applicant is absent from the
    United Kingdom for a period of 6 months or less at any one time,
    provided that the applicant in question has existing limited leave to
    enter or remain upon their departure and return, but shall be
    considered to have been broken if the applicant:

    (i) has been removed under Schedule 2 of the 1971 Act, section 10 of
    the 1999 Act, has been deported or has left the United Kingdom having
    been refused leave to enter or remain here; or

    (ii) has left the United Kingdom and, on doing so, evidenced a clear
intention not to return; or

    (iii) left the United Kingdom in circumstances in which he could have
    had no reasonable expectation at the time of leaving that he would
    lawfully be able to return; or

    (iv) has been convicted of an offence and was sentenced to a period of
    imprisonment or was directed to be detained in an institution other
    than a prison (including, in particular, a hospital or an institution
    for young offenders), provided that the sentence in question was not a
    suspended sentence; or

    (v) has spent a total of more than 18 months absent from the United
    Kingdom during the period in question.

    (b) "lawful residence" means residence which is continuous residence
pursuant to:

    (i) existing leave to enter or remain; or

    (ii) temporary admission within section 11 of the 1971 Act where leave
    to enter or remain is subsequently granted; or

    (iii) an exemption from immigration control, including where an
    exemption ceases to apply if it is immediately followed by a grant of
    leave to enter or remain.

    (c) 'lived continuously' and 'living continuously' mean 'continuous
    residence', except that paragraph 276A(a)(iv) shall not apply.





 4. The judge considered various items of documentary  evidence  and  heard
    oral evidence  from  the  appellant  and  from  his  witnesses,  Messrs
    Choudhry, Mohommed and Ahmed.

 5. At [32] the judge found that, "Although the  appellant  may  well  have
    come to the UK initially as long ago as 1997, he  has  failed  to  show
    that he has been continuously here since then and has not left  the  UK
    in the meantime."  The  grounds  assert  that  the  appellant  and  his
    witnesses were not directly challenged as to "when,  how  and  for  how
    long the appellant left the United Kingdom."  It was never put  to  the
    appellant that he had not obtained a travel document.

 6. At [23], the judge noted that the appellant had been

         asked in cross-examination if he had been back to Pakistan  and  he
         said he had not.  Bearing in  mind  the  contents  of  the  refusal
         letter, which clearly  set  out  the  respondent's  view  that  the
         appellant had not demonstrated continuous residence in the UK, I do
         not see there to have been any need for Mrs  Fell  [the  Presenting
         Officer] to labour the issue as to whether or not the appellant had
         been back to Pakistan since he arrived here.

    I find that this ground of appeal has no merit.  It  was  not  for  the
    respondent to prove that the appellant had left the United Kingdom;  it
    was for the appellant, upon whom rested the burden of proof,  to  prove
    that he had remained continuously in the United Kingdom  in  accordance
    with the Rules.  Further, it is not clear what would have  been  gained
    by further cross-examination of the appellant as to when, how  and  for
    how long he had left the United Kingdom when he had clearly  stated  in
    evidence that he had not left.  The judge's finding that the  appellant
    had  not  discharged  the  burden  of  proving  that  he  had  remained
    continuously in the United Kingdom is  in  no  way  undermined  by  the
    failure of the Presenting Officer to put to the appellant the questions
    suggested in the grounds of appeal the answers to which would have been
    obvious to all, given the appellant's assertion that he  had  not  left
    the United Kingdom.  Further, the judge went on in  detail  to  examine
    the evidence from employers, the mosque and tenancy agreements at  [28-
    30].  The judge found at [31] that the appellant had been  an  "evasive
    witness" and that he had failed to be "straightforward about facts such
    as his knowledge of the  passport  that  he  used  to  enter  the  UK."
    Crucially, the judge  also  found  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    "straightforward with  his  own  witnesses"  noting  that  one  of  the
    witnesses had been "clearly surprised to learn that the  appellant  was
    here illegally."  All of  the  witnesses  had  been  unaware  that  the
    appellant had used a  false  passport  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom.
    Whilst the judge accepted that the witnesses were  "decent  members  of
    the community" he gave little weight to their various  assertions  that
    the appellant was a "honest and trustworthy" individual given that they
    had been "kept in the dark about his background."  Those  are  findings
    which are clearly open to the judge on the evidence  before  him.   The
    judge did not ignore evidence which was pertinent to  the  question  of
    the  appellant's  residence  nor  did  he  have  regard  to  irrelevant
    evidence.  Whilst another judge, faced with the  same  documentary  and
    oral evidence, may well have concluded that the appellant satisfied the
    requirements of the Rules, the evidence adduced did not compel such  an
    outcome.  I can identify no perversity in the judge's approach  to  and
    analysis of this evidence.

7.   The grounds assert that the judge failed to approach Rule  276A  and  B
    in  accordance  with   existing   jurisprudence,   in   particular   ZH
    (Bangladesh) [2009] EWCA Civ 818.  I find that that ground of appeal is
    misguided also.  The Court of  Appeal  in  ZH  dealt  with  the  public
    interest which was satisfied where an individual proved that he or  she
    had remained in the United Kingdom for more than  fourteen  years;  the
    judge was not so satisfied in this appeal.  The court warned against an
    overemphasis upon the use of a false identity or illegal  work;  whilst
    those factors were legitimately considered by the judge in  the  appeal
    there was no suggestion that they were decisive and other factors (such
    as the appellant's willingness to mislead witnesses who had attended to
    support his appeal and the appellant's experience in the use  of  false
    travel documents) were also in play.

8.   Finally, then the grounds assert that the judge  failed  to  adopt  the
    correct approach to the Article 8 ECHR appeal.   At  [37],  Judge  Reed
    noted that the public interest which lies in the exclusion of those who
    "enter the country illegally and  support  themselves  through  illegal
    work".  I do not consider that finding  is  contrary  to  the  guidance
    offered by ZH because it was linked in  the  judge's  analysis  to  his
    clear finding  that  the  appellant  had  "pursued  a  false  claim  of
    entitlement" to remain in the United  Kingdom,  that  is  that  he  had
    sought to deceive his witnesses  and  give  false  evidence  about  the
    period during which he claimed to have  resided  continuously  in  this
    country.

9.   The judge acknowledged that  the  appellant  had  produced  documentary
    evidence which indicated that he had been in the United Kingdom for  at
    least some of  the  years  which  comprised  the  period  of  residence
    required by the Rules.  Whilst that evidence may  have  supported  that
    appellant's case, it was not decisive.  I find that it was open to  the
    judge to  take,  as  he  did,  a  very  dim  view  of  the  appellant's
    credibility and to find that the evidence was insufficient to discharge
    the burden of proof which rested on the appellant.  That conclusion was
    not perverse nor  was  it  attained  in  the  face  of  evidence  which
    compelled a particular outcome in the  appeal.   Consequently,  I  find
    that the judge has not erred in law such that his  determination  falls
    to be set aside.

DECISION

10.  This appeal is dismissed.




Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

