
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10613/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 29 April 2015                              |On 5 June 2015                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             nelly uchenna eluwa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss N Nnamani, Counsel, instructed by Samuel Louis
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant  is  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    Respondent is the Claimant. The Claimant, a national of  Nigeria,  born
    on 12 June 1975, applied for a  residence  card  under  the  provisions
    contained within the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 on the basis of being an extended family member.

2.   The Secretary of State  refused that application on  13  February  2014
    on the basis that it  had  not  been  established  there  was  a  valid
    marriage and it had not been established that there was a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship, a durable relationship as  otherwise  referred
    to, under the Regulations.  The Secretary  of  State  did  not  in  the
    alternative, in addition to  those  reasons,  go  on  to  consider  the
    provisions under Regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations  in  terms  of
    whether the person had established that they were  an  extended  family
    member and  therefore  a  qualified  person  to  exercise  in  all  the
    circumstances a discretion to issue the residence card.

3.   It is fairly said that the Secretary of State could have looked  at  it
    on that basis and had sufficient time to do so.

4.   First-tier Tribunal Judge  J  J  Maxwell  (the  judge)  in  a  decision
    promulgated in or about 13 January 2015, he concluded that  the  appeal
    did not succeed on the basis of a recognised marriage but  went  on  to
    conclude that on the facts there was a durable relationship between the
    Claimant and her partner in the UK.

5.   What the judge then did having made perfectly adequate  and  sufficient
    findings was to go on to exercise the discretion that it was in  effect
    appropriate, to issue the residence card.  It is true to say  that  the
    judge's decision  as  expressed  was  that  the  appeal  is  'dismissed
    allowed', which plainly is some problem with a formatted decision.   It
    seems clear and  the  parties'  representatives  are  clear,  that  the
    judge's intention must have been to allow the appeal and by  nature  of
    the order the judge made, he decided to exercise the discretion   which
    would have been for the Secretary of State to exercise under Regulation
    17(4)(b) of the 2006 Rules.

6.   Permission to appeal that decision was  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cruthers on 18 February 2015.

7.   Before me the argument was confined simply to the question:-   Was  the
    judge making an error of law in proceeding  to  allow  the  appeal  and
    essentially take away or exercise the discretion  which  lay  with  the
    Secretary of State under Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations?

8.   Miss Brocklesby-Weller relied upon the case of Ihemdu (OFMs -  meaning)
    Nigeria [2011] UKUT 340 (IAC).  The case, with  which  the  Immigration
    Judge should have been familiar, stands for the proposition that  where
    the Secretary of State has not exercised a discretion under  Regulation
    17(4) then it is not for a judge to do so.   Rather  the  judge  should
    allow the appeal to the extent the Secretary of  State's  decision  was
    not in accordance with the law and the matter of  whether  to  exercise
    the discretion under Regulation 17(4) in the Claimant's favour remitted
    to the Secretary of State.

9.   The case of Ihemdu is of some interest  because  what  happened  before
    the Upper Tribunal was that the parties agreed that the  judge  in  the
    Upper Tribunal should exercise that discretion  which  would  otherwise
    have been applied by the Secretary of State.  In this case there was no
    such concession before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  it  is  clear
    from a plain reading  of  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  that  the
    Secretary of State never purported to exercise that discretion.   As  a
    matter  of  general  law,  therefore,  where  no  discretion  has  been
    exercised, there is no justiciable decision.

10.  That position is actually fortified by  the  provisions  of  Regulation
    17(4)(b) which states: "and (b)... in all the circumstances it  appears
    to the Secretary of State appropriate to issue the residence card".  So
    the Secretary of State may issue a card to an  extended  family  member
    who is not an EEA national on an application if those requirements  are
    met.  In the circumstances, whilst there is much of attraction in  Miss
    Nnamani's argument that really  the  Secretary  of  State  should  have
    addressed the matter, had the opportunity to do so  and  there  was  no
    failing by the judge in doing so, has the attraction  of  efficacy  but
    runs into the particular unavoidable difficulty that the discretion and
    the primary decision maker is  the  Secretary  of  State's.   In  those
    circumstances it is clear that there is no challenge whatsoever to  the
    findings the judge made concerning the status of the  Claimant  and  in
    particular her  falling  within  the  necessary  provisions  to  be  an
    extended family member.

11.  The findings of fact, therefore, are wholly clear and  I  am  satisfied
    that the appropriate course which the judge should have taken  is  that
    the appeal should have been allowed to the extent it  was  remitted  to
    the Secretary of State to make a  decision   upon  the  issues  arising
    under Regulation 17(4) of the Regulation.

12.  The Original Tribunal erred in law in making the decision  in  the  way
    it did and the following decision is substituted.

13.  The appeal of the  Claimant  is  allowed  to  the  extent  that  it  is
    remitted to the Secretary of State to be determined in accordance  with
    the provisions of Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations on the basis
    of  the  facts  and  matters  found  by  the  judge  and  any   further
    representations made for and on behalf of the claimant.

14.  No anonymity order was made and none is required.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey








