
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/10272/2014
                                                               IA/10485/2014
                                                               ia/10486/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 March 2015                              |On 23 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                     nimeshkumar patel (first appellant)
                      nishaben patel (second appellant)
                       krishn patel (third appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Slatter, Counsel instructed by E2W (UK) Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants have been granted permission to appeal the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mayall dismissing their appeals  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 4 February 2014 to refuse him leave to
    remain on human rights grounds and to  remove  him  from  the  UK.   In
    reality the first appellant is the only one with  a  right  of  appeal.
    The other named appellants are his wife and son.  They are  dependants.
    They have been issued with notices of  immigration  decision  dated  10
    February 2014 to remove them as illegal entrants under  Section  10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  They are only entitled to  appeal
    this decision under Section 82(1) of the 2002 Act after they have  left
    the UK.  They have erroneously lodge in-country appeals  when  they  do
    not have the right to do so.  I find in  any  event  that  the  judge's
    decision is not affected by this administrative error.

2.   The facts of this case are that the  first  appellant  claims  to  have
    entered the UK as a visitor on 16 October 2000.  He did not go back  to
    India because he saw that it was good here.  He thought he  could  earn
    money and then go back.  He married Nishaben Patel who claims  to  have
    entered the UK as a  visitor  on  13  February  2006,  in  a  religious
    ceremony on 24 August 2008.  On 18  September  2009  their  son  Krishn
    Patel was born.  On 27 September  2010  the  first  appellant  made  an
    application for leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on
    compassionate grounds.  On 12 October 2010 this application was refused
    with no right of appeal.  He then applied for a reconsideration of  the
    application on 7 December 2010 which was however rejected.  He  made  a
    further application on 26 September 2011 for leave  to  remain  outside
    the Immigration Rules on compassionate grounds.  This was rejected on 3
    October 2011.  On 7 October 2011 he made an application on human rights
    grounds under Article 8.  This was refused with no right of appeal on 1
    November 2011.  On 8 October 2012 he was informed  of  his  immigration
    status and liability to be removed from the UK.  On 12 October 2012  he
    requested reconsideration of the human  rights  Article  8  application
    under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. It was the refusal of  this
    application which led to his appeal which was dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mayall.

3.   Upon hearing oral evidence from the first  appellant  and  his  cousin,
    Jyotiben Patel, the judge was satisfied that the first  two  appellants
    are in a permanent relationship and that they intend to  live  together
    as husband and wife.  He also accepted  that  the  third  appellant  is
    their child.  The first appellant arrived in the UK in October 2000 and
    the second appellant in February 2006.  Their son was born  here.   The
    judge accepted that all three appellants have a close relationship with
    Jyotiben Patel.  However, she does not live with the family.  She lives
    some distance apart.  Whilst she, no doubt, played some part in looking
    after the child, the judge was entirely satisfied that  the  extent  of
    the relationship was considerably  overstated  by  the  witnesses.   In
    particular, for example, in the witness statement the  first  appellant
    said that he had lived with his cousin ever since arriving.   That  was
    not correct.  They have not lived together for some years.   The  judge
    was not satisfied that the relationship between the appellants and  the
    cousin goes beyond the normal  ones  one  would  expect  between  adult
    relatives or between an adult relative and a nephew or similar.  He was
    not satisfied that the relationship between  them  amounted  to  family
    life within the meaning of Article 8.  He said there was no doubt  that
    the family would be removed as a whole.  He did not consider that there
    would be any interference with the family life as a result.

4.   With regard to private life, he noted that  the  first  two  appellants
    had been in the UK for a considerable period.  The child has spent  all
    of his life here.  In that time they must have built up a private life.
     However it is common ground that they do not  meet  the  private  life
    provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   They  clearly   still   have
    considerable ties in India.

5.   The judge found that the first two  appellants  are  relatively  young.
    He had no doubt that having spent the majority of their lives in India,
    and been wholly conversant with the language and  culture,  they  could
    easily re-adapt to life in India.  Their son was  at  an  age  when  he
    would readily adapt, the family as a whole having been mixing with  the
    Indian Hindu community in the UK.  There was nothing in the evidence to
    suggest that they would  be  any  worse  off  than  many  other  Indian
    families.  It was conceded that there are schools available  not  least
    because the appellant's relative's children attend such schools.  There
    was no evidence before him to suggest that the standard of education in
    India was not adequate.

6.    The  judge  found  that  the  first  appellant  has  managed  to  find
    employment in the UK despite not being allowed to work legally.   There
    was no reason to suppose that he could not find employment in India.

7.   The judge accepted that removal  would  interfere  with  their  private
    life.  The judge went on to say that when considering Article 8 he must
    follow the approach  set  out  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Nigeria,
    Haleemudeen  and  MM  (Lebanon).   The  judge  then  went  on  to  cite
    paragraphs 42 to 48 of Haleemudeen.

8.   The judge then said that he must also apply the provisions of the  2014
    Act.  He must attach little weight to private life built up at  a  time
    when the appellants had no lawful right to remain.

9.   The judge said that he must also have regard to the  interests  of  the
    child as being primary, if not the primary consideration.  He  must  do
    so in the context set out by the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) in
    carrying out the assessment of the best interests of the child  on  the
    basis that the facts are as  they  are  in  the  real  world.   If  the
    appellants have no right to remain that is the background against which
    the assessment must be conducted.

10.  The judge found that he was wholly unable to detect any  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances in this case.  The family will be returned as
    a unit.  They can readily adapt to life in India.  In the circumstances
    he was entirely satisfied that the decisions in this case were entirely
    proportionate.

11.  Permission was granted on the basis that the judge misdirected  himself
    as to the proper basis for assessing the best interests of the child in
    light of the apparent contradiction between paragraphs 33 and 58 of the
    judgments in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  The argument in the
    grounds was that the best interests of the child are to  be  determined
    by reference to the child alone without reference  to  the  immigration
    history or status of either parent.  The judge erred  in  relying  upon
    the minor appellant being "at an age when he would readily adapt".  The
    grounds submitted that a similar comment was criticised by  the  former
    president in E-A (Article 8 - best  interests  of  the  child)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC) at [28].

12.  Mr Slatter submitted that the judge appeared to adopt a  Kugathas  test
    when stating that he was not satisfied that  the  relationship  between
    the various parties went beyond the normal ones one would  expect.   He
    said this was a misdirection in law as the Kugathas  question  was  not
    whether the relationship went beyond a normal one,  but  whether  there
    were elements of dependency involving more than  the  normal  emotional
    ties.

13.  I find that even though the judge did not correctly cite  the  Kugathas
    test, this was not material.  On the evidence the appellants could  not
    meet the Kugathas test for the reasons given by the judge.

14.  The next argument by Mr Slatter was that the judge failed to perform  a
    best interest assessment  in  relation  to  the  minor  appellant.   He
    submitted that the judge's findings in respect of the  third  appellant
    overlooked the fact that he was born in the UK and has never  lived  in
    India.  It was held in EV (Philippines) EWCA  Civ  874  that  the  best
    interests of the child are to be determined by reference to  the  child
    alone without reference to the immigration history or status of  either
    parent.

15.  I find that the judge considered all the evidence  in  respect  of  the
    child. He noted that it was conceded by the  appellant's  Counsel  that
    thee are schools available in India and there was  no  evidence  before
    him to suggest that the standard of education was not adequate.  I rely
    on Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 in which the Supreme Court held that there is
    no irrationality in the conclusion that it was in the best interests of
    the children to go with their parents to their country of  origin.   No
    doubt it would have been possible to have  stated  that,  other  things
    being equal, it was in the best interests of the children that they and
    their parents stay in the United Kingdom so that they could obtain such
    benefit as healthcare and education which the decision maker recognised
    might be of a higher standard than would be  available  in  the  Congo.
    But other things were not equal.  They were not British citizens.  They
    had no right to future education and healthcare in this country.   They
    were of a close-knit family with highly educated parents and were of an
    age when their emotional needs could  only  be  fully  met  within  the
    immediate family unit.  The Supreme Court also went to  say  that  they
    saw  no  sustenance  in  the  criticism  that  the  assessment  of  the
    children's best interests  was  flawed  because  it  assumed  that  the
    parents would be removed  to  the  Republic  of  Congo.   In  light  of
    Zoumbas, and the fact that these appellants including  their  son,  the
    third appellant, are not British citizens, I find no error  of  law  in
    the judge's decision.

16.  Mr Slatter submitted that the judge misdirected himself with regard  to
    the approach he was required to follow  in  Article  8.   Although  the
    judge cited the case of Haleemudeen he failed to explain its  relevance
    to the determination of the appeals.  He argued that the appellants did
    not claim to have accrued any right to remain on the basis of  the  law
    prior to the  introduction  of  HC  194.   I  agree  with  Ms  Weller's
    submission that the judge cited Haleemudeen for what it said in respect
    of the assessment of proportionality.

17.  I found no merit in Mr Slatter's argument that  the  judge's  assertion
    that he must attach little weight to the private life built up when the
    appellants had no lawful right to remain, did not reflect  the  wording
    of the statute.  Section 117B(4) states "Little weight should be  given
    to (a) a private life that is established by a person at  a  time  when
    the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully".    That  is  precisely
    what the judge did.  The judge's use of  the  word  "must"  instead  of
    "should" does not amount to a misdirection in law.

18.  In his grounds Mr Slatter argued that the judge failed to  have  regard
    to the delay occasioned by the respondent in this case  to  remove  the
    appellants and assessing whether there was a pressing  social  need  to
    their removal from the UK.  They had made  applications  to  remain  in
    2010 and decisions had been made  to  remove  in  2012  which  did  not
    attract a right of appeal.  It was not until 2014 that  reconsideration
    was given to the appellants' case.  The judge recorded that  submission
    at paragraph 37 and yet failed to consider  the  significance  of  this
    when assessing proportionality. Mr. Slatter relied on the  decision  in
    EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41.

19.  On this issue I agree with Ms Weller's submission that the delay  point
    was not raised by the appellant's Counsel below.  In the light  of  the
    immigration  history  identified  at  paragraph  2  above,  I  see   no
    discernible delay on the part of the respondent.

20.  I find that the judge's decision does not disclose any  error  of  law.
    The judge's decision dismissing the appellants' appeal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



Signed        Date 20 March 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
