
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10217/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2016                            |On 3rd January 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          rishi gerwinsingh bhoobun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr R Deepchand of Counsel instructed by Lambeth
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State and the respondent
    is Mr Rishi Gerwinsingh Bhoobun.  However  for  the  purposes  of  this
    Decision and Reasons I refer to the parties as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal where Mr Bhoobun was the appellant.  Mr Bhoobun  is
    a national of Mauritius born on 20 February 1981 and entered the United
    Kingdom on 29 August 2004 with entry clearance as  a  student.   On  31
    October 2014 the appellant applied for settlement  in  the  UK  on  the
    basis of ten years' continuous  lawful  residence.   The  Secretary  of
    State refused that application on 19  February  2015.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 7 July 2016 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Henderson
    allowed the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal with  permission.
    The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal were: this was a case  where
    the appellant was unable to meet the long residence Rules as he  had  a
    gap in his valid leave to remain.  The appellant had  made  an  in-time
    application on 30 October 2008, his leave expiring on 31 October  2008.
    However that application  was  rejected  as  invalid  as  the  fee  was
    declined.  A  subsequent  (valid  but  out  of  time)  application  was
    submitted on 11 December 2008 and this was  granted  in  February  2009
    meaning that the appellant had a gap in his leave from 31 October  2008
    until 26 February 2009.  The Secretary of State argued that the  First-
    tier Tribunal made a finding that the appellant  did  not  receive  the
    letter sent to him on 9 November 2008; however it  was  submitted  that
    the acceptance of the appellant's evidence about his failure to receive
    the rejected application cannot confer any  leave  on  him  and  cannot
    reduce the gap in his continuous residence.  It was submitted that  the
    judge's acceptance of the appellant's explanation about when or how  he
    received the rejection letter was immaterial.

 3. The Secretary of State's second ground was that the judge  went  on  to
    find that, as a result of the misdirected post, the appellant only  had
    a gap in his leave of 32 days and therefore discretion should have been
    considered by a senior case worker as to the reason for the out of time
    application in 2008.  The judge found that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was not in accordance with the law.  However  the  judge  also
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  it  was  submitted
    that the judge materially misdirected herself: if a  senior  caseworker
    should have considered whether to exercise discretion, it was submitted
    that any decision that the appellant was unaware of  the  rejection  of
    his initial application could not confer leave and the  correct  course
    of action would have been to remit the case to the Secretary of  State.



The Hearing

 4. Mr Bhoobun attended the hearing and was represented  by  Mr  Deepchand.
    Mr Staunton in  his  submissions  indicated  that  whilst  he  was  not
    conceding the first ground he was not pursuing it.  In relation to  the
    respondent's second ground he submitted that the  judge  made  a  clear
    error in allowing the appeal outright having, at  paragraph  27,  found
    that the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with  Home
    Office guidance and therefore not in accordance with the law.

 5. Mr Deepchand returned to the issue, raised in the First-tier  Tribunal,
    in relation to the letter of 9 November 2008 rejecting the  appellant's
    application for further leave to remain made on 30  October  2008.   Mr
    Deepchand referred me to Mr Bhoobun's letter of 11 December 2008, which
    was before the First-tier Tribunal, where  Mr  Bhoobun  indicated  that
    when the documents were sent back to him they were wrongly delivered to
    Guildhall College instead of London Guildhall College and he  was  only
    informed of this on 10 December 2008, before resubmitting the documents
    the following day on 11 December 2008.

 6. Mr  Deepchand  pointed  out  that  the  applicant  had  acted  promptly
    following his discovery of the error of the post office.  Mr  Deepchand
    relied again on the Secretary of State's  guidance  on  long  residence
    applications which was before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  indicated
    that example 3, given at page 20 of the guidance, where the application
    had been made 34 days out of time was most  relevant  to  Mr  Bhoobun's
    case.  Mr Staunton agreed that this was the most appropriate example.

 7. It was Mr Deepchand's argument that therefore the  Secretary  of  State
    should have exercised her discretion to grant leave to Mr  Bhoobun  and
    to disregard the gap in lawful residence.

 8. In relation to the second ground  Mr  Deepchand  relied  on  the  Upper
    Tribunal case of Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT  00307.
    Mr Deepchand referred me to the third paragraph of the  headnote  which
    provides:

         "If the decision maker has lawfully exercised  his  discretion  and
         the Tribunal has such a statutory power, the Tribunal  must  either
         (i) uphold the  decision  maker's  decision  (if  the  Tribunal  is
         unpersuaded that the decision maker's discretion should  have  been
         exercised differently); or (ii) reach a different decision  in  the
         exercise of its own discretion."

Decision

 9. I am satisfied that there is little merit  in  the  respondent's  first
    ground.  Although the judge may have erred in her finding  in  relation
    to the length of the gap in the  appellant's  lawful  leave  I  am  not
    satisfied that that error was material given that the  key  issue  that
    the judge was considering was whether Mr Bhoobun had been  credible  in
    his evidence in relation to the reason for the gap in his  leave.   She
    found that he was and there  was  no  substantive  challenge  to  those
    findings which I am satisfied were correct and must  stand.   What  the
    judge relied on was that there was a good reason for  Mr  Bhoobun's  32
    day delay in submitting his application and that this  was  within  the
    principle of  the  circumstances  in  example  3  on  page  20  of  the
    respondent's Guidance on  Long  Residence.   The  fact  that  a  lawful
    decision by the Secretary of State extending Mr Bhoobun's leave was not
    then made until 26 February 2009 (thus giving him a longer period where
    he had a gap in lawful leave) is not material for the purposes of  that
    guidance.

10. However in relation to the respondent's second ground  I  am  satisfied
    that there is merit.  The Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  having
    found the appellant's version of events to be credible and having  made
    findings of fact in support of the appellant's account  of  events  and
    that Mr Bhoobun fell within  the  principle  of  the  circumstances  in
    example 3, noted that the guidance on long residence  stated  that  the
    "decision must be confirmed with the SEO  senior  caseworker.   I  find
    that the respondent's decision is  not  in  accordance  with  the  Home
    Office's guidance and thus, is not in accordance with the law".

11. I am satisfied that this is a case where the judge quite properly found
    that the Secretary of State had failed to exercise a discretion  vested
    in her.  Paragraph 2 of the headnote  in  the  Ukus  case  provides  as
    follows:

         "Where the decision maker  has  failed  to  exercise  a  discretion
         vested in him, the Tribunal's jurisdiction on appeal is limited  to
         a decision that the failure renders the decision 'not in accordance
         with the law' (s.86(3)(a)). Because the discretion is vested in the
         Executive, the appropriate course  will  be  for  the  Tribunal  to
         require the decision maker to  complete  his  task  by  reaching  a
         lawful decision on the outstanding application, along the lines set
         out in SSHD v Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148. In such a case, it  makes  no
         difference whether there is a statutory power as  is  mentioned  in
         paragraph 1 above."

12. The Secretary of State failed to exercise the discretion that was  open
    to her to follow, following her guidance, particularly  at  example  3,
    page 20, of the long residence  guidance  and  to  allow  Mr  Bhoobun's
    application.  The exercise of this discretion must  include  confirming
    this with the senior executive officer senior caseworker.  There was no
    evidence that the decision maker lawfully exercised her discretion,  as
    envisaged in paragraph 3 of the Ukus headnote.

13. The Secretary of State's  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the
    respondent's own guidance and therefore not in accordance with the  law
    as properly found by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  at  [27]  of
    her decision.  The judge was incorrect to allow the appeal outright.

Conclusion

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law.   I
    set aside the decision to allow the appeal under the Immigration  Rules
    and substitute my own decision to allow the appeal as not in accordance
    with the law.  The case is remitted to the Secretary  of  State  for  a
    lawful exercise of her discretion in accordance with the  Secretary  of
    State's own guidance, in particular at page 20 of that guidance.


Signed   Date: 30 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

No anonymity direction was requested or is appropriate in this case.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee application was made and I make no fee award.


Signed   Date: 30 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
