
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/10687/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th December 2015                |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mohammed Zubair Ikram
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Peterson of Counsel instructed by Vincent
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appealed against a decision of Judge Seifert  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 28th May 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male citizen of Pakistan  born  10th  July  1988  who
    entered the United Kingdom in 2000.  He was granted discretionary leave
    to remain outside the Immigration rules, following a successful appeal,
    his leave being valid between 25th January 2011 and 24th January  2014.



 4. On 8th January 2014 the Claimant applied for further leave  to  remain.
    His application was refused on 10th February  2014,  the  Secretary  of
    State issuing a Notice of Immigration Decision of that  date,  refusing
    to vary leave to remain, and indicating that a decision had been  taken
    to remove the Claimant from the United Kingdom.  A  letter  dated  10th
    February 2014 was issued by the Secretary of State giving  reasons  for
    the decision.

 5. The Claimant's appeal was heard by the FTT on 14th October  2014.   The
    FTT decided that  the  appeal  could  not  succeed  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration rules in relation to the Claimant's
    private life, but the Claimant's appeal was allowed in relation to  his
    private and family life, pursuant to Article 8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention) which  was  considered
    outside the Immigration rules.

 6. The Secretary of State  applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  In summary  it  was  contended  that  the  FTT  had  taken  an
    incorrect approach to consideration of Article 8 outside the rules,  by
    failing to give reasons for considering the appeal outside  the  rules,
    and failing to give weight to the public interest.

Error of Law

 7. The hearing to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law took place on
    13th October 2015.  After hearing submissions from both parties  I  set
    aside the decision of the FTT, having found a material  error  of  law.
    Full details of the application and grant of permission, together  with
    the submissions made  by  the  parties  are  set  out  in  my  decision
    promulgated on 20th October 2015.  I set out below my  conclusions  and
    reasons for setting aside the decision of the FTT;

         "17. The only application for permission to appeal the decision  of
             the FTT was made by the Secretary of  State.   Permission  was
             granted for the reasons set  out  in  the  decision  of  Judge
             Pooler.

         18.  In my view the  FTT  erred  when  considering  the  appeal  on
             Article 8 grounds.  I find no error in considering  Article  8
             outside the Immigration rules, but the error  in  law  is  the
             failure to carry out a balanced proportionality assessment, by
             failing to consider and give weight to the public interest  in
             maintaining effective immigration control.

         19.  The Upper Tribunal confirmed in Dube [2015] UKUT  00090  (IAC)
             that judges must have regard to the  specified  considerations
             set out in section 117A - 117D of the 2002  Act.   It  is  not
             however an error of law to fail to refer to section 117A -117D
             considerations if the judge has applied the test he or she was
             supposed to apply, according to its terms.   What  matters  is
             substance, and not form.

         20.  I have taken the guidance in Dube into account in  considering
             the FTT's decision.  Section 117B is mentioned in paragraph 50
             with the FTT rejecting the submission made on  behalf  of  the
             Claimant that it should not be considered because it  had  not
             been in  force  at  the  date  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
             decision.  All that is stated with reference to  section  117B
             is  that  it  does  not  provide  that  no  weight  should  be
             attributed to the private and family life  that  the  Claimant
             has established in the particular circumstances of this  case.
             I find that to be inadequate.

         21.  There is no adequate consideration of  sub-section  (1)  which
             provides  that  the  maintenance  of   effective   immigration
             controls is in the public interest.  It is apparent that  sub-
             section (2) does not adversely affect the Claimant, because he
             can speak English.

         22.  There is no comprehensive analysis of whether the Claimant  is
             financially independent, which is relevant to consideration of
             sub-section (3), although there is reference in  paragraph  18
             to  the  Claimant  giving  evidence  that  he  had   part-time
             employment which started the previous month, and in  paragraph
             29 the witness Mr Ahmed stating  that  the  Claimant  supports
             himself financially.  The FTT found in paragraph 42  that  the
             Claimant and Mr Ahmed were  credible  witnesses  although  the
             Claimant did not claim, according to the FTT decision,  to  be
             financially independent, and there was no specific finding  as
             to his financial independence.

         23.  I find that the FTT did not adequately  consider  sub-sections
             (4) and (5) which state that little weight should be given  to
             a private life established by a person  at  a  time  when  the
             person is in the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully,  or  when  that
             person's immigration status is precarious.

         24.  In this case the Claimant was in the United Kingdom unlawfully
             from 2001 until he was first granted  leave  on  25th  January
             2011.  Thereafter because he had limited leave to  remain  his
             immigration  status  was  precarious.   The   Upper   Tribunal
             confirmed in AM Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)  that  a  person
             has a precarious immigration status if his continued  presence
             in the United  Kingdom  is  dependent  upon  him  obtaining  a
             further grant of leave.

         25.  There is no adequate consideration of the unlawful  status  of
             the Claimant and no adequate  consideration  of  private  life
             established  while  his  immigration  status  was  precarious.
             These are matters that should  have  been  factored  into  the
             consideration of proportionality and because  they  were  not,
             that consideration is unsafe and amounts to an error of law.

         26.  I set aside the decision of the FTT.  In relation to error  of
             law, I have not considered the issue raised in the  Claimant's
             rule  24  response,  relating  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
             discretionary leave policy.  This  is  because  there  was  no
             application made for permission to appeal that point,  and  EG
             and NG confirms that the Upper Tribunal  cannot  entertain  an
             application purporting to be made under rule 24 for permission
             to appeal until the First-tier  Tribunal  has  been  asked  in
             writing for permission to appeal and has either refused it  or
             declined to admit the application.

         27.  In my view it is appropriate to have a further hearing  before
             the Upper Tribunal so that the decision can be re-made.

         28.  As the FTT hearing has been set aside, I considered it may  be
             appropriate to  hear  submissions  from  both  parties  as  to
             whether the Secretary of State's decision dated 10th  February
             2014 was in accordance with the law, on  the  basis  that  the
             Claimant had previously been granted  discretionary  leave  to
             remain, and was applying for further leave, and this was  made
             clear in the covering letter with the application  for  leave,
             which was  dated  30th  December  2013.   The  FTT  Record  of
             Proceedings confirms that this point  was  raised  before  the
             FTT, but no finding was made upon it.  It  was  not  a  matter
             that could be considered when dealing with error of law, as no
             permission had been granted to appeal, but in my view  it  may
             be possible to consider that point  at  further  hearing,  now
             that the FTT's decision has  been  set  aside.   Both  parties
             should be in a position to make submissions on this issue."

Re-making the Decision

 8. The resumed hearing took place on  11th  December  2015.   Ms  Peterson
    indicated that no evidence would be called but reliance would be placed
    upon the evidence given to the FTT on the basis that this evidence  had
    not been challenged, and the FTT had found the  Claimant,  his  brother
    and a further witness Mr Ahmed to be credible.

 9. I firstly heard submissions  from  Ms  Fijiwala  who  relied  upon  the
    reasons for refusal letter dated 10th February 2014.

10. Ms Fijiwala noted that the skeleton argument produced  by  Ms  Peterson
    relied upon paragraph 276ADE(vi), but pointed out  the  FTT  had  found
    against the Claimant on this point, and there had been no challenge  to
    the FTT findings on this issue.

11. Turning to the issue of whether the Secretary of State's decision dated
    10th February  2014  was  in  accordance  with  the  law,  Ms  Fijiwala
    submitted  that  it  was,  notwithstanding  that  there  had  been   no
    consideration of the Claimant's application to have  his  discretionary
    leave extended further to  the  Home  Office  policy  on  discretionary
    leave.

12. Ms Fijiwala explained that the application had not been considered with
    reference to discretionary leave because the Claimant had submitted  an
    incorrect application form.  The  Claimant  had  made  his  application
    using form FLR(FP) and  form  FLR(O)  should  have  been  used  if  the
    Claimant was applying for discretionary leave, having  previously  been
    granted a period of discretionary leave.  Ms  Fijiwala  referred  to  a
    copy of the discretionary leave policy which had been submitted at  the
    hearing on 13th October 2015 and referred to  section  10  which  dealt
    with transitional arrangements, contained at page 16 of the policy, and
    pointed out that at the bottom of the page, it was indicated that  from
    1st April 2013 all applications for further  leave  outside  the  rules
    should be made on the FLR(O) form if the application is chargeable.

13. It was therefore  the  Secretary  of  State's  case  that  because  the
    incorrect form had been submitted, there was no obligation to  consider
    the request to extend discretionary leave, and it was not open  to  the
    Tribunal  to  consider  discretionary  leave  as  this  had  not   been
    considered by the Secretary of State.

14. Ms Fijiwala went on to argue that the appeal should not be allowed with
    reference to Article 8 outside the Immigration rules.  I was  asked  to
    take into account with reference  to  the  considerations  set  out  in
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (the
    2002 Act) that the Claimant had not established that he was financially
    independent, and that little weight should be placed  on  private  life
    which had been established when he was in the UK unlawfully, or with  a
    precarious immigration status.  I was asked to find that  the  Claimant
    had not established family life that would engage Article 8,  with  his
    adult brother or sister.

15. I then heard submissions from Ms Peterson who relied upon her  skeleton
    argument.  I was asked firstly to consider the issue  of  discretionary
    leave.  Ms Peterson explained that she had only been made  aware  today
    by Ms Fijiwala, that it was contended that  the  wrong  form  had  been
    used.  Ms Fijiwala had submitted samples of forms FLR(FP)  and  FLR(O),
    and Ms Peterson pointed out that these  were  the  forms  in  use  from
    October 2015 in relation to FLR(O) and November  2015  in  relation  to
    FLR(FP).  The forms in use when the Claimant submitted his  application
    had not been provided.  The form in the  Respondent's  bundle  did  not
    contain the first six pages, and therefore it had not been proved  that
    the wrong form was used.

16. In any event it was clear from the covering letter submitted  with  the
    application form, that the Appellant's application  was  based  firstly
    upon his request that he be given further discretionary leave  pursuant
    to  the  Home  Office  policy,  as  he  had  initially   been   granted
    discretionary leave between 25th January 2011 and 24th January 2014.

17. I was therefore  asked  to  find  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    refusing the Claimant's application, was not  in  accordance  with  the
    law, because there had been no consideration  of  discretionary  leave,
    and  therefore  the  decision  should  remain  outstanding  before  the
    Secretary of State for a lawful decision to be made.

18. In the alternative, I was asked to allow the appeal with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) in relation to the Claimant's private life for the
    reasons set out in the skeleton argument.  As a further alternative,  I
    was asked to allow the appeal under Article 8 outside  the  Immigration
    rules, both in relation to family  and  private  life,  again  for  the
    reasons set out in the skeleton argument.

19. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. I find as a fact that the  Claimant  was  granted  discretionary  leave
    between 25th January 2011 and 24th January 2014 following a  successful
    appeal.  His adult brother and sister had their appeals heard  together
    but separately  from  the  Claimant,  and  following  their  successful
    appeals, they were granted discretionary leave from 30th June  2010  to
    29th June 2013.

21. The Claimant's brother has produced evidence  he  was  granted  further
    leave to remain on 1st October 2013 to 27th September 2016.   There  is
    reference in the FTT decision to the Claimant's sister also having been
    granted further discretionary leave.

22. In my  view  it  is  appropriate  to  firstly  consider  the  issue  of
    discretionary leave.  This was raised as an issue before the  FTT,  but
    no findings were made upon it.  As the decision is to be remade, it  is
    necessary and appropriate to consider this issue.

23. It is evident that the Claimant's application for leave to  remain  was
    made using Form FLR(FP)  version  12/2013.   The  form  is  dated  16th
    December 2013 and was received by the Secretary of State on 8th January
    2014, prior to the expiry of the Claimant's discretionary leave.

24. The skeleton argument submitted on behalf of the Claimant at  paragraph
    9 sets out the discretionary leave policy which is found at 10.1 of the
    Asylum Policy Instruction relating to discretionary  leave  dated  18th
    August 2015.  In my view that is very similar but not exactly the  same
    as the policy which was in force when the Claimant made his application
    for further leave, and a copy of  this  policy  was  submitted  on  the
    Claimant's behalf at the hearing on 13th October 2015 and I set it  out
    below;

           . Individuals granted DL on a date prior to  and  including  8th
             July 2012 may apply to extend that leave when their period  of
             DL  expires.   Decision  makers  must  apply   the   following
             guidance:

        Applicant's Granted Discretionary Leave Before 9th July 2012

           . Those who, before 9th July 2012 have been granted leave  under
             the DL policy in force at the time will normally  continue  to
             be dealt with under that policy through to settlement if  they
             qualify for it (normally after accruing six  years  continuous
             DL).  Further leave applications  from  those  granted  up  to
             three years DL before 9th July 2012 are subject to  an  active
             review.

           . Consideration  of  all  further  leave  applications  will  be
             subject to a criminality check  and  the  application  of  the
             criminality thresholds, including cases awaiting a decision on
             a further period of DL on  that  date.   See  Criminality  and
             Exclusion Section above.

           .  Decision  makers  must  consider  whether  the  circumstances
             prevailing at the time of the original grant of leave continue
             at the date of the decision.  If the circumstances remain  the
             same and the criminality thresholds do not  apply,  a  further
             period of 3 years DL should  normally  be  granted.   Decision
             makers must consider whether there are any circumstances  that
             may warrant departure from the standard period of leave.   See
             section 4.4 above.

           . If there have been significant changes or the applicant  fails
             to  meet  the  criminality  thresholds  (see  Criminality  and
             Exclusion Section above), the application  for  further  leave
             should be refused.

25. There then follows the advice pointed to by Ms Fijiwala, that from  1st
    April 2013 all applications for further leave outside the rules  should
    be made on form FLR(O) form if the application is chargeable.

26. It is now apparent why the Secretary of  State  did  not  consider  the
    Claimant's application  to  be  granted  further  discretionary  leave,
    because the  Claimant's  solicitors,  who  submitted  the  application,
    submitted it on form FLR(FP) rather than FLR(O), even though the fee of
    �578 was paid.

27. On balance, I accept that the incorrect form  was  submitted  with  the
    application.  I then have to decide whether this entitled the Secretary
    of State  not  to  consider  the  Claimant's  application  for  further
    discretionary leave.  In my view it is relevant to  take  into  account
    the letter which accompanied the application form, which  was  prepared
    by the Claimant's then solicitors, and sent to the Secretary  of  State
    together with the application.  The letter is dated 30th December  2013
    and it is clear that  it  was  received  as  it  is  exhibited  in  the
    Secretary of State's bundle of documents at C1.  The letter commences;

         "Dear Sirs

         Re Mr Mohammed Zubair Ikram 10.7.1988 Pakistani

         The applicant wishes to make an FLR(FP) application to  extend  his
         stay in the United Kingdom for leave to  remain  on  the  following
         basis:

           . Home Office policy for discretionary leave;

           . Private life - Immigration rules (paragraph 276ADE);

           . Article 8 of the European Convention of  Human  Rights  (ECHR)
             and;

           .  Compassionate  and  exceptional  circumstances-considerations
             outside Immigration rules.

         The applicant first entered the UK  sometime  around  January  2000
         aged 11 years old.  He has since then continuously resided  in  the
         UK.  He was subsequently granted with discretionary leave to remain
         on 25.1.2011 until 24.1.2014.

         The applicant now wishes to make an application  for  extension  of
         stay on the above basis.

         Home Office Policy for Discretionary Leave

         We submit that the applicant should be granted  with  extension  of
         stay in line with the Home Office's policy on  discretionary  leave
         under  the  transitional  arrangements  given    he   was   granted
         discretionary leave prior to 8th July 2012 (i.e. granted in January
         2011).

         The applicant submits his circumstances which  were  prevailing  at
         the time of the original grant of  leave  continue  and  are  still
         present now if not strengthened given his added time in the UK.

         Regarding  the  criminality  checks,  we  are  informed  that   the
         applicant does not have any criminal offences in any shape or  form
         against his name.

         In  line  with  the  policy,  the  applicant   submits   that   his
         circumstances prevailing at the time of the original grant of leave
         continue.  The applicant informs us that he has  been  residing  in
         the UK continuously since his grant of  discretionary  leave.   The
         applicant therefore feels he should be granted  with  extension  of
         stay in the UK due to the above.

         Given his factual circumstances  are  no  different  from  when  he
         previously applied, coupled with fact since his grant of  leave  to
         remain in the UK his ties and  integration  in  the  UK  have  only
         strengthened, the applicant has a legitimate  expectation  that  he
         would be allowed to extend his stay in the UK."

28. I also find it relevant to take into account section 10 of the  FLR(FP)
    form submitted on behalf of the Claimant which asked whether  there  is
    any other information concerning the Claimant or his  family  which  he
    would like to be considered as  part  of  his  application.   There  is
    reference in that section to "please see cover letter."  There is  also
    reference to the Claimant having previously been granted  three  years'
    discretionary leave, and that he now wishes to apply for  an  extension
    of his stay.

29. Therefore it has, in  my  view,  been  made  clear  that  although  the
    Claimant's solicitors may have submitted the  wrong  application  form,
    the covering letter confirms  that  the  primary  application  made  on
    behalf of the Claimant, was for further discretionary leave  under  the
    Home  Office  policy,  given  that  he  had  previously  been   granted
    discretionary leave.  The letter could not have made that any  clearer.
    There is also reference to discretionary leave in  section  10  of  the
    application form that was submitted.  A fee was paid.

30. I have to balance the clearly expressed letter, and  the  reference  to
    discretionary leave in the application form, against the  fact  that  I
    accept that an incorrect form was submitted.  In my view it  must  have
    been clear to the Secretary of State's decision maker, given  that  the
    Appellant had already been granted discretionary  leave,  that  he  was
    applying for further discretionary leave.  This is not a case where the
    Claimant was trying to avoid  paying  a  fee.   What  appears  to  have
    happened here is that the  Claimant's  solicitors  made  a  mistake  in
    submitting the wrong form.

31. I therefore conclude that the decision maker should have considered the
    Claimant's application with reference to the transitional  arrangements
    that applied to individuals granted discretionary leave before 9th July
    2012.  This was not done, and I therefore conclude  that  the  decision
    was not in accordance with the law.  In the  alternative,  my  view  is
    that at the very least the Claimant should have been put on notice that
    an incorrect application form had been  submitted.   The  Secretary  of
    State has only considered part of the Claimant's application,  and  not
    considered the primary application that he was making.  This has caused
    unfairness, and  because  I  conclude  that  the  decision  is  not  in
    accordance with the law, it is appropriate for the appeal to be allowed
    to the extent that  the  application  remains  outstanding  before  the
    Secretary of State for the discretionary leave policy to be considered.

32. In those circumstances I do not go  on  to  consider  either  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the  Immigration  rules,  or  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration rules.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.  The Claimant's  appeal  is  allowed  to  the
limited extent that the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  not  in
accordance with the law, and  the  decision  therefore  remains  outstanding
before the Secretary of State for a fresh decision to  be  made  to  include
consideration of the discretionary leave policy.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and no  anonymity  order
is made.


Signed   Date 15th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Claimant's appeal has been allowed to a limited extent.  I do  not  find
it appropriate to make a fee award.  The Claimant should have submitted  his
application on the appropriate application form.


Signed   Date 15th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

