
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10703/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 January 2017                |On 11 January 2017                |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                              Mr BIPIN HAMPAUL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik, Counsel
      (instructed by Chipatiso Associates LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
           Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal PJM  Hollingworth  on  24  November  2016  against  the
           determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Miles,  who  had
           dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  refusal  of  his
           claim for ILR as a victim of domestic violence under  rule  289A
           of the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 ECHR. The  decision
           and reasons was promulgated on 27 June 2016.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of India, born there on  16  October
           1981.  After reciting the Appellant's immigration history, which
           included a significant overstay,  Judge  Miles  found  that  the
           Appellant's  short  marriage   had   ended   as   a   subsisting
           relationship by 18 June  2014,  as  the  result  of  the  wife's
           choosing that she no longer wanted to  be  with  the  Appellant.
           The only violence took place after the marriage had broken  down
           and was not the cause of the breakdown: see [25] of the decision
           and reasons.  Hence the appeal was dismissed.


      3.    Permission to appeal was  granted  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
           because it was considered that it was arguable  that  the  judge
           had, inter alia, applied too narrow a  definition  of  "domestic
           violence",  had  failed  to  recognise  that  the  parties   had
           continued to live together for a period after she had written to
           the Home Office, that the Appellant wanted the  relationship  to
           continue and that the judge had failed to consider section  117B
           of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.




      Submissions


      4.    Mr Malik for the Appellant relied  on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and grant.  In summary he argued that the judge had erred
           in determining when the marriage broke down because it had  been
           accepted that the parties had continued to live  together  after
           the Appellant's wife had written to the  Home  Office  to  state
           that the marriage was over.  The  Appellant  had  not  left  the
           matrimonial home until 2 July 2014.  The  judge  had  restricted
           himself when defining domestic violence and  had  thereby  acted
           unlawfully when considering the evidence.  Moreover,  the  judge
           had not dealt sufficiently with the evidence of  the  Appellant.
           Finally the judge  was  bound  to  consider  section  117B  when
           evaluating  the  Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  claim  and   had
           mentioned none of the relevant factors.


      5.    Mr Avery for the Respondent relied on the rule 24 notice  lodged
           earlier in which the onwards appeal was opposed.  There had been
           no issue as to the date when the marriage failed and it was over
           before the Appellant left the matrimonial home.  The  judge  had
           not applied too high a threshold to the assessment  of  domestic
           violence and had  reached  clear,  properly  reasoned  findings.
           There was no material aspect of  section  117B  with  which  the
           judge had not dealt.


      6.    There was nothing which Mr Malik wished to add by way of reply.




      No material error of law finding


      7.    In the tribunal's view the grant of  permission  to  appeal  was
           very generous, if not surprisingly so.  There was nothing in any
           of Mr Malik's submissions, which amounted to  no  more  than  an
           extended disagreement with the proper  and  lawful  decision  of
           Judge Miles and an empty, technical challenge over section  117B
           which could not be material on the facts properly found.   There
           was no dispute that the Appellant's wife had written to the Home
           Office on 18 June 2014, and the date of actual  receipt  by  the
           Home Office  of  her  letter  was  immaterial.   The  judge  was
           entitled to find that the marriage was over at  the  point  when
           the letter was written, as he said, "at  latest",  whatever  had
           been  the  Appellant's  hope  for  reconciliation.   The   judge
           referred to the Appellant's wife's conduct, which was in  effect
           cheating on the Appellant.  The only significant violence  found
           by the judge was the incident when the Appellant  was  asked  to
           leave the matrimonial home after he had refused: see [22] of the
           decision and  reasons.   The  judge  discussed  the  Appellant's
           evidence in detail at [24] of his decision and found that, while
           there had been arguments, there had been  no  domestic  violence
           during the subsistence of the marriage, let alone any which  had
           led to its breakdown.


      8.    There is no suggestion in the judge's decision and reasons  that
           he adopted a narrow or restrictive approach to  the  concept  or
           definition of domestic violence.  The decision  and  reasons  is
           gender neutral and is expressed in careful and judicial language
           throughout.   Two  witnesses  had  testified   to   the   wife's
           adulterous behaviour and its effect on the  Appellant  and  that
           evidence, taken with the Appellant's own testimony, was abundant
           support  for  the  judge's  findings  about  the  cause  of  the
           breakdown.  The judge  recorded  the  fact  that  the  Appellant
           wanted the marriage to continue, but that  required  the  wife's
           agreement which was not available.


      9.    The judge went on to consider  the  Appellant's  obviously  weak
           private life claim and his similarly  weak  family  life  claim,
           based on his connection with his  aunt:  see  [31].   While  not
           perhaps identifying them by name, the judge dealt  with  all  of
           the relevant section 117B factors for Article 8  ECHR  purposes,
           i.e., section 117B(2) that the Appellant spoke English  (not  in
           dispute, no interpreter at the  hearing)  and  section  117B(3),
           was, if permitted to work, capable  of  financial  independence:
           see [28].  Section 117B did  not  add  to  the  Article  8  ECHR
           assessment already undertaken in relation to rule 276ADE and  it
           is plain that the Article 8 ECHR claim,  such  as  it  was,  was
           comprehensively evaluated.  The judge  went  much  further  than
           section  117B  required  and  the  relevant  factors  were  duly
           considered.


      10.   There was no other substantive challenge to the dismissal of the
           Article 8 ECHR appeal, rightly  for  the  reasons  given  above.
           The onwards appeal has no merit and must be dismissed.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law and stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
