
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10756/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 October 2013                            |On 24 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                               Nathapat kalong

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Soloman, instructed by Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant, a citizen of Thailand  born  on  12
    April 1982, against a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing
    his appeal against the respondent's decision  made  on  20  March  2013
    refusing to grant him an extension of leave to remain in the  UK  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and to remove him from  the  UK  under
    s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

Background

2.   On 28 July 2008 the appellant was granted leave to enter the  UK  as  a
    student until 21 June 2009.  On 27 July 2009 an application  for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant was refused, but on  23
    March 2010 he was granted leave to remain in  that  capacity  until  23
    June 2010 and further extensions were granted until  14  January  2013.
    On 8 January 2013 the appellant made an application for  further  leave
    to remain to continue his studies.

3.   Although the appellant was able to show that he could meet  the  points
    requirements of Appendices  A  and  C,  his  application  was  refused,
    firstly on the basis that he did not satisfy the requirements  of  para
    245ZX(h) in that a further grant of leave  would  exceed  a  period  of
    three years of combined study below degree level, and secondly, that on
    his application form he had failed to disclose that on 14 January  2011
    he had been convicted of driving with excess alcohol, using  a  vehicle
    while uninsured and driving  otherwise  than  in  accordance  with  his
    licence, and in consequence had  failed  to  disclose  material  facts,
    leading to a refusal under para 322(1A).

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

4.   The appellant appealed against that decision and in  his  grounds  said
    that it was not correct that he had not informed UKBA of his conviction
    for drink driving.  The offence had occurred in January  2011  and  his
    student visa expired on 6 July  2011.   He  had  returned  to  Thailand
    before his visa expired and had applied for an extension and when doing
    so he had told the British Embassy of his conviction and he  was  still
    granted the student visa to continue his studies.  When he applied  for
    the further extension in January 2013, as he had already informed  UKBA
    about his convictions, he did not think it was necessary to inform them
    again.

5.   The appellant asked for the appeal to be determined on the  papers  and
    it was duly allocated for determination on 18 June 2013.  The judge was
    not satisfied that he met the requirements of  para  245ZX(h)  for  the
    reasons she gave in [10] of her determination.  She  then  went  on  to
    consider the issue under para 322(1A) as follows:

         "11.     Further, the appellant does not deny that he committed the
             offences referred to in the refusal letter.  It is also  clear
             that in his present application form, the  appellant  answered
             the first question of Section I  by  indicating  that  he  had
             previously told UKBA about this, but the fact remains that his
             answer to the question in the present application  is  untrue.
             Notwithstanding  what  the   appellant   says   about   having
             previously told UKBA about the conviction  in  an  application
             submitted via an Embassy, the  appellant  must  have  realised
             that his answer was not truthful.  The appellant's application
             therefore did fall for automatic refusal under para 322(1A)."
6.   The appeal against the decision to refuse further leave to  remain  was
    therefore dismissed, but the appeal against the  removal  decision  was
    allowed on the basis that it was not in accordance with the law.

Grounds and Submissions

7.   Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal on the basis that it  was  arguable  that
    the judge had erred in her assessment of whether  the  requirements  of
    para 245ZX(h) were met and that she had not made  a  clear  finding  on
    whether the appellant had been dishonest when he failed to disclose his
    conviction to the respondent, given his evidence that he  had  informed
    an Entry Clearance Officer of it.

8.   At the hearing before me it was conceded by Mr  Duffy  that  the  judge
    had erred in law in her assessment of  whether  the  grant  of  further
    leave would lead to the appellant spending more than three years in the
    UK as a Tier 4 Migrant as his first course did not count because  leave
    was granted as a student and not under the points based scheme.

9.   Mr Solomon submitted that when assessing para 322(1A),  the  judge  had
    failed to reach any adequate findings on the material matter of whether
    the appellant had completed the form dishonestly, particularly  in  the
    light of the fact that he had given an innocent explanation,  and  that
    an incorrect statement was not necessarily false.  He referred  to  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in AA (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 773.  He argued that  the  fact
    that incorrect information had been given did not necessarily mean that
    it was dishonestly given.

10.  Mr Duffy submitted that it was clear from  the  judge's  findings  that
    she was satisfied the appellant had been dishonest.

Assessment of whether the Judge Erred in Law

11.  I am not satisfied that the judge erred in law  in  her  assessment  of
    whether a false representation or a failure to disclose material  facts
    had been made within para 322(1A).  This provides that leave to  remain
    is to be refused

         "... where false representations have been made ... (whether or not
         material to the application and whether or not to  the  applicant's
         knowledge) or material facts have not been disclosed in relation to
         the application ..."

    The judge  properly  directed  herself  that  the  burden  lay  on  the
    respondent to prove any contested precedent fact  when  assessing  para
    322.

12.  The explanation the appellant put forward was that he did not think  he
    needed to declare the conviction as he had previously disclosed  it  in
    an earlier application.  It was for the judge to decide what weight  to
    give to that explanation.  She  found  that  the  appellant  must  have
    realised that his answer was not truthful.  That was a finding open  to
    her on the evidence before her.  The question at section I1  is  clear.
    It reads;

         "Have you ever been convicted of a criminal offence either in  the
        UK or in another country?"

     The appellant ticked the box "No".  Further, he signed the  declaration
    at the end of the form, which included the following:

         "The information given in my application is complete and is true to
         the best of my knowledge and belief."

     By finding that the appellant must have realised that  his  answer  was
    not truthful, the judge was clearly satisfied that the  respondent  had
    established that the answer was given dishonestly.

13.  Therefore, although it is accepted  that  the  judge  was  wrong  about
    whether the provisions of para 245ZX(h) were engaged, her findings that
    a false representation had been made or that a material  fact  had  not
    been disclosed were properly open to her for the reasons she gave.   In
    the light of the date when the removal decision was made, that decision
    was set aside as not in accordance with the law.  That decision remains
    to be made by the respondent.  As I indicated at  the  hearing,  it  is
    open to the appellant  to  make  any  further  representations  to  the
    respondent before that decision is made.

Decision

14.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law on the  issue  of  para  245ZX(h).
    This is not a case where the decision should be set aside as  leave  to
    remain   fell   to   be   refused   in   the   light   of   the   false
    representation/failure  to  declare  a  material  fact  made   in   the
    application form.  Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.






Signed                                  Date: 24 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

