
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/10288/2015
                                                               IA/10293/2015
                                                               IA/10304/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, Bream's        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Buildings                            |                                     |
|On 21st March 2016                   |On 25th April 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               (1) [MARY O A]
                                  (2) [A F]
                                  (3) [K O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Wale Adelakun (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge D A Pears,  promulgated  on  16th  September  2015,  following  a
    hearing at Richmond Magistrates' Court, on 27th August  2015.   In  the
    determination, the judge dismissed the appeals of [Mary OA], [AF],  and
    [KO].  The Appellants  subsequently  applied  for,  and  were  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  They comprise a  family  of  a
    mother and her two children.  The first Appellant, the mother, was born
    on 21st November 1980.  The second Appellant, her daughter, was born on
    [ ] 2000 and is 14 years  of  age.   The  third  Appellant,  the  first
    Appellant's son, was born on [ ] 2009 and is  5  years  of  age.   They
    appeal against the decision of the Respondent  dated  2nd  March  2015,
    rejecting their claim for further leave to remain  in  the  UK  on  the
    basis of Article 8 of the ECHR and Section 55 of the BCIA 2009.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The first Appellant's claim is that  she  cannot  now  return  back  to
    Nigeria because of fear of domestic violence from  the  father  of  the
    second Appellant, and that given the length of time that the Appellants
    have been in the UK it would not be reasonable to expect them to do  so
    in any event.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had regard to the fact  that  the  refusal  letter  expressly
    refers to Section 55 of the BCIA and the best interests of the children
    (see paragraph 7), observing (at page 5) that, "your client's  children
    are not British nor settled in the UK" before dealing with the  reasons
    for why there would not be very significant obstacles to  their  return
    back to Nigeria.  The refusal letter observes that the children  cannot
    remain in the UK by virtue of the  child  route  because  the  mother's
    application has not been allowed (see paragraph 8).  Specific regard is
    given to Section 55 of the BCIA (paragraph 10).

 5. The judge has regard to the established case law in  this  jurisdiction
    (see paragraphs 11 to 18).  He then goes on to  consider  the  evidence
    thereafter.

 6. The judge's conclusions are that the first Appellant seems to have  had
    no leave since 2007 and has tried different routes to  remain  in  this
    country even though her position has been precarious  for  many  years.
    The judge ruled that even if he  was  to  accept  the  authenticity  of
    documents said to relate to the assault in Nigeria, he  would  have  to
    conclude that there is  no  risk  to  the  Appellants  from  the  first
    Appellant's first husband because there has been no  contact  with  him
    for over a decade.  The first Appellant could not make out a  case  for
    not returning to Nigeria based on historic  domestic  violence.   There
    were no very significant obstacles to her reintegration  into  Nigeria.
    As far as the children were concerned the judge took into account their
    age, how long they had been in education, what  stage  their  education
    reached, and to what extent they had been distanced from their country.
     The judge noted that the second Appellant is engaged in a GCSE  course
    but equally the third Appellant has only just started school.  They did
    not speak Yoruba, "but equally they will be returning to a  country  of
    their  citizenship,  where  their  mother  was  brought  up  and  their
    grandmother still lives" (paragraph 37).  The judge  went  on  to  hold
    that it had not been shown on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
    Appellants could remain here on the  basis  of  Appendix  FM,  EX.1  or
    paragraph 276ADE.  The Respondent had also discharged his duties  under
    Section 55 of the BCIA.  There were no  exceptional  circumstances  put
    forward (see paragraph 40).  The appeal could not succeed under Article
    8.

 7. The appeals were dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge had not considered  the
    best interests of the minor Appellants.  He had not carried out his own
    assessment of his findings.  He had simply referred to the way in which
    the Secretary of State had come to her own conclusions  on  the  issues
    before her.

 9. On 5th February 2016, permission to appeal was granted.

10. On 24th February 2016, a Rule 24 response was  entered  to  the  effect
    that the judge was fully  aware  that  he  had  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the children as  a  primary  consideration  and  gave  the
    correct self-direction to himself (at paragraphs 7, 10, 12 to 16).  The
    judge was right in saying (at paragraph 37) that the Appellants  "would
    be returning to their country of citizenship, where  their  mother  was
    brought up, and their grandmother still lives ...".

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me  on  21st  March  2016,  the  Appellants  were
    represented by Mr Wale Adelakun, a solicitor, and he  referred  to  his
    skeleton argument and the Grounds of Appeal.  The  high  point  of  his
    submissions before me were that the second Appellant had  now  been  in
    the UK for seven years and was 15 at the time of the application.   The
    third Appellant had been  here  for  six  years  at  the  time  of  the
    application.  Paragraph 276ADE and paragraph FM was applied but Section
    117B of the 2002 Act  was  not  properly  applied  at  all.   Moreover,
    Article 8 was not properly considered in any event.  The judge was also
    wrong in concluding that the first Appellant could return on the  basis
    that there was no continuing risk of domestic violence, any such threat
    being of historic significance only, but the judge does  not  refer  to
    any police report or any expert objective  evidence  to  come  to  this
    conclusion.  Mr Wale Adelakun submitted that the judge does  not  refer
    to SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at all.  He  does  not  look  at  the
    situation outside the Immigration Rules at all.  The fact is  that  the
    children have no cultural affinity with anyone in Nigeria.  The  father
    of the second Appellant has no parental responsibility for  the  child.
    The best interests of the children  were  not  served  by  accompanying
    their mother to Nigeria.

12. For her part, Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied upon on the Rule 24 response.
     She submitted that the "domestic violence" area has not  been  granted
    permission by the judge.  The only issue is that  of  assessment.   All
    the relevant case law, however, was here cited  by  the  judge  in  the
    determination.  This is clear from  paragraph  11  onwards.   The  best
    interests of the children have to be with their mother.  It is not  the
    case that the judge does not embark upon a judicial assessment  of  the
    issues himself.  This is clear from paragraph 37 of  the  determination
    where the judge sets out the various factors from (a) to (e)  and  then
    goes on to explain what he has regard to, observing that  although  the
    second Appellant has engaged on a GCSE course, the third Appellant  has
    only just started school, and he is  aware  that  none  of  them  speak
    Yoruba, but that they would equally be  returning  to  the  country  of
    their citizenship.  He goes on to say that, "I have  to  weigh  up  the
    fact that they will all be returning as a  family  unit  and  the  poor
    immigration history of their mother".  Accordingly, the assessment  had
    been undertaken and any criticism in this regard was unfounded.  As far
    as Section 55 was concerned, the judge held  that  the  Respondent  had
    discharged this duty and the judge gave clear and  reasonable  findings
    for this.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  This was a case where the judge does have proper regard to
    the material facts and the relevant law.  The suggestion that the  case
    of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 has not been applied is  misconceived
    because that makes it clear that there must be  something  "compelling"
    about a claim for it to  succeed  on  Article  8  grounds  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, and  in  this  case  the  judge  has  explained  (at
    paragraph 37) why this is not the case.  It is  true  that  the  eldest
    child, the second Appellant, is now embarking upon GCSE exams  and  has
    been here for over seven years  and  this  does  bring  into  play  the
    considerations in Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT  00197,  but  the  essential
    issue is how the "best interests" of the children are to be served  and
    the judge has here considered this issue.  It  needs  to  be  borne  in
    mind, moreover, that in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 it  was  affirmed  that,
    where children have no independent  lives  of  their  own,  their  best
    interests are  served  by  being  with  the  parent  who  has  parental
    responsibility, and this is the  case  here  as  well.   The  Appellant
    cannot point to any exceptional circumstances  that  would  lead  to  a
    different result.  It is  true  that  they  do  not  speak  the  Yoruba
    language but the judge has taken this  into  account  and  has  reached
    conclusions that were open to him.

Notice of Decision

14.  There  is  no  material  error  of  law  in   the   original   judge's
    determination.  The determination shall stand.

15. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    21st April 2016
