
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10242/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 August 2015                             |On 30 September 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Gulam Abbas
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Iqbal, instructed by Law Lane Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Secretary of State is the appellant before the Upper  Tribunal.   I
    shall refer to Mr Abbas as the claimant herein.

 2. On 21 October 2013 the claimant applied for an EEA residence card as an
    extended family member of his brother, Mr Waris -  a  German  national.
    The application was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision  of
    12 February 2014, ostensibly for the following reasons:

         "You have not provided any evidence of your dependency on your  EEA
         national sponsor at any time, either in Pakistan or in  the  United
         Kingdom.  You have not provided any evidence that your  (sic)  were
         dependent  on  your  EEA  national  sponsor  immediately  prior  to
         entering the United Kingdom as required under  Regulation  8(2)(a),
         in addition, we have not received any evidence that you  have  been
         dependent upon your EEA national sponsor since entering the  United
         Kingdom as required under Regulation 8(2)(c)."

 3. The claimant appealed this decision to the First-tier Tribunal and  the
    appeal was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fletcher-Hill  in  a
    determination signed on 28 October  2014.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's
    conclusions, found in paragraphs 56 to 61 of its determination, can  be
    summarised thus:

        i) The sponsor, Mr Waris, is a qualified person;

       ii)  The  claimant  and  sponsor  have  lived  together  since   the
           claimant's arrival in the United Kingdom in 1997;

      iii) The claimant's brother, Mr Waris, has  been  a  German  national
           since at least 2006;

       iv) The claimant lived in the same household as Mr Waris in Pakistan
           between 1965 and 1980 and has done  so  in  the  United  Kingdom
           since 1997; and,

        v) The wives and children of both the claimant and  Mr  Waris  also
           lived in the family home  in  Pakistan  after  their  respective
           marriages in 1982 and 1984, and continued  to  do  so  until  Mr
           Waris' wife and family joined him in the United Kingdom in  2010
           or 2011.

 4. For these reasons the First-tier Tribunal found the claimant to  be  an
    extended family member of Mr Waris for the purposes of regulation 8  of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 5. The Secretary of State sought and obtained permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, thus the matter came before me.

Error of Law

 6. At a hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 20 March 2015 it was properly
    conceded on behalf of the claimant that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in failing: (i) to consider whether Mr Waris had  become  an  EEA
    national prior to 2006 and, if so, (ii) to determine when he had become
    an EEA national.  A finding on these matters was  necessary  given  the
    other findings made by the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. As a consequence I  set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in a decision given orally at the hearing  of  20  March  2015
    and, thereafter, reduced to writing on 26 March.

Remaking of the decision under appeal

 8. At the hearing of  20  March  Mr  Iqbal  indicated  that  he  had  been
    instructed that evidence could readily be obtained to demonstrate that:
    (i) Mr Waris had become an EEA national  in  1996,  (ii)  that  he  had
    travelled to Pakistan in 1996 after he had become an EEA  national  and
    (iii) that at that time the claimant was living in Mr Waris'  household
    in Pakistan.  In such circumstances, and  without  objection  from  the
    Secretary of State, I adjourned the re-making of the decision  until  a
    later date so as to enable the claimant to obtain such evidence.

Legal Background

 9. It is necessary at this stage to set out briefly the  regulations  that
    are pertinent to a decision  in  this  appeal.   Regulation  8  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006  (2006/1003)  is  headed  "Extended
    Family Member" and reads:

     Regulation 8(1) reads:

         "In these Regulations 'extended family member' means a  person  who
          is not a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under  Regulation
          7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions in  paragraph
          (2), (3), (4) or (5)."

    Regulation 8(2) continues:

         "A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the  person
         is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his  civil  partner
         and -

         (a)  the person is residing in a  country  other  than  the  United
             Kingdom and is dependent upon the EEA national or is a  member
             of his household;

         (b)  the person satisfied the condition in (a) and is  accompanying
             the EEA national to the United Kingdom or wishes to  join  him
             there; or

         (c)  the person satisfied  the  condition  in  paragraph  (a),  has
             joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues to
             be dependent upon him or to be a member of his household."

    And then Regulation 8(6) says:

        "In these Regulations 'relevant EEA national' means, in relation to
        an extended family member, the EEA national who is or whose  spouse
        or civil partner is the relative of the extended family member  for
        the purpose of paragraph (2), (3) or (4) or the EEA national who is
        the partner of the extended  family  member  for  the  purposes  of
        paragraph (5)."

10. Turning to the regulations relating to the issuing of an EEA  residence
    card, these are found in regulation 17 of the 2006  EEA  Regulations  -
    the relevant provision in this  appeal  being  regulation  17(4)  which
    reads:

         "The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to  an  extended
         family member not falling within Regulation 7(3) who is not an  EEA
         national on application if -

          a) the relevant EEA national in relation to the  extended  family
             member is a  qualified  person  or  an  EEA  national  with  a
             permanent right of residence under Regulation 15; and

          b) in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of  State
             appropriate that to issue the residence card."

Further evidence

11. By the time the matter came back before me on 26  August  the  claimant
    had produced the original of a German passport, bearing Mr Waris' name,
    date of birth and photograph - such passport having been issued  on  11
    July 1996 and being valid until 10 July 2006. It  contains  a  multiple
    entry visa for Pakistan issued on 28 October 1996.

12. The claimant also gave oral evidence to the effect that  Mr  Waris  had
    travelled to Pakistan in November 1996 had returned to the UK  in  July
    1997. When in Pakistan Mr Waris had resided in the same  house  as  the
    claimant's, the claimant's wife and children, his other  brothers,  his
    sister in law, niece and his father. His mother had passed away a  long
    time previously. This was the family house that he (the appellant)  had
    grown up in with, amongst others, Mr Waris.

13. Mr Waris gave oral evidence broadly to the same effect.

Submissions

14. Mr Walker accepted the authenticity  of  Mr  Waris'  passport  and  the
    stamps contained therein. He  also  accepted  the  truth  of  the  oral
    evidence given. He submitted, however, that the claimant had not  lived
    in Mr Waris' household in Pakistan between 1996 and 1997 or, indeed, at
    any time subsequent to Mr Waris becoming an EEA national. The house  Mr
    Waris resided in whilst in Pakistan between November 1996 and July 1997
    was a communal household headed by the claimant's father.

15. It was further submitted that the meaning to be ascribed to  the  words
    "member of his household" in regulation 8 of the 2006  EEA  Regulations
    has already been the subject of consideration by the Court of Appeal in
    KG (Sri Lanka) and AK (Sri  Lanka)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  13.  It  is  not
    sufficient for the claimant to demonstrate merely that he had lived  in
    the same house as the relevant EEA national in 1996 to 1997, but rather
    he had to show something more to demonstrate that  he  had  to  been  a
    member of the EEA national's household at this time.

16. In his submissions (made in writing on 4 September 2015) Mr Iqbal  drew
    the Tribunal's attention to passages in the decisions of Moneke (EEA  -
    OFMs) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00341 (IAC), RK (OFM - membership of house  -
    dependency) India [2010] UKUT 421 (IAC), KG (Sri Lanka) and SM  (India)
    v ECO (Mumbai) [2009] EWCA Civ 1426, thereafter asserting as follows:

         "16. On the facts of this appeal the appellant and his EEA national
         (sic) have lived in the same house since their  respective  births.
         They never lived separate from each other  in  Pakistan.  Following
         their respective marriages their wives moved into the  same  house.
         The EEA national's wife and children moved to the UK in  2010/2011.
         It is thus the family home.

         17 Although it appears from domestic authorities that in order  for
         a house to be considered at the EEA national's household either the
         EEA national has to be the owner of the house  or  the  leaseholder
         but, as far as research conducted on behalf  of  the  appellant  is
         concerned, there is (sic) such authority from the ECJ which support
         this view or even the contrary view.

         18 It is  arguable  that  in  many  countries  the  headship  of  a
         household depends on culture and traditions.

         19 In any event the Upper Tribunal has had the benefit  of  hearing
         evidence from the appellant and from his sponsor. The  Tribunal  is
         therefore invited, strictly on the  balance  of  probabilities,  to
         find the appellant has lived in Pakistan (sic) a member of the  EEA
         national's household in 1996/97."

Discussion and Decision

17. The issues I must determine are:  (i)  when  Mr  Waris  became  an  EEA
    national and (ii) whether the  claimant  was  a  member  of  Mr  Waris'
    household in Pakistan after Mr Waris became an EEA national.

18. As to the first of these issues, it is now  properly  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State that Mr Waris became a German, and therefore an EEA,
    national in July  1996.  I  also  accept  this  to  be  so,  given  the
    production of Mr Waris' original passport.

19. Mr Walker further accepts, as I do, that Mr Waris travelled to Pakistan
    in November 1996 and remained there until  approximately  July  1997  -
    living in the same house as the claimant, amongst other of  the  family
    members, during such time; this being the same house that  he  and  his
    siblings grew up in.

20. Turning to the meaning  of  "a  member  of  his  [the  EEA  national's]
    household" - found in regulation 8(2) of the  2006  EEA  Regulations  -
    although this has been the subject of consideration by both  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the Court of Appeal, I need only set out the following.

21. In KG (Sri Lanka) the Court of Appeal considered a matter in which the
    appellant had come to the  United  Kingdom  from Sri  Lanka,  made  an
    unsuccessful claim for asylum but remained in  this  country  for  some
    years without leave and then applied for a residence card on the  basis
    of regulation 8, as an extended family member of an EU citizen who  had
    gone from Sri Lanka to Germany, had made a successful claim to asylum
    and acquired German citizenship. He had then come to the United Kingdom
    in the exercise of his rights as an EU  citizen,  entering  the  United
    Kingdom over 5 years after KG. The appellant AK  was  in  a  factually
    similar position, advancing a claim by reference to a relative who  had
    gone from Sri Lanka to France and  had  acquired  French  citizenship
    before entering the United Kingdom.

22. Under the heading "Members of  the  household  of  the  Union  citizen"
    Buxton LJ (with the agreement  of  Hooper  and  Smedley  LJJ)  said  as
    follows:
           "[77] There was some tendency in the argument before us to  read
           this requirement as one of being members of the same  household;
           or, as  was  said  on  behalf  of  AK,  members  of  a  communal
           household. That is not what Directive 2004/38 says, nor was that
           the condition in Regulation 1612/68, which requires the  OFM  to
           have been, in relation to the Union citizen, under his roof, not
           under the same roof. It seems very likely that the assumption is
           that the household will indeed  have  been  that  of  the  Union
           citizen, that is, that he was in colloquial terms  head  of  it,
           the relations were under his roof, and  on  that  basis  he  can
           reasonably wish to be accompanied by the members of it  when  he
           leaves for another country. If, on the other hand,  the  liberty
           extends to what might be called collateral members of  the  same
           household, then it is very difficult to  see  why  for  instance
           cousins with  a  close  relationship  but  not  actually  living
           together are excluded; or why, to give a  concrete  example,  it
           should be crucial to the case of AK that he was  living  in  the
           same house, rather than the same street, as his cousin.
           [78] KG asserts membership of the Union citizen's household, but
           the household in their case was clearly that of  their  parents.
           AK asserts that the household headed  by  his  parents  was  the
           household of his seventeen year old cousin who was living  there
           with her own parents. That seems to be an abuse of language. The
           claim also demonstrates the reach of the appellants'  case.  The
           household in question was lived in by fourteen  people,  all  of
           whom if living unlawfully in the United  Kingdom  would  on  the
           appellants' argument qualify for a residence permit as  soon  as
           the Union citizen relative arrived here. To them would  have  to
           be added any other relatives of the Union citizen with whom  she
           happened to have lodged or shared a flat either in Sri Lanka  or
           in any other country that she  passed  through  on  her  way  to
           France."

23. Nothing that is said by the Court of Appeal in SM India casts doubt  on
    the aforementioned analysis and such analysis was specifically approved
    by the Court of Appeal in Bigia and others v ECO [2009] EWCA Civ 79  at
    [43].

24. Applying this rationale to the facts of the instant case  it  is  clear
    that  the  claimant  has  failed  to  demonstrate  to  the  balance  of
    probabilities that he was a member of Mr Waris' household  in  Pakistan
    between November 1996 and July 1997, or indeed at any other time  after
    Mr Waris became an EEA national and prior to the claimant's arrival  in
    the UK. When coming to this conclusion I have had full  regard  to  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal and to the evidence before me.

25. Whilst the claimant clearly lived it the  same  property  as  Mr  Waris
    during  this  period  of  time,  the  evidence  does  not  support  the
    contention that Mr Waris was the head of the household, or  that  there
    were any other features of his residence therein which should  lead  to
    the conclusion that it was Mr Waris' household.   I  observe  that  the
    claimant's father was still alive at this time and living in  the  same
    house.

26. It has not been suggested that the claimant was dependent on  Mr  Waris
    after Mr Waris became an EEA national and  to  prior  to  the  claimant
    travelling to the UK. In any event, the evidence does  not  demonstrate
    to the balance of probabilities that this was so.

27. For this reason  I  conclude  that  the  claimant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of regulation 8 of the 2006 EEA  Regulations  (or  Article
    3(2)  of  2004/38).  Consequently,  the  claimant's  appeal   must   be
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's determination contains an error on a point of  law
and is set aside.

Having re-made the decision on Mr Abbas' appeal for myself I dismiss it.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 18 September 2015

