
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10740/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 March 2015                              |On 13 March 2015             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                             MOHAMMAD IKRAM BAIG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr S Hosein, AQ Archers solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant,  a  national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
  Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  his
  application for leave to remain on the basis  of  his  family  life  with
  Asmayati Asmayati, an Indonesian citizen with Indefinite Leave to  Remain
  in the UK.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith dismissed the  appeal  and
  the appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

2. The appellant's case is that he entered the UK in September 2003  with  a
  visit visa valid for six months. He did not  leave  the  UK.  He  met  Ms
  Asmayati in 2011 and they married in an Islamic traditional  ceremony  on
  10 July 2011. He was arrested on 1 August  2013  and  detained  until  21
  October 2013. He applied on 2 August 2013 for  leave  to  remain  as  the
  spouse of Ms Asmayati. The appellant asserts that his family in  Pakistan
  do not approve of his wife and  that  he  and  his  wife  would  find  it
  difficult to settle in Pakistan without the help of  his  family.  It  is
  asserted that they could not relocate to Indonesia.

3. In the reasons for  refusal  letter  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
  appellant and his wife have a genuine and  subsisting  relationship.  The
  respondent considered Ex 1 of Appendix FM and decided that there  are  no
  insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's family life with his  partner
  continuing outside the UK. The respondent considered paragraph 276ADE and
  concluded that the appellant does not meet the requirements of  paragraph
  276ADE (vi) as he continues to have ties in Pakistan.

4.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Griffith  heard  oral  evidence  from   the
  appellant and his wife and  concluded  that  their  evidence  as  to  the
  difficulties they would face in Pakistan amount to economic  difficulties
  and to the associated disruption to their daily lives of moving  to  live
  in Pakistan. She concluded that  whilst  removal  to  Pakistan  would  be
  'difficult  and  disruptive'  such  difficulties  would  not  amount   to
  'insurmountable obstacles' [37].

5. This assessment is challenged in the grounds of appeal on the basis  that
  the Judge failed to give proper weight to a number of factors. Mr  Hosein
  accepted that the grant of Permission to Appeal is limited  to  the  sole
  issue as to whether the Judge had erred in failing  to  consider  whether
  the appellant's wife would be afforded entry clearance to Pakistan and in
  failing to give consideration to the fact that the appellant and his wife
  are different nationalities in considering the  difficulties  they  would
  face in Pakistan.

6. Mr Hosein accepted that the issue  of  entry  clearance  to  Pakistan  or
  Indonesia was not raised by the appellant at the hearing  in  the  First-
  tier Tribunal and that  there  was  no  evidence  before  the  First-tier
  Tribunal Judge as to any possible difficulties obtaining a visa.  However
  he submitted that the Judge should have taken judicial notice of the fact
  that the appellant's wife would be required to obtain a visa.

7. However paragraph 14 of the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  reminded  the
  appellant that the onus is on him to show that it is not possible for his
  wife to relocate to Pakistan in order to demonstrate that this  would  be
  an insurmountable obstacle. The appellant did not raise this in the First-
  tier Tribunal let alone provide any evidence to demonstrate that his wife
  could not relocate to Pakistan. In my view even if the  Judge  had  taken
  judicial notice of the requirement for either the appellant or  his  wife
  to obtain a visa to go to Pakistan or Indonesia it would have been beyond
  the realms of judicial notice to have reached any conclusions as  to  the
  likelihood of either party being refused such a visa.  I  do  not  accept
  that the Judge could have reached a finding on this issue in the  absence
  of evidence.

8. Mr Hosein relied on the decision of the High Court in Aliyu &  Another  v
  SSHD [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin) where Deputy High Court Judge Grubb said:

      "65.     In my judgment, it would be sufficient for the  Secretary  of
      State to take the factors I have identified into account in  assessing
      whether there were "exceptional circumstances" applying the  criterion
      of whether the circumstances were  "compelling"  such  as  to  produce
      "unjustifiably harsh  consequences"  so  as  to  outweigh  the  public
      interest."

9.  Mr  Hosein  submitted  that  relocation  to  Pakistan  would   lead   to
  unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant and his wife.  However
  the Court in Aliyu was dealing with the consideration  of  an  Article  8
  claim outside the Rules and refers to a completely different test to that
  of 'insurmountable obstacles'.

10. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  this  appeal  concluded  that  the
  appellant  and  his  wife  would  face  difficulties  and  disruption  in
  relocating to  Pakistan  but  took  into  account  a  number  of  factors
  including the fact that they both speak English, they have  relocated  in
  the past - the appellant's wife spent  six  years  working  in  Singapore
  before coming to the UK where she is employed,  they  are  both  in  good
  health and have work experience  and  they  would  not  be  destitute  in
  Pakistan even if they did not have the support of the appellant's family.
  The First-tier Tribunal Judge acknowledged that  the  appellant  and  his
  wife would prefer to remain in the UK and that their standard  of  living
  in Pakistan might not  be  commensurate  with  that  they  are  currently
  enjoying in the UK, however the Judge concluded that  these  difficulties
  would not amount to insurmountable obstacles. This was a finding properly
  open to the Judge on the basis of the evidence before her.

11. Accordingly I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not
  make an error of law in the determination of this appeal.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Signed
                       Date: 12 March 2015



A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal












