



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/10883/20I4

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 April 2015                           |On 27 May 2015             |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr MANDEEP SINGH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent



    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
    For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.    The appellant in this appeal before me is the  Secretary  of  State
      who appeals against the decision of Judge Reidy Flynn, a Judge of  the
      First Tier Tribunal, allowing the appeal of  the  respondent,  Mandeep
      Singh, a citizen of India.


   2.   The respondent had been refused  further  leave  to  remain  by  the
      appellant on 13 February 2014 for reasons specified  in  her  decision
      letter. The appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  was  heard  at
      Taylor House on 17 October 2014. No one was present at the  hearing  -
      neither the appellant  Mandeep  Singh  nor  a  representative  of  the
      Secretary of State. The appellant's solicitors had requested that  the
      appeal be determined on papers and the respondent had  not  sought  an
      oral hearing either. Accordingly the appeal was determined on  papers.
      Judge Reidy  Flynn  allowed  the  appeal  for  reasons  given  in  the
      determination promulgated on 26 November 2014.

   3.    The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to  appeal
      the decision of the Judge Reidy Flynn by Judge Brennan, a Judge of the
      First Tier Tribunal. In the decision  dated  15  January  2015,  Judge
      said, "The grounds on which permission to appeal is sought submit that
      the Judge misdirected herself as to the provisions of the  Immigration
      Rules, in particular paragraph 41-SD of Appendix A and paragraph 245AA
      or failed  to  apply  those  provisions.  These  grounds  are  clearly
      arguable."

   4.   For the hearing of the appeal  before  me  the  solicitors  who  had
      represented the Mr Singh previously had written to say that they  were
      no longer representing him. Mr Singh was not present and  nor  had  he
      sent any explanation for his absence or a request for  adjournment  of
      the appeal. I noted from the case file  that  he  had  been  sent  the
      notice of hearing on 25 February 2015 by first class post as  had  his
      solicitors, Farani.Javed.Taylor Solicitors.

   5.   In the circumstances and acting in the spirit of the Procedure Rules
      enjoining expeditious  disposal  of  appeals,  I  proceeded  with  the
      hearing in the absence of Mr Singh.

   6.   Having carefully gone through the written decision  of  Judge  Reidy
      Flynn, I find that the grounds tendered in support of the  application
      are made out. The relevant provisions ie. Appendix A  para  41-SD  are
      mandatory and do not give  discretion  to  look  at  reasons  for  non
      production of specified evidence under para 41-SD.  The  Secretary  of
      State's reliance on the decision made by the Upper Tribunal in  Fayyaz
      [2014] UKUT 00296 (IAC) is sound.

   7. The decision of Judge Reidy Flynn is accordingly set aside as it is in
      material errors of law. I remake the decision and find no evidence  of
      compliance by Mr Singh with the relevant mandatory requirements of the
      Rules - para 41 SD.  The  appeal  that  he  had  brought  against  the
      Secretary of State's decision must therefore be dismissed.


K Drabu CBE
Date:     22 May 2015
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.

Anonymity Direction:
On the facts of this case anonymity direction is neither necessary nor
appropriate.

Fee Award
The direction made by Judge Reidy Flynn is reversed as the appeal  has  been
dismissed and there can be no award on fees.

K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
