
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10728/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th July 2016                             |On 5th August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR TARIQUL ISLAM MINTU
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Torr, instructed by Howard Kennedy LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal,  that  is  Mr  Mintu  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 30th December 1983 and
    he appealed against the decision of the respondent of 3rd March 2015 to
    refuse to vary his leave in the United Kingdom under paragraph 276B  of
    the Immigration Rules  as  he  claimed  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence in the United Kingdom.  His appeal was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson who clearly set out the relevant  Immigration
    Rules  and  the  applicable  burden  and  standard  of  proof   between
    paragraphs 11 to 17 of his decision.

 3. As set out by the judge it was the appellant's primary  case  that  his
    period of residence in the United Kingdom was continuous.   The  detail
    of the background is best encapsulated by a recitation of  the  judge's
    own decision and I have highlighted key points by underlining. The  nub
    of the matter  is  the  Secretary  of  State's  production,  or  rather
    otherwise, of a letter written by the Secretary of State and dated  8th
    June 2016.

 4. The judge set out as follows:

         "19. The respondent acknowledges that  the  appellant's  period  of
             residence in the United Kingdom was continuous from  the  date
             of his arrival as a student on 22  November  2004  until  2007
             and, thereafter, again from  some  point  after  21  September
             2009, when the appellant submitted a fresh application,  until
             the present time, the appellant's current  leave  having  been
             extended by virtue of section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971.
             The period in dispute relates primarily to  what  occurred  in
             2009.

         20.  First, I would comment that there is no  particular  challenge
             to the appellant's credibility  and  the  appellant's  primary
             case essentially is dependent upon certain specific factors to
             which I refer below."

 5. The judge then made  a  clear  finding  that  the  appellant  had  also
    established further leave until 30th June 2008 which did not appear  to
    be challenged by the Secretary of State (paragraph 22).

         "24. As indicated, the primary period in contention relates to  the
             appellant's application submitted on 29 April 2009.  It is the
             respondent's  contention  that  that  application   was   also
             rejected and it is common ground that further  leave  was  not
             granted to the appellant at that stage because he  omitted  to
             answer one question on one page of  the  relevant  application
             form; namely, specifically the  appellant  failed  to  confirm
             that he had never lived in Northern Ireland which,  logically,
             bearing in mind his history, should have been obvious  in  any
             event to the caseworker who considered that application.

         25.  In any event, what then occurred is that, on 8 June 2009,  the
             respondent  wrote  to  the  appellant,  as  a  result  of  the
             appellant's failure to answer the question referred  to,  and,
             as indicated, the respondent contends that his application was
             rejected at that stage, thereby ending his leave, whereas  the
             appellant's evidence is  somewhat  different.   It  is  common
             ground that, on 15  July  2009,  the  appellant  returned  the
             rejected  section  of  the  form,  with  the  single  question
             answered,  and  that  the   respondent   then   refused   that
             application, in any event, on 18 August  2009,  on  the  basis
             that the appellant's submitted bank statements were more  than
             a month old at the date of the application.  Essentially,  the
             respondent treated the appellant's communication  of  15  July
             2009 as a fresh application, whereas the appellant  considered
             it to be a submission of corrected documentation  in  relation
             to his original application of 29 April 2009.  Clearly, if the
             appellant's  interpretation  is   correct,   then   his   bank
             statements were not out-of-date whereas, if  the  respondent's
             interpretation is correct, then they were out-of-date.

         26.  The appellant's evidence, both oral and are  set  out  in  his
             statement, is actually to  the  effect  that  the  respondents
             letter to him of 8 June 2009 was actually in identical  format
             to the earlier letter of the respondent of 8 May 2007, whereby
             he was granted a period  of  time  in  which  to  correct  the
             omission in his April 2009 application  which,  the  appellant
             claims, he duly did and that, in reality, the  respondent  did
             not reject the appellant's April 2009 application but, rather,
             held it open for 28 days, pending the appellant rectifying the
             omission in question.

         27.  Unfortunately, the respondent's said letter of 8 June 2009 has
             not been produced.  I am informed that the appellant  has  not
             retained a copy of that letter  and  the  respondent  has  not
             produced it either.  What is clear, from the documents  before
             me,  is  that  the  appellant's  solicitors  despatched  three
             subject access requests to the respondent, on 3 July  2015,  3
             August 2015 and 3 September 2015, in which production of  that
             letter was requested, and yet the  respondent  has  still  not
             produced it.  Thus, whilst I acknowledge that  the  burden  of
             proof lies upon the appellant, the contention  raised  by  the
             respondent, to the  effect  that  the  appellant's  said  2009
             application was rejected  by  the  respondent,  has  not  been
             supported by the respondent producing a copy of the letter  in
             question, despite a number of requests having been made for it
             to be produced.  The appellant's evidence, which presented  as
             credible to me in the manner of its delivery,  is  clearly  to
             the  effect  that  that  letter,   whatever   the   respondent
             understood by it, did not reject  his  2009  application  but,
             rather,  gave  the  appellant  time  to  remedy  the  omission
             referred to.

         28.  The above issue is clearly critical to the  appellant's  claim
             that his residence in the United Kingdom has  been  continuous
             since his arrival in 2004 and, linked to  this,  is  the  fact
             that  the  appellant's  application  was  ultimately   refused
             because he allegedly produced bank statements which were  out-
             of-date, which contention, clearly, is incorrect,  if  I  find
             that the relevant date of the appellant's application in  2009
             was, indeed, 29 April 2009.

         29.  I would add that the situation has been  further  confused  by
             the respondent, due to the fact that, on  16  July  2009,  the
             respondent issued a letter to  the  appellant,  in  which  she
             stated that  his  application  had  been  approved,  she  then
             refusing that application on 18  August  2009  (see  pp  32-33
             appellant's main bundle)."

 6. At paragraph 30 the judge makes  a  clear  finding  of  fact  that  the
    respondent did not reject the appellant's  application  of  29th  April
    2009 but,  rather,  simply  asked  the  appellant  to  remedy  a  small
    deficiency in that application which he  duly  did.   The  judge  found
    therefore he had accrued ten years' lawful residence.

 7. Further the  judge  made  reference,  albeit  obliquely,  to  paragraph
    276B(ii) with his findings at paragraph 31 stating that  there  was  no
    specific  contention  by   the   respondent   that   there   were   any
    countervailing factors which would warrant the refusal of leave to  the
    appellant on suitability grounds, there being no contention at all that
    the appellant has a criminal record.  I will return to this point later
    in the decision.

 8. The decision of Judge Hodgkinson was challenged  by  the  Secretary  of
    State contending that the judge had reversed the burden  of  proof  and
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's requirement that the Secretary  of
    State evidenced the invalidation of the April 2009  application  was  a
    material error of law.  It was stated:

         "Whilst the letter of 8/6/09 was not  before  the  Tribunal  it  is
         highly material to any future  hearing  that  the  letter  did  not
         afford the appellant with a 28-day grace period as alleged  by  the
         appellant.  The letter  in  question  (as  attached)  categorically
         records the appellant's application of 29/4/09 as invalid."

 9. In the alternative it was asserted that the Secretary of State did  not
    consider the public interest requirement under  paragraph  276B(ii)  as
    the appellant failed to meet 276B(i) and  this  was  evidenced  by  the
    refusal letter which was silent in respect of the same.

10. The matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge C  Lane  and  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McGinty who adjourned the hearing directing that the 8th
    June 2009 letter was highly significant but  had  not  been  served  in
    accordance with Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal  Procedure  Upper  Tribunal
    Rules:

         "(a) if a party wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence that
             was not before the First-tier Tribunal, that party  must  send
             or deliver a notice to the Upper Tribunal and any other  party
             -

             (i)  indicating both the nature of the evidence; and

             (ii) explaining why it was not  submitted  to  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal; and

         (b)  when considering whether to admit evidence that was not before
             the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal must  have  regard
             to whether there has been unreasonable delay in producing that
             evidence."

    At that hearing Mr Kotas was not in a position to properly explain  why
    the letter of 8th June 2009 was not submitted to a First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge nor was he able to take full instructions in respect of what  was
    argued by Ms Torr to have been a six month delay between the claimant's
    request for a copy of the letter and its ultimate disclosure.

11. At that hearing the Tribunal noted in the interests of justice  that  a
    full and properly served written 15(2A) notice should be put before the
    Tribunal and equally that such a notice:

         "is also delivered to the  claimant  such  that  Ms  Torr  has  the
         opportunity of fully dealing  with  it.   Given  that  this  is  an
         extremely important document in this appeal it  is  important  that
         proper consideration be given as to whether or not such a  document
         should be admitted in evidence before the Upper Tribunal."

12. The matter was adjourned and three directions were given:

      1) The error of law appeal hearing is adjourned.

      2) The error of law appeal hearing is  to  be  relisted  before  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Rimington on 25th July 2016 at 10am sitting  at  the
         Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Field House,  15-25
         Breams Buildings, London, EC4A 1DZ.

      3) The Secretary of State shall send and deliver a Rule 15(2A)  notice
         to the Tribunal and to the claimant by 4pm on 11th July  2016.   No
         application under Rule 15(2A) shall be admitted if not made by that
         time and date.

13. At the hearing before me Ms Torr submitted that no Rule  15(2A)  notice
    to the Tribunal was delivered by the said date and she produced  a  fax
    from Howard Kennedy dated 12th July 2016 to the Immigration and  Asylum
    Chamber confirming that point.  A copy of an attendance note dated 13th
    July 2016 detailing a telephone conversation between the Howard Kennedy
    representative and the Secretary of State in which it was stated that a
    letter dated 8th July 2016 was sent to the Tribunal and Howard  Kennedy
    which appeared to have been a Rule 15(2A) notice.

14. Ms Torr at the hearing  before  me  confirmed  that  nothing  had  been
    received from the Home Office by letter and that  finally  a  copy  was
    emailed.

15. As I pointed out to Mr Tufan the direction from the Tribunal  was  very
    clear that the 15(2A) notice was to be delivered to both  the  Tribunal
    and to the other party.  I also note that the document said to  be  the
    Rule 15(2A) response did not comply with the Rule 15(2A) in  giving  an
    explanation as to why the production had not been complied with  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

16. It is quite clear from the decision of Judge Hodgkinson from  paragraph
    27 of his decision,  and  which  I  have  identified  above,  that  the
    appellant's solicitors dispatched three subject access requests to  the
    respondent on 3rd July 2015, 3rd August 2015 and 3rd September 2015  in
    which production of  this  letter  was  requested  and  yet  still  the
    respondent did not produce it.

17. As Ms Torr submitted at the hearing before me, the Secretary  of  State
    failed to comply with three directions in relation to production of the
    15(2A) notice.  First when the actual application for permission letter
    was sent there was no formal application under Rule  15(2A).   Secondly
    when permission was granted, a direction was issued to the extent  that
    if additional notice was to  be  served  then  Rule  15(2A)  should  be
    complied with within 21 days of that notice.  And thirdly the last  and
    final direction which has been set out above.

18. It is clear to me that the Secretary of State failed to comply with any
    of these directions and  therefore  I  refused  to  admit  the  further
    evidence in relation to the letter of 8th June 2015.

19. I find that Judge Hodgkinson has directed himself  to  the  burden  and
    standard of proof and I would further note that the principles in  Ladd
    and Marshall [1954] I WLR 1489 as encapsulated in R (Iran) [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982 paragraph 32 that:

         "The decision of the judge could only be overturned by the  use  of
         further evidence if it could be shown that

         (1)  the new evidence could not with reasonable diligence have been
             obtained for use at the trial (or hearing);

         (2)  the new evidence must be such that, if given it would probably
             have an important influence on the result of the  case  though
             it need not be decisive; and

         (3)  the evidence was apparently credible although it need  not  be
             incontrovertible."

20. It is clear that the new evidence could, with reasonable  diligence  on
    the part of the Secretary of State, have been obtained  and  indeed  it
    was requested.  The judge gave adequate and full reasoning as to why he
    proceeded on the basis that he did in terms of  each  party  evidencing
    the facts they asserted and as such I am  not  persuaded  that  he  has
    erred in law.

21. The authority Nixon (Permission to appeal: grounds) [2014]  UKUT  00368
    confirms  the  importance  of  the  parties  specifying   clearly   and
    coherently with appropriate particulars  the  errors  of  law  said  to
    contaminate the decision under challenge.  It is clear in this instance
    that the Secretary of State has, despite being in a position to  comply
    with the direction, failed to  do  so  and  this  does  in  fact  place
    unnecessary demands on the judiciary and  as  stated  "poorly  complied
    applications risk undermining the important value  of  legal  certainty
    and causing unfairness to the other party".

22. It is quite clear from the application that no explanation was given by
    the Secretary of State as to why the letter had not been placed  before
    the First-tier Tribunal in the first place despite numerous requests by
    the appellant's representatives.

23. I turn to consideration of paragraph 276B(ii).  Ms Torr submitted  that
    she had drawn the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  attention  to  the  CID
    notes which themselves had addressed paragraph 276B(ii).  That,  as  Mr
    Tufan indicated, would not necessarily  by  itself  indicate  that  the
    Secretary of State had indeed considered the second limb  of  paragraph
    276.  I acknowledge that the Secretary of State is the primary decision
    maker but it is clear that the Secretary  of  State  sets  out  in  her
    letter of 3rd March 2015 the full Rule and made  no  reference  to  the
    appellant failing to comply with that section.   Despite  the  contrary
    assertion in the respondent's grounds, the refusal  letter  quotes  the
    entirety of paragraph 276B and is followed by the passage found at page
    2 of 5 of the refusal letter (page 6 of the appellant's  bundle)  which
    states "your application has been considered on the basis of the  above
    Rules, in particular paragraph 276B(i)(a)".

24. The one point taken  by  the  Secretary  of  State  was  the  point  of
    continuous leave.  To that extent I find that the judge's  decision  to
    proceed to consider the matter in full at paragraph 31, as I  have  set
    above, indicates that it was open to him  to  proceed  with  his  final
    decision that the appeal was allowed  in  respect  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The judge clearly states that there is no  specific  contention
    by the respondent that there are any countervailing factors which would
    warrant the refusal of leave to the appellant on  suitability  grounds.
    To that extent the judge considered that the  Secretary  of  State  had
    addressed her mind to that point of discretion and  proceeded,  without
    any error of law, to make a substantive decision.

25. I therefore find there is no material error of law in the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson and the decision shall stand.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 3rd August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
