
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10246/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th August 2015                  |On 2nd December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                Gloria Offei
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Vincent Gyasi, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr R Hopkin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge P.A Grant-Hutchison) promulgated on 13th November  2014
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  on
    Article 8 grounds.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Ghana born on  19th  December  1982.  On
    20th December 2013 she applied for leave to remain as the spouse  of  a
    person present and settled in the United  Kingdom,  namely  Mr  Vincent
    Gyasi (hereafter "the Sponsor").

 3. The application was refused but on appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with the Sponsor and noted at paragraph 18 of his decision
    that the Appellant and Sponsor were expecting their first child.

 4. The judge concluded, it being conceded before him that;  the  Appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules;  that  there
    were no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Ghana and
    accordingly, went on to find that the  Appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    exception in Appendix FM of the Rules, namely EX.1.(b).

 5. The judge considered Article 8 in brief terms and  found  that  in  the
    absence of compelling circumstances there  was  no  arguable  case  for
    granting leave  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 6. The Appellant appealed. In particularising her grounds  of  appeal,  in
    essence, the Appellant said that she gave birth on  16th  October  2014
    and that the Sponsor had notified the Tribunal to that effect by way of
    email dated 20th October 2014. Along with that email were sent long and
    short birth certificates in respect of the child.

 7. We note that in accordance with what was expressed by  the  Sponsor  in
    that email he also requested that the contents therein be drawn to  the
    attention of the judge who heard the appeal.  We  also  note  that  the
    evidence  was  filed  with  the  Tribunal  before  the   decision   was
    promulgated on 13th November 2014.

 8. Before us, Mr Hopkin helpfully does not  dispute  that  the  email  and
    corresponding evidence was sent by the Sponsor to the Tribunal on  20th
    October - we note four days after the date of birth of  the  child.  We
    consider therefore that the Sponsor acted somewhat expeditiously.

 9. It is not clear to us, however, why the Sponsor's email was not brought
    to the attention of the judge and  this  is  somewhat  unfortunate.  It
    should have been. We also consider that that evidence was  material  to
    the substance of the decision and should have been taken into  account.
    The birth of  a  child  indicated  that  there  was  a  change  in  the
    Appellant's circumstances that could materially affect the  outcome  of
    the decision that was reached by the judge, particularly in view of the
    fact that the Sponsor is now a British citizen and his son is  entitled
    to British citizenship.

10. It is on that basis, although we take account of  Mr  Hopkin's  helpful
    submissions, we find that the judge did materially err in law. That is,
    we must say, as a consequence of no  fault  of  his  own  but,  we  are
    satisfied that a procedural irregularity has occurred in this  case  in
    the way that the proceedings were conducted and thereby an error of law
    has been committed. We thereby set aside the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal.

11. We do not consider that we are in a position to remedy the error and we
    agree with Mr Hopkin that the appropriate course in this case is to
    send the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal. This will allow the
    Appellant to submit further evidence should she wish to do so in
    support of an Article 8 claim. We send the matter back on that basis.
    The appeal is to be heard by a judge other than Judge P.A. Hutchison.

Notice of Decision

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.

13. We direct that the case be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]         Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral
