
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/10267/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 9 August 2016                              |On 22 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                             DOROTHEA HARLESTON
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Arkhurst (Caulker and Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Senior Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of Dorothea Harleston, a citizen of  Sierra  Leone
       born 18  November  1944,  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal of 20 January 2016 to dismiss  her  appeal,  itself  brought
       against the Respondent's decision of 27 February 2015 to  refuse  her
       application for indefinite leave to remain  outside  the  Immigration
       Rules.

    2. The application of 11 December 2014 was on the  basis  that  she  was
       wholly  dependent  on  her  daughter  who  was  settled   here,   and
       financially supported and accommodated her, whereas in  Sierra  Leone
       she had nobody to support her; she would also face dangers  from  the
       Ebola virus in Sierra Leone.

    3. The application was  refused,  the  Secretary  of  State  noting  the
       Appellant's entry to the United Kingdom as a visitor on  8  September
       2014  until  17  December  2014,  because  there  was  no  compelling
       compassionate case for leave outside the Rules, as

        a) She had spent her first 70 years in Sierra Leone and could adapt
           on return, it being  expected  that  she  could  resume  social,
           cultural or family ties there;

        b) Her daughter Dorothea could return to Sierra  Leone  to  support
           her;

        c) Alternatively her daughter and she could retain contact with one
           another via  modern  means  of  communication,  supplemented  by
           further visits if wished such as those that had taken  place  in
           March 2012, May and July 2013, and May and September 2014;

        d) Alternatively other family members such as her daughter's  three
           children  could  provide  help  and   support,   financial   and
           otherwise, via social media;

        e) The World  Health  Organisation  had  concluded  the  chance  of
           contracting Ebola was low.

    4. The First-tier Tribunal noted that the Appellant had arrived  in  May
       2014 and left the country from June until 8 September 2014 to  travel
       to the USA, whereupon  she  made  the  application  leading  to  this
       appeal. It opined that there was no justification for switching  from
       general visitor leave to that of dependent relative, and  found  that
       it was reasonable to expect the Appellant to return to  Sierra  Leone
       where there was very little real risk of contracting the Ebola virus,
       and where the public interest  outrode any family  life  between  her
       and the Sponsor. Having  regard  to  all  considerations  it  thought
       relevant, it dismissed the appeal.

    5. However, before  the  date  of  hearing,  on  11  January  2016,  the
       Appellant had written to the Tribunal  stating  that  she  no  longer
       wished to pursue her appeal. Unfortunately that was not drawn to  the
       attention of the Judge determining the appeal.

    6. Before me it was agreed that this was a material error  of  law  that
       vitiated the decision below. I agree. The express statement that  the
       Appellant wished to withdraw the appeal was patently  the  giving  of
       notice of the withdrawal of their appeal by providing to the Tribunal
       an appropriate written notice to such effect, as contemplated by Rule
       17(1) of The Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
       and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.

    7. As is shown by Rule 32 of the 2014 Procedure Rules, where a  document
       relating to the  proceedings  was  not  provided  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal at  an  appropriate  time,  it  may  set  aside  a  decision
       otherwise purporting to dispose of proceedings: the  availability  of
       this power at First-tier Tribunal level itself shows that overlooking
       material correspondence  where  unfairness  subsequently  results  is
       likely to amount to a material error  of  law.  The  same  conclusion
       comes from a consideration of public law principles:  clearly  it  is
       unfair for a person to receive a substantive decision regarding to  a
       matter which they no longer sought to contest.

    8. I accordingly  accepted  that  there  were  material  errors  of  law
       established in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

    9. The parties were agreed that I should  remake  the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal. I accordingly do so.

   10. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal should have been treated as
       withdrawn. No objection having been made to the attempt  to  withdraw
       it at the time or subsequently,  I  accept  that  the  Appellant  had
       sought to withdraw  her  appeal  pursuant  to  Rule  17(1)  the  2014
       Procedure Rules on 11 January 2015. The parties made  no  submissions
       before me as to whether I should approach the  matter  on  the  basis
       that the appeal should be treated as having been withdrawn under  the
       First-tier Tribunal Rules from early 2014, or whether  I  should  now
       treat it as  withdrawn  in  relation  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's  own
       procedure rules, ie The Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
       2008. As  the  agreed  objective  of  both  advocates  was  that  the
       proceedings below be treated as a nullity, I consider it  appropriate
       to take the former route and find that the appeal had been  withdrawn
       from the first working day after the fax was sent on 11 January 2015.



   11. I accordingly allow the appeal brought by the Appellant  against  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal. And I declare  that  her  appeal
       against the decision of the Respondent was withdrawn.

Decision:

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed. I declare that  her
appeal against the decision  of  the  Respondent  should  be  recognised  as
withdrawn.


Signed                                       Date: 10 August 2016


Judge Symes
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date: 10 August 2016


Judge Symes
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




