
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
IA/10908/2014

                                                IA/10913/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal|    Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12th April 2017                     |    On 9th May 2017                  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                             (1) mr abu zar khan
                             (2) mrs zarda begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr I Ali (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Hawden-Beal, promulgated on 18th September 2014, following a hearing at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 5th November 2014.  In  the  determination,
    the judge dismissed the appeals of Mr Abu Zar Khan and  his  wife,  Mrs
    Zarda  Begum.   The  Appellants  subsequently  applied  for,  and  were
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  They are a husband and  wife.
    They were born on 4th December 1926 and 1st January 1934  respectively.
    They appealed against the refusal  of  an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  under  paragraphs
    276ADE, 277C and Appendix FM of HC 395.  The decisions appealed against
    are dated 10th February 2014.  The essence of the Appellants' claim  is
    that they are dependent upon their son, Mr Mashkoor Hussain, are in old
    age, and suffer from a series of medical  conditions,  such  that  they
    cannot return back to  Pakistan,  having  originally  arrived  in  this
    country as visitors  with  only  temporary  leave  to  remain  in  this
    country.  The relevant facts and documentary material are  set  out  in
    the determination under appeal and I need not repeat it here.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge had regard to a medical report from Dr Qureshi of 18th August
    2014, who was of the opinion that both Appellants required the  ongoing
    support of the Sponsor and his family because of their ill-health.  The
    judge concluded, however, that there were no arguable good grounds  for
    granting leave outside the Rules because

         "The  Appellants  have  not  been  given  any  firm  or  definitive
         diagnosis of their conditions.  The first  Appellant  has  symptoms
         which  are  suggestive  of  TIAs  but  does  not  suffer  from  the
         dizziness, slurred speech, inability to communicate or weakness and
         numbness on one side of the body as per Dr Qureshi's report.  There
         had been no further investigations to confirm that he had  suffered
         from the TIAs or does have a  tachycardia.   The  second  Appellant
         does have gross cognitive impairment  but  has  not  been  actually
         diagnosed with vascular dementia.  They are both  on  inhalers  for
         asthma but they had those when in Pakistan." (paragraph 25)

 4. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge should have  considered
    Article 8 exceptionally outside the Immigration Rules and  conducted  a
    proportionality balancing exercise.  This is because the Appellants are
    an elderly couple with the second  Appellant  aged  70  and  the  first
    Appellant aged 82.  They are the parents of the  Sponsor,  Mr  Mashkoor
    Hussain and although they have two daughters living  in  Pakistan,  and
    one daughter living in the United Kingdom, it is their son who is in  a
    position to look after them in their failing health, given their  ages.
    On 3rd November 2014, the First-tier Tribunal determined that this  was
    nothing more than a disagreement with the findings of the judge.  There
    were no compelling circumstances highlighted in this case.

 6. However, on 20th February 2015, permission to appeal was granted on the
    basis that following Singh [2015] EWCA Civ  74  and  Ganesbalan  [2014]
    EWHC 2712, there was an arguable case here.  On 4th March 2015, a  Rule
    24 response was entered to the effect that the grounds  amounted  to  a
    mere disagreement.  The Appellants entered the UK on visit  visas.   It
    was perfectly open to them to return and obtain the  appropriate  entry
    clearance  with  required  evidence  as  adult   dependent   relatives.
    Moreover, at paragraph 8 of the  determination,  the  judge  noted  the
    previous Tribunal's findings, from which it was clear  that  the  judge
    considered the medical evidence along with the  circumstances  of  this
    individual appeal, and there was specialist nursing care  in  Pakistan.
    The desire not to receive nursing care in one's own country must be for
    good reason.  None had been provided.  The  judge's  determination  was
    sustainable.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing  before  me  on  12th  April  2017,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Ali of Counsel, who  handed  up  a  helpful  skeleton
    argument dated 12th April 2017, together with a  supplementary  witness
    statement from the Sponsor, Mashkool Hussain.   In  this  supplementary
    statement,  Mr  Hussain  highlighted   the   very   poor   memory   and
    concentration levels of both his parents, the fact that  they  were  on
    medication, the fact that he was the  only  son  who  could  take  full
    responsibility for his parents, the fact that his second  sister  lived
    40 miles away from the family home in Pakistan, and the fact  that  the
    parents now had a family life in this country with their grandchildren,
    such that they needed close attention and care which only family  could
    provide.

 8. Mr Ali began by submitting that, although it  was  the  case  that  the
    Appellants had entered the UK as visitors, the fact was that  they  had
    been in this country now for four years.  He drew my attention  to  the
    history of this case.  After the decision  of  Judge  Hawden-Beal,  was
    promulgated  on  18th  September  2014,  there  had  been  a  grant  of
    permission to appeal by UTJ Bruce on 20th February 2015, which  led  to
    the matter being heard in the Upper Tribunal by DUTJ McCarthy, with the
    decision being promulgated on 22nd October 2015.  Here found  there  to
    be an error of law.  However, he could not  proceed  further  with  the
    substantive hearing of the appeal because the interpreter  could  speak
    neither Urdu nor English, and DUTJ  McCarthy  himself  stated  that  he
    could not take matters  any  further  with  that  interpreter.   Before
    leaving the appeal he made it known that the evidence of the Appellants
    in relation to their health  condition  and  their  age  would  not  be
    required and they will be excused from giving further evidence.

 9. Unfortunately, when this matter went before  IJ  Andrew  at  Birmingham
    Sheldon Court on 17th June 2016, the judge took an  unsympathetic  view
    of the fact that the Appellants were not in attendance,  but  that  was
    only because DUTJ McCarthy had made it clear that they need not attend.
     What one was then  left  with  was  a  letter  from  Dr  Qureshi,  the
    consultant psychiatrist, dated 12th May  2016.   But  with  respect  to
    this, the judge was of the view that Dr  Qureshi  had  not  had  proper
    consultations with the  Appellants,  before  giving  his  opinion.   In
    short, both matters left a negative impression in the mind of IJ Andrew
    with the result of a refusal in the appeal.

10. However at the hearing itself, the Presenting Officer, Mr Proctor,  was
    clear that the medical evidence could not be challenged.  Judge Andrew,
    nevertheless, criticised Dr Qureshi's report (see paragraphs 14 to 20),
    in circumstances where Mr Proctor had accepted the report for  what  it
    said.    Indeed at page 5 of his report, Dr Qureshi discloses the  fact
    that he was  in  direct  communication  with  the  Appellant,  "through
    repeated questioning ...".  Insofar as the  particular  illnesses  were
    concerned, Mr Ali submitted that, given that we were talking here about
    a 90 year old and a 83 year old, there would be no question of "pulling
    the wool over the court's eyes" and because there were bound to be  age
    related illnesses with respect to  Appellants  of  this  age.   Indeed,
    Judge Andrew accepts this (at paragraph 21 of the determination).

11. That left the question of whether the Appellants could  turn  to  their
    daughters in Pakistan for assistance, but the judge took no account  of
    the fact that they were in no position to provide the  Appellants  with
    the day-to-day care which was available to them in the UK.

12. Finally, there was no reporting of information by the  Appellants  from
    the authorities and this was directly relevant to the issue of  Article
    8.  There was a letter from the Dudley Group NHS Foundation Trust dated
    20th September 2013 which stated, "you have been identified as possibly
    being an overseas visitor ...", before going on to  state  that,  "many
    thanks for providing me with the documents that  were  promised  to  me
    during our telephone communication ...".  Mr Ali  submitted  that  what
    this was in relation to was the Appellants making it quite  clear  that
    they were overseas visitors and may have to pay for their own treatment
    in this country.  In these circumstances,  the  extent  of  the  public
    interest here was not the same as  would  be  the  case  in  any  other
    removal case.   There  was  no  overstaying  by  them.   They  came  as
    visitors.  They then applied to remain here well within the duration of
    their existing leave.  There had been no illegal offending.  There  was
    no criminality.  Sufficient weight should now be attached to  the  fact
    that they  have  established  themselves  in  this  country  with  five
    grandchildren living with them, and being in receipt of  gender-related
    care.

13. For her part,  Mrs  Aboni  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response.   She
    submitted that adequate reasons were given by the judge  for  rejecting
    the  medical  evidence.   This  was  not  from  the  GP.   It   was   a
    psychiatrist's report from Dr Qureshi and it  did  not  speak  to  that
    which a GP's report would speak to.  The judge gave it  limited  weight
    as he was entitled to.  It was also  important  to  recognise  that  Dr
    Qureshi for his part recognised  the  limitations  that  he  was  under
    because he asked for further medical enquiries to be undertaken.

14. Finally, whilst it was accepted that the Appellants had not been in the
    UK unlawfully, they had only managed to  come  to  this  country  after
    their visit applications were  rejected  by  Entry  Clearance  Officers
    overseas, and then they appealed in this country  and  succeeded  at  a
    hearing, expressly on the basis of the assurances that they had  given,
    namely, to be making only a short family visit, before  returning  back
    to their country.  However, less than six months into their  time  here
    they had applied to remain here  permanently.   Section  117B  was  not
    irrelevant in these circumstances to the proportionality  and  decision
    reached by the judge.

15. In reply, Mr Ali submitted that none of Dr Qureshi's  reports  indicate
    that he was working on the basis  of  inaccurate  information.   He  is
    clear that the second Appellant, Mrs Begum, has "cognitive impairment".
     He also states that her condition is likely to deteriorate further  in
    the next five years.  He is clear that the first  Appellant,  Mr  Khan,
    has clear signs of dementia.  In these circumstances, if one has regard
    to paragraph 276ADE, it is  clear  that  there  are  "very  significant
    difficulties" in the Appellants returning back to Pakistan given  their
    ill-health, and the chances of that worsening over the next five years.
     They had spent four years now in the bosom of their family and if they
    were uprooted now, this would have serious consequences for them.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

17. First, the judge has taken into account  the  "various  reports  of  Dr
    Qureshi contained both within the Respondent's bundle, the  Appellants'
    bundle and sent under cover of correspondence" (paragraph 14).

18. Second, the critical analysis that the judge undertakes of Dr Qureshi's
    reports is entirely well-founded.  She states that there is no  mention
    of whether or not Dr Qureshi and the Appellants speak the same language
    (paragraph 15); that Dr Qureshi did not have before him the benefit  of
    any reports from the Appellants' GP (paragraph 16); and that Dr Qureshi
    himself is quite clear that "further investigations [are] to  be  made.
    There is nothing before me to indicate  that  any  such  investigations
    have been carried out" (paragraph 17).

19. Third, the judge does not reject out of hand Dr Qureshi's report at all
    but states that for the reasons that she has given "less weight" is  to
    be  placed  upon  this  report.   This  is  notwithstanding  the  judge
    accepting that "the Appellants are  suffering  from  some  age  related
    problems".  What the judge concludes, however, is that, "I am unable to
    accept they are as grave as has been suggested or that they require the
    amount of assistance suggested by the Sponsor" (paragraph 21).

20. Fourth,  the  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  nursing  or  care  home
    provisions to an acceptable paid assistance standard are not  available
    in Pakistan (see paragraph 23).  Finally, the judge did not ignore  the
    "cultural aspects", but rather found that they  should  be  taken  into
    account and drew attention to Dasgupta [2016] UKUT 00028 (see paragraph
    26).  She noted however the Appellants had lived in  Pakistan  for  all
    their lives apart from a relatively short period of time spent  in  the
    UK and that they had daughters there (paragraph 25).

21. I am, of course, aware that Mr Ali  has  argued  strenuously  and  most
    effectively on behalf of the Appellants.  I also have the assistance of
    his well compiled skeleton argument.   He  draws  attention  to  recent
    authorities  on  Article  8.   These,  however,  do  not   assist   the
    Appellants.  In fact, they point the other way.  He draws attention  to
    how the recent case of Treebhawon  (NIAA  2002  Part  5A  -  compelling
    circumstances test) [2107] UKUT 00013 (IAC), saw a  presidential  panel
    explain (at paragraph 45) that:

         "Certain observations are a posit.  First, (and importantly in  the
         present context), Parliament has chosen to devise distinct  regimes
         for foreign offenders (on the one hand) and  illegal  entrants  and
         unlawful overstayers (on the other).  Moreover, the public interest
         engaged in the deportation  of  foreign  national  offenders  is  a
         variable, depending upon the individual case.  Second, the recently
         promulgated decision of  this  Chamber  in  Kaur  (children's  best
         interests/public  interest  interfaces)  [2017]  UKUT  00014  (IAC)
         contains, at [22]-[24], a thesis on the words 'little  weight'  and
         the notional sliding scale which they entail.   Core  reasons  that
         this produces  the  result  that  in  some  cases  a  private  life
         developed during a period of unlawful or precarious  leave  in  the
         United Kingdom may qualify for  virtually  no  weight,  whereas  in
         others the quantity of weight to the attributed may  verge  on  the
         notionally moderate where the assessment is that  of  a  particular
         case, with its individual traits and circumstances, belongs to  the
         upper end of  the  'little  weight'  spectrum.   Reconsidered  this
         complementary to, and not in  conflict  with,  the  'little  weight
         flexibility' approach as passed in Rhuppiah."

22. Given that there is sliding scale, however, the proper distinction here
    is not between a lawful entrant and an unlawful entrant, but between  a
    person who entered on a visitor's visa, with the express  intention  of
    remaining only for a  temporary  period,  having  first  satisfied  the
    Immigration Tribunal that that was indeed the true intention, and  then
    seeking to remain here  within  the  six  months  of  arrival  in  this
    country, on the basis of ill-health, on which they had given assurances
    prior to coming to  this  country.  That  must  shift  the  balance  of
    considerations against the Appellant in favour of immigration  control,
    which is the public interest specified  in  Section  117B.   For  these
    reasons, the Appellants cannot succeed under Article 8  notwithstanding
    the four years of family life that they have developed with  their  son
    and five grandchildren.  The appropriate course of action is  for  them
    to return back to Pakistan and to make an application  to  re-enter  as
    dependent relatives, for which express  provision  is  made  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th May 2017



