
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10674/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                            david opeyemi alawode
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani, of Counsel instructed by ILAS (LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  7  September  1993  who
    entered Britain as a visitor on 4 November 2004  and  overstayed  after
    his leave expired in February 2005.  On 20  May  2013  he  applied  for
    indefinite leave  to  remain.   That  application  was  refused  and  a
    decision was made to remove him to Nigeria.   The  appellant  appealed.
    His  appeal  was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal
    Youngerwood in a determination promulgated on 3 October 2014.

2.   An application for permission to appeal was refused in  the  First-tier
    but then granted in the  Upper  Tier  by  Deputy  Judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Archer on 30 March 2015.  The appeal then came  before  Deputy
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal Juss who set aside the  decision  of  Judge
    Youngerwood and remade the decision allowing the appeal.  The basis  of
    his decision was that he incorrectly believed that  the  appellant  had
    lived in Britain for 22 years.

3.   On application to the Court of Appeal the decision of Deputy  Judge  of
    the Upper Tribunal Juss was set aside and the matter  remitted  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

4.   In these circumstances the appeal came before me to  determine  whether
    or not there was a material error of  law  in  the  decision  of  Judge
    Youngerwood.

5.   As stated above the appellant arrived in Britain in November 2004.   At
    that date he was aged 11.  He entered  Britain  with  his  brother  and
    since his  arrival  has  been  looked  after  by  his  uncle  and  aunt
    ostensibly on  the  basis  that  his  parents  had  been  in  financial
    difficulties in Nigeria.  The appellant's younger brother, with whom he
    had arrived in Britain,  has  now  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.

6.   Judge Youngerwood noted that Ms Nnamani, who appeared  before  him  had
    argued that the appellant "has no ties (including social,  cultural  or
    family) with the country to which he would have to go  if  required  to
    leave the UK" and that she had  relied  on  the  decision  on  Ogundimu
    (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 where it had  been  held
    that the word "ties" imported:

         "... a contact involving something  more  than  merely  remote  and
         abstract lengths to the country of proposed deportation or removal.
          It involves there being  continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country  of
         origin".

7.   The Judge noted that the appellant in Ogundimu had left his country  of
    origin at the age of 6 and had been in Britain for 22 years.  He stated
    that each case had to turn on its own facts and that  consideration  of
    relevant circumstances should conclude consideration of the age that an
    appellant had left his country, the exposure he had had to the cultural
    norms of that country, whether he spoke the language and the extent  of
    family and friends that the person had in the country to which  he  was
    being removed and the quality of the relationship that the  person  had
    with those family members.

8.   He stated that in this case the appellant had left home at the  age  of
    11 and there had been some contact between himself and his parents  and
    more particularly between his uncle, whom he treated as a  father,  and
    his parents.  There were, in addition, other family members in Nigeria.
     He stated the arrangement whereby the appellant came to and stayed  in
    Britain was clearly a financial one rather than based on any  hostility
    towards the  appellant  by  his  parents  and  he  concluded  that  the
    appellant still had social and cultural ties to Nigeria, which were not
    diminished by his ties to his uncle, and  that  he  had  not  lost  all
    family ties there.  He therefore concluded that the appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.

9.   He then went on to consider the rights of the appellant  under  Article
    8 of the ECHR.  He stated:

         "It is clear that he is financially dependent upon  his  uncle  and
         uncle's wife.  Whilst  there  is  case  law,  referred  to  in  the
         skeleton argument, that the key decision in  Kugathas  [2003]  EWCA
         Civ 31, as to the meaning of family life, has been interpreted  too
         restrictively in the past, I consider that, whilst there may not be
         an automatic fine line in which family life, as understood  in  the
         jurisprudence, ceases to exist, a key principle must still  be  the
         extent of emotional dependence upon members of a family.  The  fact
         that a member of a family continues  to  be  financially  dependent
         upon  other  members  of  the  family  is  in  my  view  of  little
         significance, or the more so, given the reality  of  the  financial
         situation in relation to housing in this country, with  the  result
         that many adult children find  it  necessary  to  remain  in  their
         parents' homes because they simply cannot afford to get on  to  the
         housing ladder.  There are no  medical  factors  relating  to  this
         appellant and I take the view that family life,  as  understood  in
         the jurisprudence, is not met."

10.  He however went on to find that the issue of private life  was  clearly
    met  but  concluded  that  the  decision  was  proportionate   in   the
    maintenance of proper immigration control.  He  stated  he  could  give
    little weight to private life established by an appellant who  was  and
    continued to be in Britain unlawfully.

11.  He commented that:

         "Whilst  the  appellant's  education  would  clearly  be  seriously
         interrupted, he  knew  full  well  at  the  time  he  entered  that
         education that his status in the UK was precarious.  Any  financial
         assistance currently being rendered by the appellant's  uncle,  who
         pays his university fees, could be supplied  to  the  appellant  on
         return to Nigeria."

12.  The grounds of appeal, on which Ms  Nnamani  relied,  argued  that  the
    judge had erred  in  his  consideration  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules in that it was  the  appellant's  evidence  that  his
    family ties in Nigeria "were practically remote".  They argued that the
    Judge  was  incorrect  to  conclude  that  family  life  had  not  been
    established in Britain due to the appellant's age.

13.  It was argued that by concluding  the  appellant  had  family  ties  in
    Nigeria the Judge had erred in  law,  notwithstanding  the  appellant's
    uncle's "sporadic contact".

14.  The grounds referred to the judgment of  Sales  J  in  Nagre  where  he
    stated that:

         "(ii)    In relation to paragraph 276ADE, for example, there may be
             individual cases of  adults  who  have  lived  in  the  United
             Kingdom for less than twenty years and who do retain some ties
             to their country of origin, but in relation to whom  the  ties
             they have developed and the roots they have put  down  in  the
             United Kingdom manifestly and strongly outweigh those ties, so
             that it would be disproportionate to remove them."

15.  It was also argued that the Judge had erred  in  his  consideration  of
    the appellant's  rights  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  and  in  his
    interpretation of the judgment in Kugathas.  They argued that  a  young
    adult who had not formed an  independent  family  unit  and  was  still
    financially dependent would be  considered  to  enjoy  a  family  life.
    Moreover  the  judge  had   erred   in   his   consideration   of   the
    proportionality of the decision and in referring to  Section  117B  had
    erroneously  imported  into  that  consideration  the  fact   that   he
    considered there had been a "so-called family conspiracy"  whereby  the
    appellant had overstayed here.  Moreover the appellant  should  not  be
    penalised for overstaying because he had  been  a  child  when  he  had
    entered.   It  was  emphasised  that   his  brother  had  been  granted
    discretionary leave to remain  notwithstanding  his  unlawful  presence
    here.

16.  At the hearing of the appeal before  me  Ms  Nnamani  referred  to  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630 which held
    that the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Kugathas related to extreme
    facts and that a young adult living with his parents or siblings  would
    normally have a family life which would be respected  under  Article  8
    and that a child  enjoying   family  life  with  his  parents  did  not
    suddenly cease to have a family life at midnight  when   he  turned  18
    years of age.

17.  She also referred to the  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  dated
    August 2015 with regard to the assessment of whether or not there  were
    "very significant obstacles to integration" to the country  of  return.
    It was her argument that the judge should have found that the appellant
    had no ties in Nigeria and that he was fully integrated here.  Moreover
    the judge had not been entitled to suggest that there had been a family
    conspiracy.  He had been wrong, she argued, to place so  little  weight
    on the family life that had built up between the appellant, his brother
    and his uncle and aunt.

18.  She referred to the judgment in Ogundimu and  emphasised  the  lack  of
    contact between the appellant and his biological parents.   She  stated
    that there was no evidence of social or cultural ties and the mere fact
    that the appellant's parents lived in Nigeria was not sufficient.

19.  She stated that the judge had not properly considered the ties  between
    the appellant and his uncle and aunt or assessed  the  quality  of  the
    family life.

Discussion

20.  I consider there is no material error of law in  the  determination  of
    the Judge in the First-tier.  He was correct in his  interpretation  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  He placed particular weight on the fact
    that the appellant's parents live in Nigeria and there was no  evidence
    that there had been a breach between the appellant and his parents.  As
    he stated, in paragraph 18, the arrangement whereby the  appellant  had
    come to Britain to live here had been basically a financial one  rather
    than based on any  hostility  towards  him.   He  correctly  noted  the
    continued contact between the appellant's  uncle  and  the  appellant's
    father and that there were other relatives in  Nigeria.   Moreover,  of
    course, the  appellant  remains  living  in  a  Nigerian  family.   The
    conclusions of the Judge that the appellant still  had  social,  family
    and cultural ties with Nigeria was entirely open to him.

21.  Moreover, when considering the rights of the appellant under Article  8
    of the ECHR the Judge was correct in  his  analysis  of  the  issue  of
    family life.  He did not say that, taking into account the judgment  of
    Kugathas that there was a clear line at 18 when the applicant ceased to
    be a member of his uncle's family.  He merely stated the fact that  the
    appellant was now at university and was aged 21 meant  that  there  had
    been such a lessening of  ties  that  he  did  not  consider  that  the
    appellant's right to family life was infringed by the  decision.   That
    position was perfectly tenable.  However, even if  that  were  not  the
    case, the Judge, when considering the issue of proportionality,  as  he
    correctly went on to do was entitled to take into account a  number  of
    factors including the fact that the applicant's parents were in Nigeria
    as were other members of the family, that support from his  uncle  here
    could be given to him in Nigeria  and  that  under  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B little weight should be given to private life  established
    by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
    precarious.  His  overall  conclusion  that  the  decision  was  not  a
    disproportionate interference with  a  right  to  the  appellant  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR was entirely open to him on the  evidence  before
    him.

22.   I  therefore  find  there  was  no  material  error  of  law  in   the
    determination of the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  his
    decision dismissing this appeal on both immigration  and  human  rights
    grounds shall stand.

Decision

This appeal is dismissed on both immigration and human rights grounds.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

