
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/10406/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th November 2013                           |On 25th November 2013      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)



                                   Between

                          Rajanikant Somabhai patel
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Jones, Counsel instructed by Chetty & Patel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of India born on 2nd October 1951.  The
    Appellant first arrived in the UK on 30th July 2006 when he was granted
    limited leave to enter as the spouse of a British citizen, the  Sponsor
    Priyabara Patel.  Thereafter  he  was  granted  successive  periods  of
    further limited leave to remain on the same basis until  2nd  September
    2012.  On 30th August 2012 the Appellant applied  for  further  limited
    leave to remain as a spouse.  Apparently he  did  not  seek  indefinite
    leave to remain because of his inability to provide an English Language
    Test Certificate sufficient  to  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    application was refused for the reasons given in the Notice of Decision
    dated 25th March 2013.  The Appellant  appealed,  and  his  appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sangha (the Judge) sitting at
    Birmingham on 4th September 2013.  He decided  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules but to allow it on human rights grounds for
    the reasons given in his Determination dated 16th September 2013.   The
    Respondent sought leave to appeal that decision,  and  on  7th  October
    2013 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge allowed the appeal on human rights grounds because  he  found
    that the Appellant had a family life with his wife  with  whom  he  had
    cohabited since his arrival in the UK in July  2006.   The  Appellant's
    wife was a British citizen, and both she and the Appellant  worked  and
    were able to maintain and accommodate themselves without  any  recourse
    to public funds.   The  decision  of  the  Respondent  amounted  to  an
    interference with that family life of such gravity as to engage Article
    8 rights, and was disproportionate.  The  only  bar  to  the  Appellant
    obtaining indefinite leave to remain was his inability  to  produce  an
    English Language Test Certificate which met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Appellant had produced an English Language Test
    Certificate issued to the Appellant on 17th August 2013, but  this  was
    from a body not on the list of English language test providers.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Saunders referred to the grounds of application  and
    argued that the Judge had erred in law in coming  to  this  conclusion.
    Mr Saunders informed me that he did not rely upon the argument made  in
    paragraph 1 of ground 2, but otherwise submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    erred in law by attaching insufficient weight to the public interest in
    the  balancing  exercise  as  represented  by  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Further, the Judge had failed to explain why it was  not  possible  for
    the Appellant and his wife to return to  India  together  and  continue
    their family life there.  The Judge had given the wrong  interpretation
    to the test of insurmountable obstacles given in the Immigration Rules.



 5. In response, Mr Jones referred to his Rule 24  response  and  submitted
    that there was no such error of law in the Judge's decision.  The Judge
    had found a genuine and subsisting relationship between  the  Appellant
    and his wife, and had taken into account all  other  pertinent  factors
    including the time the Appellant had spent in the UK.  The  Appellant's
    wife was a British citizen  originally  from  Kenya  who  had  a  large
    extended family  in  the  UK  and  no  family  abroad.   The  Appellant
    satisfied all the relevant requirements  of  Appendix  FM  of  HC  395,
    including the financial test, except for  the  English  language  test.
    The Judge had given appropriate weight to all the relevant factors  and
    had concluded that the Respondent's decision was disproportionate.

 6. At the hearing I found no error of law in the Judge's decision so  that
    it should be set aside.  I now give my reasons for that decision.

 7. I am satisfied that the Judge came to a conclusion which  was  open  to
    him on the evidence before him.  His explanation for  his  decision  is
    adequate.  The Judge demonstrated that he had carried out the balancing
    exercising necessary for any assessment of proportionality.  The  Judge
    was entitled to attach little weight to  the  public  interest  as  the
    Appellant met all the requirements of Appendix FM relating  to  spouses
    except for that mentioned in paragraph E-ECPT.4.1(b).  The  Appellant's
    failure to satisfy  the  English  language  test  was  something  of  a
    technicality in that although  he  had  provided  an  ESOL  certificate
    showing his English language speaking and listening to be at a  minimum
    of level A1 of the CEFR, this was not from a specified provider.

 8. The Judge considered at paragraph 22 of the Determination  the  ability
    of the Appellant's wife to go to India and settle  with  the  Appellant
    there.  The Judge did not find this to be possible, and the reasons  he
    gave for that decision are harmonious with the provisions of  paragraph
    EX.1(b) of Appendix FM.

 9. For these reasons, I find no error of law in the decision of the judge.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

