
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11907/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20th June 2014                               |On 26th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                           tim nii yaw (yan) armah
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Akohene, instructed by Afrifa & Partners London
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana whose date of birth is recorded  as
    2nd February 1969.  The history to  this  appeal  is  set  out  in  the
    Determination and Reasons following the earlier hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 25th April 2014.  On that occasion the  Appellant  did  not
    appear but Ms Everett for the Secretary of State  conceded  that  there
    was an error  of  law  for  the  reasons  which  are  set  out  in  the
    determination following that earlier hearing and, for the avoidance  of
    doubt, I made clear in any event that I agreed with  what  she  had  to
    say.  However, on that last occasion we could not  proceed  because  it
    was clear that the notice of hearing had not satisfactorily been served
    upon the Appellant or his representatives and so it would not have been
    fair to proceed.  Today it is for me to re-make  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. Mr Whitwell, for reasons which I need not go into, was not  aware  that
    the error of law had already been found in  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal but in the event that did not matter because  there
    was common ground that examination of  the  guidance  in  the  case  of
    Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 would very probably
    resolve the issue in the re-making because Mr Akohene conceded that  if
    I found that the  guidance  in  Kareem  was  to  the  effect  that  the
    appellant was required to prove on balance of  probabilities  not  only
    that the marriage contended for was entered into lawfully in accordance
    with the laws of Ghana but also that on balance of probabilities it was
    a marriage that was recognised in accordance with the laws  of  France,
    he could not succeed because he was not in  a  position  to  prove  his
    case, in relation to French law.

 3. Mr Akohene's submission in short was that the guidance in Kareem is  to
    the effect that only where there is  doubt  or  uncertainty  about  the
    validity of the marriage in the third country, in this case  Ghana,  is
    it necessary to go on to consider whether the marriage is recognised in
    accordance with the laws of the EEA state of which  the  Sponsor  is  a
    member.

 4. Mr Whitwell's position is to the contrary.  His view is that where  the
    parties to a marriage entered  into  in  an  EEA  state  is  proved  by
    sufficient evidence then that is the end of the matter but,  where  the
    marriage is entered into in accordance with the laws or said to  be  in
    accordance with the laws of a third country, that is to say  a  non-EEA
    country, then in addition to establishing that the marriage was validly
    contracted in that third country it must also be shown to be a marriage
    that is recognised in the state of the EEA member who  is  a  party  to
    that marriage.

 5. Mr Akohene draws support from the guidance in the case of CB  (validity
    of marriage: proxy marriage) Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080 and also  having
    taken me to various paragraphs in the  case  of  Kareem  to  the  final
    remarks from paragraph 67 onwards and  in  particular  to  68(g)  which
    reads:

         "It should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
         the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
         the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
         evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof...".

    Mr Akohene relies on the word "or", though not  only  on  the  case  of
    Kareem does Mr Akohene  rely.   He  also  took  me  to  Article  24  of
    EC2004/38 which relates to equal treatment.  That reads:

         "(1) Subject to such specific provisions as are expressly  provided
             for in the  treaty  and  secondary  law,  all  Union  citizens
             residing on the basis of this directive in  the  territory  of
             the host Member State shall enjoy  equal  treatment  with  the
             nationals of that Member State within the scope of the treaty.
              The benefit of this right shall be extended to family members
             who are not nationals of a Member State and who have the right
             of residence or permanent residence.

         (2)  By way of derogation from paragraph (1) the host Member  State
             shall  not  be  obliged  to  confer  entitlement   to   social
             assistance etc. etc."

    Mr Akohene relied on paragraph (1) of Article 24  and  although  I  was
    also presented with Article 25 no reliance was placed on that.

 6. I find that the  submissions  of  Mr  Whitwell  are  to  be  preferred.
    Firstly, at paragraph 5 of Kareem, read with  the  determination  as  a
    whole, it is clear that the guidance in CB was not to be  seen  as  the
    end of the matter so far as the point which arises in  this  appeal  is
    concerned.  At paragraph 7 it reads:

         "The Member States do not share a common definition of spouse, each
         state defining marital relationships for itself.  For  example,  in
         several Member States a person cannot be a spouse if  of  the  same
         sex as the partner whilst the laws of other Member States  describe
         such a person as a spouse. Similarly,  whilst  many  Member  States
         refuse to describe any person in a  polygamous  relationship  as  a
         spouse other than the person  first  married,  the  laws  of  other
         Member States may recognise all  partners  as  spouses  in  certain
         circumstances...".

 7. Then at paragraph 18 it reads:

         "The same conclusion may readily be reached by a  different  route.
         Within EU law, it is essential that Member  States  facilitate  the
         free movement and residence rights  of  Union  citizens  and  their
         spouses. This would not be achieved if  it  were  left  to  a  host
         Member State to decide whether a Union  citizen  has  contracted  a
         marriage. Different Member States would be able to reach  different
         conclusions about that Union citizen's marital status.  This  would
         leave Union citizens unclear as to whether their spouses could move
         freely with them; and might mean that the Union citizen could  move
         with greater freedom to one Member State (where the marriage  would
         be recognised) than to  another  (where  it  might  not  be).  Such
         difficulties would be contrary to fundamental  EU  law  principles.
         Therefore, we perceive EU law as requiring  the  identification  of
         the legal  system  in  which  a  marriage  is  said  to  have  been
         contracted in such a way as to  ensure  that  the  Union  citizen's
         marital status is not at risk of being  differently  determined  by
         different  Member  States.  Given  the   intrinsic   link   between
         nationality of a Member State and free movement rights, we conclude
         that the legal system of the nationality of the Union citizen  must
         itself govern whether a marriage has been contracted."

 8. I do not see Article 24 being offended by the requirement in  the  case
    of a marriage said to have taken place in a third country  as  treating
    persons outside of the requirements of Article 24.  The equal treatment
    relates in my judgment  to  the  equal  treatment  of,  in  this  case,
    spouses.  However the evidence required to establish that someone is  a
    spouse  can  be  different  dependent  upon  whether  the  marriage  is
    contracted within the EU or outside of it. In essence  the  requirement
    is the same ie that the marriage has to be shown to  be  recognised  in
    the EEA state. In the case of a marriage contracted in an EEA  state  a
    certificate from the state will usually  suffice,  in  the  case  of  a
    marriage contracted outside the EEA, the certificate  from  that  state
    will usually suffice to establish the marriage but not  establish  that
    the marriage is recognised in the relevant EEA state.

 9. I take the view that the guidance in  Kareem  is  clear  and  that  the
    situation is this: where there is a marriage contracted outside  of  an
    EU state firstly the Tribunal or a court must satisfy itself that there
    was a marriage that was validly entered into in that country.   If  the
    marriage is not valid in that country  then  there  is  an  end  to  it
    because there is no marriage to consider.  If it  is  established  that
    there is a marriage validly entered into in that country then there  is
    a second hurdle of establishing whether that marriage is recognised  in
    the EEA state of the EEA national and the reason why that must be so is
    already stated in the case of Kareem.  Hypothetically, it may  be  that
    whereas  under  English  law  certain  polygamous  marriages  would  be
    recognised, the law of another  EU  state  would  in  no  circumstances
    recognise a polygamous marriage. What then would happen, if Mr  Akohene
    were right is that the marriage would be recognised here, in the United
    Kingdom but not in the very country from which the EEA citizen hails.

10. In the circumstances, given the concession made by Mr Akohene  that  he
    cannot prove to the requisite standard that the marriage, even if valid
    in Ghana, would be recognised in accordance with the  laws  of  France,
    the appeal in the re-making fails.

11. I invited the parties to tell me whether they wanted  me  to  make  any
    findings as to whether or not there was a valid marriage in  accordance
    with the laws of Ghana.  If so then it would  have  been  necessary  to
    stand the matter down for a while to give Mr Whitwell  the  opportunity
    to look at the papers but, in the event, Mr  Akohene  did  not  require
    such a finding and it seems to me that since the appeal  fails  in  any
    event there is no prejudice to any of the parties if I do  not  make  a
    finding at this stage.  It may be that a  future  application  will  be
    made either on this basis or some other, I simply do not know.  Equally
    I was not addressed on whether there was any durable  relationship  for
    the purposes of regulation 8.

12. For the avoidance of doubt therefore there was an error of law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  set  aside  in  the
    determination following the hearing of 25 April 2014.  In the re-making
    of the determination the appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date 25.06.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

