


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11133/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at : Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On : 21 July 2016                   |On: 2 August 2016                     |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                mehmuda iqbal
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Butterworth, instructed by Finsbury Law
                    Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mrs Iqbal's appeal  against
the respondent's decision to refuse to vary  her  leave  to  remain  and  to
remove her from the United Kingdom.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as  the  respondent  and  Mrs  Iqbal  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan,  born  on  28  November  1929.  She
arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 June 2014 in possession of a  visit  visa
and applied, on 28 November 2014, for leave to remain on the  basis  of  her
family and private life. Her application was refused. She  appealed  against
that decision. Her appeal  was  heard  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  17
November 2015 and was allowed. The  Secretary  of  State  has  been  granted
permission to appeal that decision.


In her application of 28 November 2014 the appellant relied  upon  the  fact
that she was an 85 year old woman who had lived in  Pakistan  all  her  life
and who had significant medical problems. It  was  submitted  that  she  had
been living with her son Khalid in Pakistan and had been visiting the UK  as
a visitor for over ten years and had always returned to Pakistan before  the
expiry of her visa. Before coming to the UK in June 2014 her  intention  had
been to return to Pakistan, but her circumstances had changed as her  health
had deteriorated to the extent that she could not travel back  to  Pakistan.
Further, her son's situation had  changed  in  Pakistan  as  he  was  facing
threats as an Ahmadi and he may  have  to  flee  his  family  home.  It  was
submitted that her UK sponsor would be  able  to  accommodate  and  maintain
her. She had become dependent upon her children in the UK. Her removal  from
the UK would interfere with her private and family  life  and  would  be  in
breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.


In refusing her application, the respondent  concluded  that  the  appellant
could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE(1).  With
regard to the latter it was considered that there were no  very  significant
obstacles to integration into Pakistan. The  respondent  considered  further
that there were no exceptional circumstances justifying  a  grant  of  leave
outside the immigration rules as the appellant had not made  an  application
as an adult dependent relative and in any event she  could  not  succeed  on
that basis. It was not accepted that she had established a  family  life  in
the UK with her adult children.


The appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Harris on 17 November 2015. Judge  Harris  accepted,  on  the
basis of the medical evidence produced and the  appellant's  age,  that  she
required long-term personal care to  perform  everyday  tasks.  He  accepted
that she had intended to return to Pakistan after her visit,  but  that  her
family's awareness of her deteriorating  health  resulted  in  the  decision
that she should apply to remain  in  the  UK.  He  also  accepted  that  the
appellant's son and his family, who had previously cared for  the  appellant
and with whom she had resided in Pakistan, could  no  longer  care  for  her
properly as they were experiencing problems due to their Ahmadi faith  as  a
result of which they had had, at times, to move out  of  their  home.  Judge
Harris accepted that the appellant had four children in the  UK  who  helped
look after her care needs. The judge concluded that the appellant  could  be
cared for in Pakistan by a carer paid for by her family in the UK and  that,
as such, she could not meet the immigration  rules  as  an  adult  dependent
relative and neither could she demonstrate  very  significant  obstacles  to
integration  in  Pakistan  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).
Nevertheless, on the basis that the appellant had established a family  life
in the UK and that Article 8 was engaged outside the immigration  rules,  he
concluded that the respondent's decision was disproportionate and in  breach
of Article 8. He allowed the appeal on that basis.

The respondent sought permission to appeal Judge Harris's  decision  on  the
grounds that he had failed to provide adequate  reasons  for  accepting  the
appellant's claim in regard to her son's problems in Pakistan,  particularly
when that had been challenged by the presenting officer at the hearing,  and
for accepting that the appellant came to the UK as a  genuine  visitor,  and
that he had failed to consider reasons why the appellant and her  son  could
not move to another part of Pakistan. The grounds  also  asserted  that  the
judge  had  embarked  on  a  free-standing  Article  8  assessment   without
considering the appellant's  failure  to  meet  the  immigration  rules  and
without identifying any compelling  circumstances  warranting  consideration
outside the rules. It was asserted further that  the  judge's  consideration
of family life was flawed as there was a failure to consider the  precarious
circumstances in which it was formed.

Permission was granted on 26 May 2016 by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
grounds raised.

The appeal came before me. I heard submissions from both  parties  and  have
formed the view that the judge's decision  does  not  contain  any  material
errors of law requiring it to be set aside. My  reasons  for  so  concluding
are as follows.


Consideration and findings.

The decision in the appellant's case is one, in my  view,  that  could  have
been made differently by another judge and is one which  perhaps  benefitted
from  rather  generous  findings  by  Judge  Harris.  However  the  relevant
question is whether or not Judge Harris' decision is a rational  and  lawful
one. I find that  it  is.  It  is  clear  that  all  relevant  matters  were
considered by the judge  and  that  adequate  reasons  were  given  for  the
findings made.

The respondent's first ground of appeal is that the  judge  failed  to  give
adequate  reasons  for  accepting  the  appellant's  claim  as  regards  the
difficulties faced by her son in Pakistan and her intentions  in  coming  to
the UK as a visitor. However it seems to me that  the  respondent's  quarrel
is not so much with the adequacy of the reasoning but with  the  outcome  of
that reasoning and the weight that the judge attached to the evidence.  With
regard  to  the  appellant's  claim  about  her  son  Khalid's  problems  in
Pakistan, the judge clearly had regard to the challenges made  by  the  Home
Office presenting officer to the documentary evidence submitted in  relation
to his problems as an Ahmadi and noted the submission that the claim  was  a
fabrication. The grounds refer to typographical errors  in  the  documentary
evidence undermining its credibility, but do not elaborate on those  errors.
The judge, however, had the benefit of hearing from the  appellant  and  her
son and daughter and was entitled to give the weight that he  did  to  their
evidence and  to  the  documentary  evidence,  applying  the  principles  in
Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 439, and to accept that the account was true.  He
noted that the account was consistent with the country guidance  in  MN  and
others (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  389
and with the  background  information  about  Ahmadis.  Accordingly  he  was
entitled to accept that the appellant could not look  to  her  son  for  her
long-term care needs in Pakistan. That was a  conclusion  properly  open  to
him on the evidence. Likewise the judge was entitled to accept the  evidence
of the witnesses as to the appellant's intentions when she came  to  the  UK
and he gave adequate reasons at [22] for so doing.  I therefore do not  find
that the first ground is made out and consider that it amounts  to  no  more
than a disagreement with the judge's conclusions.

The second ground  asserts  that  the  judge  embarked  on  a  free-standing
Article 8 assessment without considering the appellant's inability  to  meet
the requirements of the immigration rules. However that is clearly  not  the
case. The judge made it clear at [35] that the appellant could not meet  the
requirements of the rules for adult dependent relatives and at [32] to  [37]
he gave detailed consideration to the criteria in  paragraph  276ADE(1),  in
particular paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), concluding that the  requirements  could
not be met. At [38] he made it clear that he was then going on  to  consider
Article 8 outside the immigration rules.


With regard to the question of family life being  established,  I  asked  Mr
Melvin if he had any submissions to make in that regard, but  he  said  that
he simply relied on the grounds.  Mr  Butterworth  relied  on  the  case  of
Dasgupta (error of law - proportionality - correct approach) [2016] UKUT  28
and submitted that it was open to the judge to find  that  family  life  had
been established. It seems to me that  the  judge's  findings  at  [44]  are
consistent with the guidance in Kugathas v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and that it was open to him, on the  basis  of
the medical and other evidence before him, to conclude that family life  had
been established, considering in particular that, whilst the  appellant  had
entered the UK only as a visitor, she had been living  with  her  family  in
the UK for almost a year and a half by the time the appeal was heard.


When considering proportionality at [48] to [56], the judge  had  regard  to
the statutory provisions in section 117B of the 2002 Act and gave weight  to
the public interest factors therein, including  the  precariousness  of  the
appellant's immigration status and noting in particular that  her  inability
to meet the requirements of the immigration rules weighed against  her.  The
grounds of appeal assert that the judge failed to have regard  to  the  need
for there to  be  compelling  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of  leave
outside the rules. However it is clear from his findings  at  [56]  that  he
was fully aware that that was a requirement and at [55] he gave  details  of
those compelling circumstances.


The question of whether  the  deprivation  of  family  life  can  amount  to
compelling circumstances, when the  relevant  immigration  rules  which  the
appellant cannot meet,  namely  the  adult  dependent  relative  rules,  are
themselves concerned with  family  life,  is  one  which  has  troubled  me.
However that was not a matter raised in the grounds and Mr  Melvin  did  not
seek to make any submissions other than to rely on the written  grounds.  In
any event I am persuaded by Mr Butterworth's reliance  upon  Dasgupta  which
addressed circumstances very similar to those of the  appellant  before  me,
albeit in an entry clearance case, and which  Mr  Melvin  did  not  seek  to
challenge or distinguish in any particularised way. Having  regard  to  [23]
in Dasgupta, it seems to me that Judge Harris's findings at [55] based  upon
the  whole  "evidential  picture"  including  the  appellant's   needs   and
vulnerability, lack of family support in Pakistan and  dependence  upon  her
family in the UK, are sufficient to conclude that his  decision  as  to  the
existence of compelling circumstances was a sustainable one.

Accordingly, I find that the judge  did  not  err  in  law  as  the  grounds
assert. He reached a conclusion that was open to him on  the  basis  of  the
evidence before him.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The  Secretary  of
State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
allow the appellant's appeal stands.



















                                Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
