

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: IA/11034/2014


                               THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons        |
|On: 7th July 2015                        |Promulgated                       |
|                                         |On: 2nd October 2015              |
|                                         |                                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                        Tajudeen Olusegun Aruna-Ogun
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Anifowoshe, Counsel instructed by Apex Solicitors


For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria date of birth 12  October  1969.
    He appeals with permission the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge David C Clapham SSC) to dismiss his appeal against the Secretary
    of State's decision to refuse  to  issue  him  with  a  residence  card
    confirming his right of residence as the extended family member  of  an
    EEA national.


 2. It was the Appellant's case before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  he
    lived with his aunt in the UK, and that having  previously  lived  with
    her  in  Nigeria,  this  qualified  him  under  Regulation  8  of   the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (the  Regs):  he
    relied on the second limb of Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012]
    UKUT 79 (IAC).

 3. The First-tier Tribunal  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  currently
    living with his aunt in the UK. It also accepted that  they  had  lived
    together in a house in Nigeria in 1991-1992. That house belonged to the
    Appellant's grandparents, her  parents,  who  also  lived  there.   The
    matter in issue was whether the phrase "is a member of  his  household"
    in Regulation 8(2) required the applicant to show that he  had  been  a
    member of the EEA national's household, or  whether  it  could  suffice
    that they had been part of the same household. In this case the  First-
    tier Tribunal rejected the proposition that the  Regulation  should  be
    read down as meaning that the two were members of  "a"  household:  "it
    seems to me that the household has to  be  the  household  of  the  EEA
    principle" [paragraph 37].   Since the two lived in  the  household  of
    the Appellant's grandparents, the appeal was dismissed.   It is on this
    same question that permission to appeal was granted by Judge Cheales on
    the 23rd April 2015.

 4. It would seem that in granting permission Judge Cheales was  not  aware
    of the decision of the Court of Appeal in AA (Nigeria) [2014] EWCA  Civ
    1741 in which this very same argument was considered, and rejected,  in
    December of last year. In that case an applicant sought to rely on  the
    fact that he had in the past lived in the same house  as  his  brother,
    along with their parents. Ms Anifowoshe, who  also  appeared  for  that
    appellant, submitted to the Court of Appeal  that  this  satisfied  the
    requirement in Regulation 8(2). Lord Justice Sullivan said this:

         "To adopt this interpretation of Article 3.2  and  Regulation  8(2)
         would be to depart even further from the plain and ordinary meaning
         of  those  provisions.  We  would  be  considerably  enlarging  the
         obligation  in  respect  of  extended  family  members  which   was
         undertaken by member states of  the  European  Union  and  for  the
         reasons given above, we would be doing so for no obvious policy  or
         reason.


         Miss Anifowoshe submitted that if we do not accept her  submissions
         then a reference to the CJEU was appropriate. I do not accept  that
         submission. It seems to me that the provisions of Article  3.2  are
         clear. There is no need for a reference".

 5. Permission to appeal to the Supreme Court was refused on the 31st March
    2015.


 6. Before me Ms Anifowoshe argued that the matter  had  not  been  finally
    determined and that permission was now being sought to the  CJEU.  That
    may be so. I am however bound by the current findings of the  Court  of
    Appeal.   I would add that had I not had the benefit of  the  judgement
    in AA (Algeria) I would have upheld the clear and careful reasoning  of
    Judge Clapham in the present case. There is no justification to  extend
    the meaning of Regulation 8(2) in the manner for  which  the  Appellant
    contends.



    Decisions

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law and it
    is upheld.

 8. I was not asked to make a direction for anonymity and on  the  facts  I
    see no reason to make one.









                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    7th
                                  July 2015
