
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11844/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 April 2016                              |On 4 May 2016                 |



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                      DHARMENDRAKUMAR CHANDUBHAI PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is a decision in the appeal of Mr D C Patel, following  a  hearing
    at  Field  House  on  19  April  2016  at  which  the   appellant   was
    unrepresented and the respondent was represented by Mr Clarke,  a  Home
    Office Presenting Officer.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of India who first  came  to  the  UK  as  a
    student on 5 May 2008.  He subsequently (on 13th December 2014) applied
    for further leave to remain in the UK as a student but his  application
    was refused on 12th March 2015 and the respondent decided to remove the
    appellant.  It  seems  that  prior  to  the  decision  to  refuse   his
    application he had been invited to attend  an  interview  at  the  Home
    Office by a letter dated 2nd December 2014 offering him an interview on
    10th December 2014.  That letter was addressed to his address  at  [  ]
    HA3 8BL, where he still lives.

3.   At this hearing the appellant has had the assistance of an  interpreter
    through whom he explained that he did not receive the  notification  of
    the interview date in December 2014.   That is an  important  piece  of
    information because of the grounds on which his appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was dismissed is that he had  failed  without  reasonable
    explanation to comply with a request to attend for interview. Paragraph
    322 (10) of the Immigration Rules allows  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse leave to remain in the UK where there has been a failure on  the
    part of the appellant to do so.

4.   It is clear that the appellant was invited to attend an  interview  but
    as a result of information supplied by the respondent this morning (the
    CID case notes from the respondent's computer) it is clear  also  that,
    for reasons that are not transparent, the letter was  returned  to  the
    Secretary of State marked "Not known" at  this  address.   Perhaps  the
    error was the Post Office's, but it seems clear that  the  letter  from
    the respondent was correctly addressed but that it did not come to  the
    appellant's attention. Therefore, in fact the appellant did not in fact
    have notice of the proposed interview date, time or venue.

5.   I have considered whether it would be appropriate in the  circumstances
    to allow the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  Judge  Farrelly,  to
    stand.  In fairness to Judge Farrelly, he had decided the case  on  the
    papers because  the  appellant  ticked  the  box  in  his  appeal  form
    notifying the Tribunal that that is what he  wanted.  Therefore,  there
    was no explanation from the appellant's  side  as  to  his  failure  to
    attend for interview. However, in his grounds of appeal, with  which  I
    have been provided a copy today, it is clear  that  the  appellant  did
    raise all proper grounds of appeal in his  concise  grounds  of  appeal
    (clearer, it must be said, than some grounds professionally drafted  by
    legal representatives). In those grounds the appellant pointed out  (in
    paragraph 5) that he did  not  receive  the  letter  inviting  him  for
    interview.

6.   The appellant raised all possible grounds available to him  and  it  is
    right to say that the  Immigration  Judge  did  touch  on  the  grounds
    substantively because he she found that the appellant was not a genuine
    student  within  paragraph   245ZX(o)   of   the   Immigration   Rules.
    Nevertheless, out of fairness to both parties  it  is  right  that  the
    Secretary of State should have a proper  opportunity  to  consider  the
    appellant's explanation for his alleged  failure  to  comply  with  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules  in  terms  of  being  a  genuine
    student. This will require a fresh interview to be arranged.

7.   It may well be that he is not able to provide an  adequate  explanation
    for his apparent failure to meet the requirement  of  being  a  genuine
    student, in which case the Secretary of State will undoubtedly come  to
    the same conclusion. However, the Secretary of State will wish to  make
    a proper assessment after the appellant has attended the  interview  at
    which the concerns  about  the  appellant's  course  of  study  can  be
    properly addressed.

8.   I have considered whether it is possible simply to hear  evidence  from
    the appellant at the Upper Tribunal  as  to  his  satisfaction  of  the
    substantive requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.  However,  I  have
    decided that it would not be appropriate to do so in light of the  fact
    that the respondent should be given a proper opportunity to investigate
    what he says and consider the  details  of  the  institution  where  he
    attends before she reaches a fresh decision.   It  is  not  unknown  in
    student cases for there to be concerns about those institutions or  the
    level of attendance by the student applicant.

9.   For these reasons I have decided that the fair course to  adopt  is  to
    allow the appeal to the extent that I find that the  Immigration  Judge
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  by  finding  that  there  was  no
    reasonable explanation for the failure to comply with the request  when
    in fact there  was  a  reasonable  explanation  in  that  the  document
    inviting the appellant to interview had been returned without coming to
    his attention.

10.  That of course was not known to the Immigration Judge  but  it  is  now
    known to the Upper Tribunal and the fair course to adopt  is  to  remit
    the matter back to the Secretary of State  to  make  a  fresh  decision
    which of course will trigger a new right of appeal.

Notice of Decision

11.  For these reasons I am allowing the  appeal  to  the  extent  that  the
    decision of the First-tier tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  respondent's
    decision to dismiss the application for further leave to remain is also
    set aside as is  her  decision  to  issue  removal  directions.   I  am
    remitting the matter  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a  fresh
    decision.

12.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

