

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11251/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Laganside Courts, Belfast            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 October 2014                            |On 7 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                                 HAI NA DONG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Mr S McTaggart (of Counsel), instructed by DA Martin
                  Solicitor
Respondent:   Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. By a decision dated 17th February 2014 made on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State for the  Home  Department  (the  "Secretary  of  State"),  the
    Appellant's application for  a  derivative  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (the "EEA Regulations") was refused.
     The first of the two refusal reasons, namely an  asserted  failure  to
    provide a valid passport as evidence of her identity  and  nationality,
    was  subsequently  withdrawn.   The  remaining  refusal  reason,  which
    relates in part to the father of  the  child  in  question,  a  British
    citizen allegedly estranged  from  the  Appellant  and  the  child,  is
    encapsulated in the following passages:

         "You have not provided evidence as to why the child's father is not
         in a position to care for the British citizen  child  if  you  were
         forced to leave  the  United  Kingdom  and  there  is  insufficient
         evidence to show that the [child] .....  would be unable to  remain
         in the United Kingdom if you were forced to leave.  Furthermore, to
         be considered the primary carer we  would  expect  you  to  provide
         evidence to show that the  child  lives  with  you  or  spends  the
         majority of her time with  you,  that  you  make  the  day  to  day
         decisions in regard to the child's health, education etc  and  that
         you are responsible for the child ....


         In making this assessment, the  burden  of  proof  remains  on  the
         applicant and the standard of proof is the balance of probabilities
         ....."

    The remainder of the letter alerted the Appellant to the possibility of
    making a free standing application for leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.

 2. Accordingly, at the stage of the appeal  to  the  First  tier  Tribunal
    ("the FtT"), the only live refusal reason  was  that  rehearsed  above.
    The FtT dismissed the appeal.  Upon the hearing of the appeal  to  this
    Tribunal, it was acknowledged by Mr Mills on behalf of the Secretary of
    State that there is a paucity of necessary findings of  fact/evaluative
    assessments  in  the  determination  and,  in   his   words,   "limited
    reasoning", which must be considered against the background of what was
    accepted to have been "considerable evidence" adduced at  the  hearing.
    It was further specifically accepted that the following passage in  the
    determination is misconceived:

         "....  The Respondent in its [decision  letter]  ......  identified
         examples of documents that might evidence  primary  responsibility,
         in  particular  a  valid  court  order  which  establishes  primary
         responsibility for the child or a valid legal  guardianship  order.
         Neither was  produced.   I  find  those  examples  to  be  entirely
         reasonable."

    Mr Mills agreed with me that this assessment  and  commentary,  all  of
    which is adverse to the Appellant, is divorced from  the  framework  of
    the Appellant's case.  There is no dispute that the  Appellant  is  the
    biological mother of the child concerned and none of the  court  orders
    about which the Judge  speculated  could  conceivably  exist  in  their
    circumstances.

 3. I  am  further  satisfied  that  the  Judge  applied  the  wrong  test,
    committing a material error of law  in  consequence.  Under  regulation
    15A(4A) of the EEA Regulations, it was incumbent on  the  Appellant  to
    establish that she is the "primary carer" of the child  concerned  and,
    in her particular case, to do so by  demonstrating  that  she  is  "the
    person who has primary responsibility for that person's care".  In  the
    determination,  the  Judge  neither  adverts  to  nor  reproduces,   in
    substance or at all, the statutory tests.  This failing  is  aggravated
    by the Judge's adoption of an incorrect test in [21],  namely  that  of
    "sole carer".  This I consider to be a clear, free  standing  error  of
    law.

DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 4. I decide and direct as follows:

       i) The determination of the FtT is set aside.


      ii) I remit the appeal  to  a  differently  constituted  FtT  for  the
          purpose of remaking the decision.

     iii) The Appellant's solicitors will formally lodge with  the  FtT  the
          two extant bundles, within 14 days of today.

      iv) The case will be relisted in the FtT on the first  available  date
          thereafter.










                                    [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                       Date: 31 October 2014
