
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11615/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 September 2015                 |On 23 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Ms Elizabeth Mgbojikwe
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Mwaekwu, Solicitor of Moorehouse Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department concerning a refusal to issue a residence card  in  relation
    to a claimed right  of  residence  made  by  the  applicant  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations of 2006.

2.   Very  briefly,  the  applicant  was  previously  married  to  a  Slovak
    national and they divorced on 15 March 2013.  An application  was  made
    for a residence card on 1  May  2013,  after  the  termination  of  the
    marriage.  The key issue before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  the
    extent to  which  any  retained  rights  of  residence  vested  in  the
    applicant.

3.   The matter  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blum  and  his
    Decision and Reasons were promulgated on 20 November 2014.  The bulk of
    that determination deals with a consideration  of  evidence  concerning
    the employment situation of the applicant's former spouse.

4.   The judge quite narrowly came to the view that notwithstanding  certain
    matters which he viewed with scepticism, the applicant's former  spouse
    was employed as a worker.  Paragraph 18 of the determination  concludes
    that those matters:

         " ... give rise to suspicion on my part as to  whether  the  former
         spouse  really  was  working,  but  this  is  mere  suspicion   and
         insufficient to displace the otherwise clear evidence presented  by
         the wage slips and the corresponding deposits  in  the  joint  bank
         account that, at the date of the divorce,  the  appellant's  former
         spouse was employed as a worker."

5.   It is the Home Secretary's appeal, and it has now been conceded by  the
    applicant's representative (responding to the appeal), that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge did not turn his mind to the specific provisions of
    Regulation 10(6) which concerns the position of the  applicant  herself
    and whether she could properly be classified  as  a  worker  for  these
    purposes.

6.   There was, I am told, some evidence on this matter  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge but not to my mind sufficient to be conclusive  one
    way or the other.  There was clearly an error of law by the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in not dealing expressly with Regulation 10(6), and this
    is conceded on behalf of  the  respondent.   I  have  had  to  consider
    whether it would be appropriate for the matter to be  retained  in  the
    Upper Tribunal and the decision remade or for the matter to be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

7.   In my view (and  I  think  ultimately  this  view  is  shared  by  both
    representatives), the matter is better dealt  with  afresh  by  another
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who  can  then  have  the   advantage   of
    considering the totality  of  the  evidence  including  any  additional
    evidence  which  the  applicant  may  wish  to  tender,  together  with
    representations on the law, particularly the period  during  which  the
    applicant must demonstrate that she was a worker whether with  retained
    rights or otherwise.

8.    There  is  a  degree  of  ambiguity  as  to   matters   of   statutory
    interpretation and neither representative was prepared to  address  the
    legal issue today with the particularity and thoroughness it  deserved.
    Rather than adjourn the matter off to have a  resumed  hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal and for it then possibly to be remitted at  that  stage,
    it seems to  me  that  the  overriding  objective  is  best  served  by
    embracing the reality that the decision needs to be made again and  for
    me to make no determination as to either the legal issue raised or  the
    underlying evidential merits of the application as it presently stands.

Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed.

Matter remitted to a First-tier Tribunal Judge, not Judge Blum, for a  fresh
determination.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 22 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

