
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11271/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                             SAKA ENEJI MUHAMMED
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Nwaekwu instructed by Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 3 April 1979. His  appeal
    arises out of a decision by the respondent, dated  20  March  2015,  to
    refuse his application for a residence card as confirmation of a  right
    to reside in the UK as the spouse of an EEA national exercising  Treaty
    rights in the UK under the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  ("the
    2006  Regulations").  His  application  was  refused  on  two  grounds:
    firstly, that  his  relationship  with  an  EEA  national  was  one  of
    convenience; and secondly, that he had failed to demonstrate  his  wife
    was a qualified person.

 2. The ensuing appeal was determined by First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")  Judge
    Wallace on the papers. In a decision promulgated on 22 June  2015,  the
    FtT dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 3. In respect of the appellant's relationship with an  EEA  national,  the
    FtT concluded, at paragraph [14], that "the documents on  file  do  not
    endorse the appellant's claim that he and his wife are in a  subsisting
    relationship" and, at paragraph [15], that "what the  appellant  claims
    may be true but there is no evidence  substantiating  that  the  couple
    live together".

 4.  There  are  no  findings  in  the  decision  concerning  whether   the
    appellant's sponsor is a qualified person under the 2006 Regulations.

 5. The grounds of appeal submit that the FtT erred in two respects:

      a. Firstly, it applied the wrong test in respect of  the  relationship
         between the appellant and his  sponsor.  The  FtT  found  that  the
         evidence did not support there being  "a  subsisting  relationship"
         whereas the relevant question, as specified in Regulation 2 of  the
         2006 Regulations, is  whether  the  appellant  was  a  party  to  a
         marriage of convenience.

      b.  Secondly,  in  considering  whether   there   was   a   subsisting
         relationship (which in any event was the wrong test) the FtT failed
         to take into account  the  documentary  evidence  before  it  which
         showed the appellant and his sponsor were living together.

 6. The grounds also argue that the FtT erred in failing  to  consider  the
    appellant's appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the  FtT  failed  to
    address either of the two points made in the refusal notice: that  this
    was a marriage of  convenience  and  that  the  EEA  national  was  not
    exercising Treaty Rights. Permission was not granted  with  respect  to
    the Article 8 ground.

Consideration

 8. The respondent refused the appellant's application on two grounds:

      a. that his relationship with an EEA national was one of  convenience;
         and

      b. that he had failed to demonstrate his wife was a qualified person.

 9. I will consider each of these in turn.

Marriage of convenience

10. The appellant will not be entitled to a residence card under Regulation
    17 of the 2006 Regulations as the spouse of his EEA national sponsor if
    his marriage to her is one of convenience. This is because Regulation 2
    of the 2006 Regulations stipulates that 'spouse' does  not  include  "a
    party to a marriage of convenience".

11. The phrase "marriage  of  convenience"  is  not  defined  in  the  2006
    Regulations but its meaning has been  commented  on  in  case  law.  In
    Papajorgji (EEA spouse marriage  of  convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT
    00038 (IAC) it was defined as a  "marriage  entered  into  without  the
    intention of matrimonial cohabitation and for  the  primary  reason  of
    securing admission to the country."

12. Instead of considering whether the  appellant  was  in  a  marriage  of
    convenience the FtT asked itself, and reached a  finding  with  respect
    to, whether the  appellant  and  his  sponsor  were  in  a  "subsisting
    relationship." The FtT has therefore applied the wrong legal  test  and
    as such has made a clear  error  of  law.  The  error  is  material  as
    "marriage  of  convenience"  and  "subsisting  relationship"  are   not
    synonymous and an appellant could satisfy one but not the other.

Qualified Person

13. The appellant will only be entitled to a residence card if  his  spouse
    is a qualified person under Regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations.

14. The FtT decision does not include  any  consideration  or  findings  on
    whether the appellant's spouse was a qualified person even  though  the
    spouse filed a witness statement that included evidence in the form  of
    pay slips that was undoubtedly relevant to this issue. The  failure  to
    address this matter, which was one of the two  reasons  the  respondent
    rejected the appellant's application, was a further error of law.

Remaking the appeal

15. I informed the parties at the hearing  that  I  found  there  to  be  a
    material error of law for the reasons described above. I  advised  them
    that I intended to remake the decision at the hearing and  I  proceeded
    to hear submissions  from  both  parties  in  respect  of  whether  the
    appellant and his sponsor were in a marriage of convenience and whether
    the sponsor was a qualified person under Regulation 6.  I then reserved
    my decision.

16. Having considered the submissions and looked again at the evidence that
    was before the FtT, and having regard to both 7.2(a) and 7.2(b) of  the
    President's Practice Direction, notwithstanding  my  initial  view,  as
    expressed at the hearing, that I  was  in  a  position  to  remake  the
    appeal, I have decided that this is an appeal that should  be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. At the conclusion of the hearing, after I had advised the parties  that
    my decision was reserved, Mr Nwaekwu was handed a bundle  of  documents
    by the appellant which he in turn handed to me. No application was made
    and I was simply asked to take them into consideration in remaking  the
    decision. Mr Kola objected to this evidence being admitted and I  agree
    with his objection. Not only  has  the  appellant  disregarded  section
    15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, he waited
    until after the hearing was  concluded  to  submit  the  evidence.  The
    evidence has not been admitted and has played no part in my decision.

Decision

 a) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside in its  entirety  and  the  appeal
    heard afresh.

 b) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  hearing  afresh
    before a judge other than First tier Tribunal Judge Wallace.

 c) No anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 30 December 2015              |

