

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 11569/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10TH SEPTEMBER 2014                        |On 22ND SEPTEMBER 2014       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             SOPHIA OSEI NKETIA                    Claimant




Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L. Tarlow ( Home office presenting officer)
For the Claimant: Mr N Balroop  ( Michael & co Legal Services)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


   1.   In this appeal the appellant is referred to  as  the  Secretary  of
      State and the respondent is referred to as the claimant.
   2.   This matter comes before us for consideration as to whether or  not
      there is a material error of law in a determination of the First Tier
      Tribunal (Judge Birk) promulgated on 10th June  2014,  in  which  she
      allowed the appeal  under  Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
      Regulations 2006, on the grounds that the claimant was the spouse  of
      an EEA national.


Background

   3.  The claimant is a citizen of Ghana whose date of birth is 30th April
      1984.  She appealed the decision made on  11  February  2014  by  the
      Secretary of State refusing her application for a residence  card  on
      the basis of a proxy marriage in Ghana to a Belgian national who  was
      exercising Treaty rights in the UK.


   4.   The reason for refusal was that the proxy marriage conditions under
      Ghanaian law were not met.  There was no evidence  that  the  parties
      were in a durable relationship.

   5.   The appeal before the First Tier Tribunal proceeded on the basis of
      submissions only.  The Tribunal  found  that  the  claimant  met  the
      requirements under Ghanaian law.  The Tribunal considered CB(Validity
      of marriage; proxy  marriage)  Brazil  [2008]  UKAIT  00080  and  NA(
      customary marriage and divorce - evidence) Ghana  [2009]  UKAIT00009.
      At [16] the Tribunal concluded  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  go
      further to consider Kareem (proxy marriage- EU law [2014] UKUT  00024
      or whether or not  there  was  a  durable  relationship  pursuant  to
      Regulation 8.

      Grounds of appeal


   6.  The Secretary of State argued that the Tribunal  misinterpreted  the
      decision in Kareem.    The  Tribunal  should  first  have  considered
      whether the marriage was recognised in the EEA Member  State  of  the
      sponsor, namely Belgium.  There was  no  evidence  advanced  in  this
      regard.


   7.  Permission to appeal was granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge McDade
      on 29th July 2014.


     Hearing before us


    8.  Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds of appeal. After some discussion it
    was effectively  conceded by Mr Balroop that the Tribunal erred in  law
    in light of the recent Upper Tribunal decision of TA &  others(  Kareem
    explained)[2014] UKUT 316(IAC) which clarified any  uncertainty  as  to
    the Upper Tribunal's decision in Kareem.  It is  clearly  the  position
    that the lawfulness of proxy  marriages  is  to  be  considered  having
    regard to and in accordance with the laws in the  relevant  EEA  member
    State ( Kareem at [11]).






      Discussion and decision


   9.  We  decided  that  there  was  a  material  error  of   law  in  the
      determination as the Tribunal failed to apply the correct approach in
      Kareem.  The first consideration ought to have been  whether  or  not
      the marriage was lawful under laws  of  the  EEA  member  State.  The
      Tribunal failed to engage in  any  consideration  of  the  applicable
      legal provisions in Belgium, the sponsor's EEA State.


  10.   We have decided to set aside the  decision  under  Regulation  7  (
      Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

  11. As the Tribunal did not proceed  to  consider  the  question  of  the
      durability of the relationship under Regulation 8 (indeed it was  not
      asked to do so) we took the view that the  most  sensible  course  of
      action was for the matter to be remitted to First Tier Judge Birk for
      her to deal with Regulation 8.

Decision


  12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The findings of
      fact are preserved.



  13. The matter is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal at  Birmingham  for
      hearing before Judge Birk on 24th  September  2014.  The  only  issue
      which remains for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  determine  is  that
      arising under Regulation 8 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006
      (durability of the relationship).







                               Signed                 Date 11.9.2014


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


There was no anonymity order made by the First tier Tribunal.
The fee award made by the Tribunal is set aside.

                                        Signed                 Date
                                   11.9.2014


                                    GA Black
                                    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

