
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11452/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 March 2015                             |On 20 April 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         RAGIL ANTHOORVALAPPIL RAJAN
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Khan, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is a respondent appeal but I shall henceforth refer to the parties
    in the original terms detailed in the decision of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Callow following a hearing on 13 October 2014.

 2. No application has been made for anonymity  in  these  proceedings  and
    there is no reason why such an order should be made.

 3. The appellant is a citizen  of  India  born  on  1  January  1988.   He
    appealed against a decision of the respondent dated  18  February  2014
    refusing him leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant and the
    further decision to remove him under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision and, following a hearing at Taylor
    House, the judge, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  11  December  2014,
    allowed the appellant's appeal.

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal.  This was granted by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Osborne on 30 January 2015.  His reasons for
    so doing were:-

         "1.  The grounds seek permission to appeal a decision  and  reasons
             of First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow  who  in  a  decision  and
             reasons promulgated 11 December 2014 allowed the  Appellant's
             appeal against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  leave  to
             remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)   Migrant   under   the
             Immigration Rules.

         2.   The grounds assert  that  the  Judge  erred  in  law  in  that
             inadequate  reasons  were  provided  as  to  how   the   final
             determination was reached.  The reasons for refusal were cited
             but no findings of fact have been made on  (iii),  erroneously
             referred to as (ii), of the reasons for  refusal.   The  Judge
             failed to give sufficient reasons for the overall findings.

         3.   In an otherwise careful and detailed decision and reasons  the
             Judge set out the pertinent issues, law and evidence  relating
             to the facts of the appeal.  In appeals of this nature  it  is
             the task of the Judge to make findings of fact on the basis of
             the evidence and to provide adequately clear reasons for those
             findings.  In relation to the rest of the decision and reasons
             the Judge limits his findings of fact to three paragraphs (11,
             12 and 13).  It is at least arguable that the Judge failed  to
             provide adequate reasons for the  findings  made  in  each  of
             paragraphs 12 and 13 and that the arguably inadequate  reasons
             amount to an arguable error of law.

         4.   As this arguable error of law has  been  identified,  all  the
             issues raised in the grounds are arguable."

 6. Thus the appeal gave before me today.

 7. Mr Walker submitted that the judge materially erred in failing to  give
    adequate reasons for  his  decision.   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    application should have succeeded under the Immigration Rules  but  has
    inadequately explained how his final  decision  was  arrived  at.   The
    reasons for refusal have been cited but the  points  therein  have  not
    been engaged with and no findings of fact have been made in respect  of
    certain matters.  There has been a failure to give  sufficient  reasons
    for the overall findings and that the judge's  decision  should,  as  a
    consequence, be set aside.

 8. Mr Khan argued that the judge had considered  the  totality  of  issues
    within the appeal and had come to conclusions that were open to be made
    on the evidence, having found that the appellant was plausible.

 9. The judge's decision runs  to  seven  pages  and  thirteen  paragraphs.
    However, the first five and a half pages are effectively a  recital  of
    the material that was before the judge and it is  only,  in  less  than
    half a page, that the judge gives his decision at paragraphs 11, 12 and
    13.   They  do  not  engage  with  the  reasons  for  refusal  and   so
    unfortunately the respondent is deprived of any understanding as to why
    the appeal has been allowed.  In short, for the reasons asserted  there
    are inadequate  reasons  provided  by  the  judge  for  coming  to  the
    conclusion that he did.

10. The impact of this is that the respondent has been deprived of  a  fair
    hearing within the First-tier Tribunal.  Accordingly, I find  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and  has  to
    be set aside in its entirety.

11. The making of the decision in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making  of  an  error  on  a  point  of  law  and  I  consider  in  the
    circumstances that the appeal should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be dealt with afresh, pursuant to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  and  Practice  7.2(b),
    before any judge aside from Judge Callow.

12. No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date         13 April 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

