
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11652/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 20th February 2015                |On 26th February 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                              mrs aurea fulcher
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Iken, instructed by Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mrs Fulcher is a citizen of  St.  Lucia  whose  date  of
    birth is recorded as 2nd October 1963.  On or about 2nd July  2013  she
    made application for a  Derivative  Residence  Card  having  regard  to
    Regulations 15A(4A)(a) and (c) as well as Regulation 18A(1)(b)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. By Regulation 15A(4A) the Appellant would be entitled to the Derivative
    Residence Card were she able to establish on balance  of  probabilities
    that she is -

         "(a) the primary carer of a British citizen ("the relevant  British
             citizen");

         (b)  the  relevant  British  citizen  is  residing  in  the  United
             Kingdom; and

         (c)  the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in  the
             United Kingdom or in another EEA state if [she] were  required
             to leave."

 3. On  3rd  March  2014  the  Respondent  refused  the  application.   The
    Appellant appealed.  Her appeal was heard on 17th October 2014 by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Finch sitting at Taylor House.  Judge  Finch
    heard the evidence and accepted the case as advanced, namely  that  the
    relevant British  citizen,  the  Appellant's  husband,  was  very  ill,
    undergoing medical treatment for prostrate  cancer  and  other  medical
    conditions.  It is clear reading the Decision and Reasons  as  a  whole
    that Judge Finch found each of the requirements of  Regulation  15A(4A)
    met.

 4. At paragraph 15 of the Statement  of  Reasons,  Judge  Finch,  said  as
    follows:

         "Having read their witness statements  and  heard  the  Appellant's
         oral evidence I also find on  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
         Appellant (sic) [for which the judge  clearly  meant  the  Sponsor]
         would not be able to remain living in the  United  Kingdom  if  the
         Appellant were not granted a derivative residence  card  and  would
         have to return to St. Lucia with her even though this would deprive
         him of the on-going  hospital  treatment,  which  is  essential  to
         maintain his health and well-being.  Taking this and  the  totality
         of  the  evidence  into  account  and   applying   a   balance   of
         probabilities I find that the Appellant is entitled to a derivative
         residence card."

 5. Somewhat surprisingly Judge Finch then, under the  heading  'Notice  of
    Decision' dismissed the appeal.  On any view reading the decision as  a
    whole Judge Finch clearly erred and intended to allow the appeal.  That
    is not an issue, indeed Mr Tarlow was for submitting  that  the  matter
    should be dealt with under the slip rule and be re-promulgated.

 6. Whilst it was open to the Appellant's representatives to  suggest  that
    the matter might be remedied under the  "slip  rule",  application  was
    made for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  grounds
    touched upon the inconsistency between the finding  and  the  reasoning
    and also submitted that the judge had failed to  deal  with  Article  8
    ECHR. Whether the issue of Article 8 would arise  in  circumstances  in
    which a derivative card is being granted is not a matter that I need to
    concern myself with today,  though  it  might  be  argued  that  if  no
    decision has been made to remove the Appellant then it cannot be argued
    that the decision interferes with her family or private life.

 7. On 23rd December 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  McDade  granted
    permission so the matter comes before me.  I have to determine  whether
    there is an error of law which is material.   Clearly  there  is.   The
    error of law is that the judge dismissed the  appeal  when  clearly  he
    intended to allow it.  That much, as I have  said,  is  not  really  in
    dispute and whilst I could have dealt with that  under  the  slip  Rule
    there is no reason why I should not simply re-make the decision on  the
    basis of the judge's clear intention.

 8. However, in re-making the decision I now have to  have  regard  to  the
    submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of State in  the  response.
    The "Rule 24 Notice", which is the reply to the grounds, is  dated  9th
    January 2015.  At paragraph 3 the  Secretary  of  State  sets  out  her
    position which is as follows:

         "In summary, the Respondent relies on Upper Procedure Rule 24(3)(e)
         [which appears to be a reference  to  the  Procedure  Rules  before
         amendment) and will submit that the judge has failed  to  give  any
         adequate reasons as to why there would  not  be  available  to  the
         Appellant's  husband  suitable  medical  care  from   the   various
         applicable agencies in the United Kingdom.  This was a major  issue
         in the refusal of the application  of  the  Appellant.   The  judge
         singularly fails to deal with this issue in paragraph 14."

 9. It was the Secretary of State's position that in respect of  Regulation
    15A(4A)(c) of the  2006  Regulations,  the  Statement  of  Reasons  was
    inadequate.

10. The matter was stood down in order that I might remind  myself  of  the
    witness statements that were before Judge Finch and for Mr Tarlow to do
    likewise. Whilst Mr Tarlow had indicated a desire to cross-examine  the
    Appellant in the remaking of the Decision, having read  the  statements
    and the Decision and Reasons, I saw no reason why the  findings  should
    be interfered with or any additional evidence be admitted.

11. I note that at paragraph 6 of the Decision and Reasons that counsel for
    the Respondent was said to have  made  very  brief  submissions.  Judge
    Finch was referred to the letter dated 4th September 2014 from Ms Hoad,
    Cardiac Liaison Sister at Guy's and St Thomas'  NHS  Foundation  Trust,
    but otherwise submitted only that the credibility of the oral  evidence
    given by the Appellant and her husband was a matter  for  Judge  Finch.
    That was the extent, it would seem, of the submissions. I  have  looked
    at the judge's notes; there is no more.

12. What the judge did have  however,  were  witness  statements  from  the
    Sponsor and the Appellant.  Those witness  statements  are  each  dated
    17th October 2014 and without  rehearsing  the  contents  of  them,  as
    indeed  Judge  Finch  did  not  do,  each  said  that  it   would   not
    realistically be possible  for  the  Sponsor,  given  all  the  medical
    conditions and the care that he was receiving from his wife, for him to
    remain in the United Kingdom were she required to leave.  The threshold
    is high but meaningless if  impossible  to  meet.  Each  case  is  fact
    specific. The test, based upon the evidence, was  whether  the  Sponsor
    would be compelled  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  because  no  other
    adequate arrangements could be made: Maureen Hines v London Borough  of
    Lambeth [2014] EWCA Civ 660. That was a case involving a child but  the
    general guidance holds good.

13. It was for the judge at first instance  to  form  a  view  and  make  a
    finding.  The question for me is whether the finding made by the  judge
    was one that  was  open  to  him.   It  would  not  seem  that  he  was
    particularly well-helped by the Presenting Officer, given  the  limited
    submissions but  I  am  not  able  to  say,  having  read  the  witness
    statements that the finding of the judge was not one that was  open  to
    him.  In my judgment it was.

14. Since the finding was one that was open to the  judge  the  submissions
    made now on behalf of the Secretary of State that there  is  sufficient
    medical care in the United Kingdom and more particularly that Mr Tarlow
    on behalf of the Secretary of State would wish to take issue  with  the
    witness statements are matters that should and  could  more  forcefully
    have been taken before Judge Finch. In the circumstances I re-make  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that the Appellant is entitled
    to the relief sought and is entitled to the derivative card.

Notice of Decision

15. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The  Decision  is  remade
    such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to grant a Derivative
    Residence Card is affirmed. It follows that the Decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside and remade such that the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal is allowed.



Signed        Date 26th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make any fee award. None was asked for but  in  any  event  it  was
open to the Appellant's  representatives  to  have  invited  the  First-tier
Tribunal to repromulgate the Decision in the First-tier  rather  than  bring
the matter before the Upper Tribunal.



Signed        Date 26th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
