
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/11533/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th April 2016                        |  On 26th April 2016                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                        James Adekunle Atanda Adeboye
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Kareem of Atlantic Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Nigeria, born  on  17th  July  1970.
    The Appellant claims to have first arrived in the UK on 21st  September
    1994 when he was given leave to enter as  a  visitor.   Thereafter  the
    Appellant  has  a   lengthy   immigration   history,   including   many
    unsuccessful applications for leave to remain.  Eventually and  on  2nd
    March 2015 the Appellant made representations which were treated as  an
    application  for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds.   That
    application was refused for  the  reasons  given  in  the  Respondent's
    letter of 18th March 2015.  The Appellant appealed, and his appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kainth (the Judge) sitting at
    Richmond on 16th September 2015.  He decided to allow the appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds for the reasons given
    in his Decision dated 22nd September 2015.  The Respondent sought leave
    to appeal that decision and on 23rd February 2016 such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge first dismissed the appeal under the provisions of  paragraph
    276B of HC 395.  This is the long residency Rule.   That  decision  has
    not been challenged by the Appellant.  The  Judge  also  dismissed  the
    appeal under Appendix FM of HC 395 as he was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant's relationship with his partner, MGL, had been of  sufficient
    duration.   Again,  this  decision  has  not  been  challenged  by  the
    Appellant.  However, the Judge  did  find  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner, and that they had
    a child, MDA born in the United Kingdom in October 2014.  The Appellant
    had a family life with his partner and child which would be  interfered
    with by the Respondent's decision to such a degree  of  gravity  as  to
    engage  the  Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  rights,  and  that  in  the
    circumstances  such  interference  was  disproportionate.   The   Judge
    allowed the appeal for those reasons.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Kandola referred to the grounds of  application  and
    submitted that the Judge had erred in law in  reaching  that  decision.
    Mr Kandola said that he did not wish to proceed  with  the  first  such
    ground of a procedural unfairness, but said that the Judge had erred in
    law by failing to  consider  if  there  were  compelling  circumstances
    required by the decision in R (on the  application  of)  Nagre  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) in order to proceed to consider the Appellant's
    Article 8 ECHR rights having found that the Appellant did  not  qualify
    for leave to remain under Appendix FM.

 5. In response, Mr Kareem argued that there had been no such error of law.
     The Judge had given a  sufficient  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 rights and had found that it would be in the  best  interests
    of the child to remain with her mother which was in accordance with the
    decision in Azimi-Moayed and Others [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC).

 6. I do find an error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  Judge  which  I
    therefore set aside.  In my view the Judge's reasoning  in  considering
    the proportionality of the Respondent's decision and therefore  whether
    there were compelling circumstances was insufficient.   He  noted  that
    the Appellant was an overstayer with no leave to remain,  and  that  he
    had a conviction for a criminal offence.  The Judge  did  consider  the
    public interest, and took account of the factors  set  out  in  Section
    117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.    In
    particular, the  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had  a  precarious
    immigration  history.   Set  against  these  factors,  the  Judge  only
    mentioned the obvious fact  that  with  a  child  so  young,  her  best
    interests would be to remain with her mother.  The Judge has  therefore
    not explained why there are compelling circumstances  to  outweigh  the
    public interest for the Respondent's decision to be disproportionate.

 7. For these reasons I find an error of law in the decision of the  Judge.
    I set that decision aside.  At the hearing I did not proceed to  remake
    the decision but decided that the decision  should  be  remade  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal in accordance with paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice
    Statements.  Further findings of fact need to be made.

Notice of Decision

 8. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside that decision.

    The decision is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed I find no reason to make such an order.






Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


