
[pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11281/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 October 2014                               |On 21st Oct 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                mei qin weng
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain, instructed by Kingswell Watts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mei Qin Weng was born on 12 May 1968  and  is  a  female
    citizen of  China.   In  her  decision  dated  18  February  2014,  the
    Secretary of State refused the appellant leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom and also made a decision to remove her under Section 10 of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The appellant appealed  against  that
    decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Grimshaw)  which,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 17 June 2014, dismissed the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a visitor in May 2008.  Her
    leave expired on 14 November 2008.  She did not  return  to  China  but
    remained living in  the  United  Kingdom  and  was  encountered  by  UK
    immigration authorities on 10 March 2012.  She  applied  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of her private and family life  with  her  husband,
    Zhenli Lin.  Mr Lin has  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  On 18 September 2013, the appellant submitted a statement  of
    intention to depart on a flight booked on 5 January 2014 but she failed
    to leave the United Kingdom.  Instead, she made a  further  application
    for leave to remain and it  is  that  application  which  falls  to  be
    considered in this appeal.

 3. The respondent accepts that the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship in the United Kingdom with her  husband.   The  respondent
    considered it not unreasonable for Mr Lin to  re-establish  his  family
    life with the appellant in China.  Both the appellant and  Mr  Lin  had
    lived in China during their early married life.

 4. Both parties accept that the appellant  cannot  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom under the provisions of  the  Immigration  Rules;  she  was  an
    overstayer and did not  have  leave  to  remain  at  the  date  of  her
    application.  The appeal was considered under Article 8 ECHR only.

 5. Ground 2 is without merit.  This ground asserts that the judge  applied
    the principles of Gulshan (Article 8-new rules-correct approach) [2013]
    UKUT 640 (IAC).  It is asserted that the judge failed to indicate  what
    good grounds existed to enable her to consider  the  appellant's  claim
    outside the Immigration Rules.  It is clear that, if the judge had  not
    found there to be good reason to go on  and  consider  Article  8  ECHR
    outside the Rules, then the appellant's appeal would have failed in any
    event.  Furthermore, as the Court of Appeal has made clear in MM [2014]
    EWCA 985  at  [129]  the  imposition  of  an  intermediary  "compelling
    circumstances" test  is  otiose.   The  judge's  decision  to  consider
    Article  8  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  an  error  of  law  in  such
    circumstances.

 6. Likewise, I do not  consider  that  ground  3  has  merit.   The  judge
    considered all the relevant circumstances, including those  aspects  of
    the  case  which  weighed  in  favour   of   the   appellant   in   the
    proportionality assessment.  Ground 3 represents nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with findings open to the judge on the evidence.

 7. The main thrust of Mr Hussain's submissions focussed upon ground 1.  He
    submitted that the judge had failed to provide a clear, cogent analysis
    of the facts under Article 8.  At [20], the judge had identified

         That the factors that weigh in favour of the appellant... it  makes
         no sense for Mr Lin to leave his job and home in order to accompany
         the appellant to  China...  the  economic  considerations  and  the
         legitimate demands of immigration control are not justified in this
         case.

    However, at [24] the judge stated that

         The appellant must show more than mere hardship as a consequence of
         being removed to China.  Inevitably, removal  will  result  in  the
         temporary rupturing of her shared life with Mr Lin.  Though it  may
         be difficult for Mr Lin to accompany the  appellant  to  China  the
         obstacles to return arguably do not go beyond the issues of  choice
         or  inconvenience  on  their  part.   Given  the  couple's  claimed
         attachment to each other and  their  access  to  accommodation  and
         support in China from their adult children it is  not  unreasonable
         to expect Mr Lin to elect to leave with the appellant... If Mr  Lin
         decides not to accompany the appellant to China it is reasonable to
         suppose that far from breaking up their relationship  the  strength
         of their marriage would be sufficient  to  meet  the  challenge  of
         their separation.

    Mr Hussain submitted that these two passages of the determination  were
    not consistent.  The appellant was left in  doubt  as  to  whether  the
    judge  had  concluded  that  "the  economic  considerations   and   the
    legitimate demands of  immigration  control"  were  outweighed  by  the
    interference which would be  caused  to  the  appellant's  private  and
    family life by her removal.

 8. I acknowledge that the two  passages  which  I  have  quoted  from  the
    determination appear under a  sub-heading  entitled  "My  Findings  and
    Conclusions".  However, it is entirely clear to me,  upon  reading  the
    entire determination, that the analysis is not inconsistent.  Paragraph
    20 opens with the words "I find that the factors that weigh  in  favour
    of the appellant are as follows."  The  judge  has  then  set  out  the
    arguments in favour of the appellant remaining in the  United  Kingdom.
    Where she says that "it makes no sense for the appellant to  return  to
    China..." she is doing nothing more than setting  out  the  appellant's
    case.  At [22], she opens the paragraph with the  words,  "I  find  the
    factors that weigh in favour of the Secretary of State are as follows."
     What is, perhaps, unfortunate is that, having set out the factors  for
    and against the appellant, the analysis moves on  to  the  judge's  own
    findings of fact and conclusions under the same sub-heading.   However,
    I do  not  find  that  the  appellant  or  any  other  reader  of  this
    determination would be left in any doubt as to the judge's conclusions.
     Having stated the arguments in favour of both parties, she states [26]
    that her

         overall conclusion is  that  the  interests  of  the  appellant  in
         allowing to remain in the United  Kingdom  must  give  way  to  the
         greater  weight  to  be  apportioned  to  the  legitimate  aim   of
         protecting  the  economic  wellbeing  of  this  country   and   the
         maintenance of fair immigration control.

    The judge leaves the reader of her determination in no doubt as to  the
    reason she has dismissed the appeal.  Consequently,  I  have  concluded
    that the judge has not erred in law such that the  determination  falls
    to be set aside.  At the  conclusion  of  the  hearing,  the  appellant
    addressed me directly, raising  a  number  of  issues  which  were  not
    addressed in the refusal letter or determination.  It is a  matter  for
    the appellant and her advisers as to whether she wishes to place any of
    those or any other matters before the Secretary of State.





DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 20 October 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

