
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/11659/2012
     IA/11660/2012
     IA/11664/2012
     IA/11666/2012
     IA/11669/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5 August 2013                                |On 31 October 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            Mohammad Tabaraiz Mir
                                Shamim Akhtar
                               Laiba Tabaraiz
                               Sobia Tabaraiz
                           Muhammad Saaim Tabaraiz
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Afzal, IIAS (Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Wardle, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  The first  appellant  is  the
    husband of the second appellant and father of the remaining appellants.
     I shall (as did the judge in the First-tier  Tribunal)  refer  to  the
    first appellant as "the appellant" throughout this determination.

 2. Granting permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Judge  Perkins
    expressed some doubt as to the immigration decision against which these
    appellants had appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Having  considered
    the matter carefully, I agree with Judge Jones (who heard and dismissed
    the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal)  that  the  present  appeal  is
    against  the  refusal  of  the  appellants'  applications   to   remain
    indefinitely in the United Kingdom on the basis that the appellant is a
    work permit holder.  That decision is dated 20 December 2011, the  same
    date of the respondent's refusal letter.  That letter  makes  it  clear
    that the refusal concerned the  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as a work permit holder which the appellant had submitted  on  1
    August 2011.  The position was obscured subsequently by  the  issue  by
    the respondent of a supplementary refusal  letter  on  26  April  2012.
    That letter  deals  with  the  (now  revoked)  paragraph  395C  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The respondent considered that the factors set  out
    in that paragraph applied in the case of  these  appellants  under  the
    terms of Home Office internal guidance.

 3. The grounds of appeal, however, to the Upper Tribunal make no reference
    to paragraph 395C but are concerned solely  with  Article  8  ECHR.   I
    shall deal with the Immigration Rules points first.  The first thing to
    note is that Judge Jones in his determination recorded more  than  once
    that the representative for the appellants at the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing had openly conceded  to  him  that  the  appellants  could  not
    succeed in an appeal under the Immigration Rules [see,  in  particular,
    the determination at paragraph 27].  Secondly, the  grounds  of  appeal
    assert that the passing of an English language test  by  the  appellant
    was not required because this was not an  entry  clearance  or  points-
    based system application.  A problem had also arisen  over  the  timely
    submission of the  appellants'  applications  to  which  the  appellant
    asserts that sufficient funds had been in his bank account but that the
    applications should not have been returned to him by the respondent.

 4. It is clear from the refusal  letter  of  20  December  2011  that  the
    applications had been refused because the  first  appellant  failed  to
    satisfy paragraph 134(vi) of the Immigration Rules:

    134.     Indefinite leave to  remain  may  be  granted  on  application
           provided the applicant:

         (vi)     has sufficient  knowledge  of  the  English  language  and
             sufficient knowledge about life  in  the  United  Kingdom,  in
             accordance with paragraph 33BA  of  these  Rules,  unless  the
             applicant is under the age of 18 or aged 65  or  over  at  the
             date of the application.

 5. A further requirement in paragraph 33BA of BA of  the  Rules  indicated
    that "a sufficient knowing of  the  English  language"  could  only  be
    proved by an applicant who had passed the Life in  the  UK  Test.   The
    refusal letter noted:

         In considering your representations submitted in  support  of  your
         application it is noted you and your  dependent  spouse  have  only
         submitted ESOL qualifications to demonstrate you have knowledge  of
         life  in  the  UK.   ...  For  the  reasons  outlined  above   your
         application for indefinite leave to remain as a work permit  holder
         is refused under paragraph 135 with reference to paragraph  134(vi)
         of HC 395 (as amended).

 6. The parties in this appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  in
    agreement that the appellant could not satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules
    because he had not passed the test.  Indeed, the  determination  refers
    to an application for an  adjournment  of  the  hearing  supposedly  to
    enable the appellant to enter  (and  pass)  the  test.   At  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing  in  August  2013,  Mr  Afzal  informed  me  that  the
    appellant had now passed the life in the Life in the UK test.

 7. I have to say I can find nothing wrong  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's handling of the Immigration Rules appeal.  Not only was he told
    by the appellants' representative that his clients  could  not  succeed
    under the Rules but it is apparent that the requirements  of  paragraph
    134(vi) defeated the applications.

 8. The remaining question, therefore, is whether the judge has  reached  a
    decision on Article 8 ECHR which is not flawed by legal  error.   Judge
    Perkins when granting permission considered that the judge may not have
    applied the case law (Judge Jones  refers  to  the  familiar  cases  of
    Razgar 2004 UKHL 27  and Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39. At [29] the  judge
    gave his reasons in detail for finding that it would  be  proportionate
    and in pursuance  of  a  lawful  and  legitimate  goal  of  controlling
    immigration for the respondent to  refuse  these  appellants  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  The private lives of the appellants were
    expressly considered by the judge at [30].  The judge  found  that  the
    appellants had not established "friendships or community  ties"  within
    the  United  Kingdom  which  would  render  the  respondent's  decision
    disproportionate.  Whilst best practice might indicate that  the  judge
    should have referred to leading case authorities, his failure to do  so
    is not an error of law per se; what is  important  is  that  the  judge
    applies the relevant principles contained in the jurisprudence. I  find
    that he has done precisely that  in  his  determination.  Further,  the
    grounds are,  with  respect,  little  more  than  a  disagreement  with
    findings which were open to the judge on  the  evidence.   The  grounds
    speak of the income tax paid by the family who had lived lives  in  the
    United Kingdom "blamelessly".  It is true (as the grounds assert)  that
    the judge has not referred expressly to  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  However, I find that this  is  a
    case  where  the  judge's  analysis  of  all  the  relevant  facts   is
    sufficiently thorough that his failure to deal expressly  with  Section
    55 does not render his determination wrong in law such that  it  should
    be set aside.  As regards Section 55,  the  grounds  do  no  more  than
    assert that it would not be in the best interests of the  children  "to
    go to a third world country which is almost a failed  state".   Section
    55 will rarely, if ever, involve a detailed comparison of conditions in
    the United Kingdom to those of the appellants' home  country.   Had  he
    examined Section 55 in  detail,  I  find  that  the  judge  would  have
    concluded that the best interests of these young children would  be  to
    remain with their parents, who are returning to Pakistan.  That country
    is also the country of the children's nationality and culture.  It  was
    clearly open to the judge to find that, notwithstanding the  fact  that
    the children and their parents had  spent  some  years  in  the  United
    Kingdom, it would not be disproportionate or contrary to the children's
    best interests for them to be removed.

 9. For these reasons, I find that the appeal  should  be  dismissed.   The
    judge has not reached a conclusion which is perverse in  any  way.  His
    findings were available to  him  on  evidence  which  he  has  analysed
    adequately.

DECISION

10. These appeals are dismissed.






Signed                              Date 29 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
