









UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11660/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 19 December 2016              |On: 27 January 2017                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                          Mr Mohammad Motiur Rahman
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ali, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 1 January 1979. His
      appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against the  respondent's  decisions
      dated 14 March 2015 cancelling his continuing leave to remain  in  the
      UK as a Tier  2  (General)  Migrant  and  to  remove  him  by  way  of
      directions, was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Wright  in   a
      decision promulgated on 16 March 2016.


   2. The Judge found that the  appellant  had  previously  used  deception,
      including the use of a proxy taker,  to  obtain  an  English  language
      certificate.


   3. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  stated
      that it is arguable that the Judge's approach to the ETS evidence  may
      no longer be sustainable in the  light  of  the  SM  and  Qadir  case,
      compromised by the secretary of state in the Court of Appeal. It would
      be for the appellant to establish if any error of  law  was  material,
      given the other matters referred to by the Judge,  and  in  particular
      those at [22].


      Background


   4. The appellant entered the UK on 18 April 2008 on a  work  permit  visa
      valid until 12 March 2013. A new work permit was granted on  5  August
      2009 valid until 5 August 2014.


   5.  On  17  September  2012,  he  submitted  a  Tier  2  General  Migrant
      application in order to undertake employment as a chef at Cinnamons in
      Woking. This was granted on 16 November 2012, valid until 27 September
      2017.  The  appellant  submitted  his  ETS  TOIEC   English   language
      certificate.  He claimed to have taken a TOEIC English  language  test
      at the Premier Language Training Centre on 21 August 2012.


   6. On 5 February  2014,  he  submitted  a  new  Tier  2  General  Migrant
      application for indefinite leave to remain, which was withdrawn on  22
      April 2014 after the Home Office requested evidence of his  employment
      over the previous five year period.


   7. The appellant returned to the UK  on  13  March  2015  having  visited
      Bangladesh. He was served with Home Office form IS 81  suspending  his
      visa and requiring him to submit to  further  examination  by  way  of
      interviews, regarding his alleged obtaining  of  leave  by  deception,
      namely his ETS TOIEC English Language test score, which was  cancelled
      as invalid following the ETS investigation.


   8. On 14 March 2015, his leave was cancelled under paragraph 321A(1)  and
      (2) of the Immigration Rules. That Rule sets out the grounds on  which
      leave to enter or remain which is in force is to be cancelled at port.




   9. Paragraph 321A (1) provides for cancellation where:


     a) There has been such a change in the circumstances of that  person's
        case since the leave was given that it should be cancelled or:


     b) False representations were made or false documents  were  submitted
        (whether or not material to the application, and whether or not  to
        the holder's knowledge), or material facts were not  disclosed,  in
        relation to the application  for  leave;  or  in  order  to  obtain
        documents from the secretary of state or a third party required  in
        support of the application.


  10. The Judge noted on the cancellation notice dated 14  March  2015  that
      the officer was satisfied that the appellant had used false documents,
      the ETS TOEIC English language certificate - in order  to  obtain  his
      Tier 2 (General) leave to remain but which  would  have  been  refused
      under paragraph 320(7A) of the Rules if the true facts were known.


  11. It was also contended that the appellant admitted to working in breach
      of his Tier 2 (General) conditions that  were  granted  to  him  on  5
      August 2009.


  12. His leave was cancelled under paragraph 321A(1) and (2).


  13. The Judge was not satisfied  on  the  evidence  that  the  appellant's
      account of having personally taken the English  language  test  on  21
      August 2012 is a consistent and credible one. The credibility  of  the
      appellant was "fatally" undermined for reasons set out in  (i-vii)  of
      [22] of the decision.


  14. In the circumstances, when the immigration interview which was  signed
      by the appellant as well as the evidence  adduced  by  the  respondent
      involving the use of voice verification  software  to  check  the  ETS
      record of the appellant's speaking test and confirming that there  was
      significant evidence to conclude that his certificate was fraudulently
      obtained, the Judge was satisfied that the appellant had obtained  his
      Tier 2 General Migrant leave  to  remain  by  deception.  He  directed
      himself in accordance with authority as set out at [23].


  15. Accordingly the appeal fell for mandatory refusal  as  the  respondent
      had established on the balance of probabilities as  a  precedent  fact
      that the basis for the general ground under 321A(2) was  made  out  on
      account of both the English language certificate as well the appellant
      having worked without the necessary work permit/paperwork [24].


  16. The Judge was also satisfied that the respondent  had  established  on
      the balance of probabilities that there had been such a change in  the
      circumstances of his leave since it  was  given,  that  it  should  be
      cancelled.


  17. He went on to state that even if he is wrong about the  appellant  not
      having  personally  taking  the  English  test,  he  nevertheless  was
      satisfied that he clearly admits  on  numerous  occasions  during  the
      interview to effectively having cheated during the tests and therefore
      that he has still deceived the authorities in obtaining the  grant  of
      Tier 2 General Migrant leave on 16 November 2012 [26].


  18. His appeal was accordingly refused under the  Rules.  The  Judge  also
      considered an Article 8 claim outside the rules. He did not find  that
      the removal of the appellant would constitute an interference with his
      Article 8 rights which is disproportionate to  the  legitimate  public
      end of maintenance of  a  coherent  and  fair  system  of  immigration
      control.


  19. Mr Ali, who did not represent the appellant at the  hearing,  referred
      to  the  appellant's  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  He
      submitted that the appellant admitted that his friend helped him  when
      he was preparing for the test but not at the time of the test  itself.
      He therefore gave an innocent explanation.


  20. He referred to questions 144-145 at the interview. The  appellant  was
      asked "when someone helps you  in  a  test,  is  that  cheating?"  The
      appellant gave no answer. He answered at question 144 "yes or no." The
      appellant answered that that you can discuss a little bit in the exam.




  21. Mr Ali referred to the appellant's evidence and witness statement. The
      interviewer made him "more stressed" after the long  journey.  He  may
      have messed up some answers as he was feeling sleepy. It is  not  easy
      to remember everything relating to the test taken in August  2012.  He
      wanted a Bengali interpreter for the convenience of communication.


  22. He stated earlier that he did not think that much before answering. He
      was asked 158 questions. He thought it would be a short interview  and
      thus said that he was fit to be interviewed and did not want to eat or
      drink anything. The interview however lasted more than two and a  half
      hours. It was not read back to him as it was written on the record.


  23. The appellant also contended with regard to  a  breach  of  conditions
      relating to his visa granted on 5 August 2009 that the  Rules  allowed
      him to work part time for another employer  at  the  same  trade.  The
      amount  provided  by  the  respondent  for  different  employers   was
      consistent with the part time working. He was thus not required to get
      any permission from the respondent to work part time for  a  different
      employer as his original job was ongoing.


  24.  It  was  also  contended  that  with  regard  to  the   supplementary
      employment, the respondent served a statement from HMRC and an extract
      relating to the employment record of an employee. That was produced to
      show that the appellant was in breach as  he  was  working  for  other
      employers previously. However, at  paragraph  8  of  the  grounds  for
      permission to appeal, it is asserted that it was proved at the hearing
      that the NI number did not match to that of the appellant and he never
      worked for those employers.


  25. He only worked up to 20 hours a week and the respondent did not adduce
      any evidence that he actually worked  for  more  than  20  hours.  The
      guidance states that permission was  not  required  for  supplementary
      work.


  26. In his later grounds for permission to appeal presented to  the  Upper
      Tribunal, the appellant referred to the decision in  SM  and  Qadir  v
      SSHD (ETS  -  evidence  -  burden  of  proof)  [2016]  UKUT  00229  in
      connection with ETS/TOEIC appeals which had been  recently  upheld  by
      the Court of Appeal. The respondent's appeal was  dismissed  with  the
      consent of the secretary of state.  The  appellant's  appeal  was  not
      heard prior to the decision  in  SM  and  Qadir  which  had  not  been
      promulgated then.


  27. On behalf of  the  respondent,  Mr  Singh  referred  to  the  Rule  24
      response.


  28. He submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  directed  himself
      appropriately.  The  grounds  relating  to  the  secretary  of   state
      withdrawing her appeal at the Court of Appeal  in  SM  and  Qadir  are
      misconceived.


  29. In fact the secretary of state indicated to the Court of Appeal in the
      case of Qadir that 40 ETS cases before the Court of  Appeal  would  be
      reviewed in the light of the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Qadir,
      which was no longer being challenged. The respondent indicated that it
      was likely that she would concede some cases  where  the  evidence  of
      deception relied upon is "limited".


  30. Mr Singh submitted that none of the categories applied to  this  case.
      The secretary of state's review  was  confined  only  to  those  cases
      before the Court of Appeal and it is not a general review of  all  ETS
      cases "per se."


  31. In the present appeal, there was a clear admission  by  the  appellant
      that he used a proxy (who happened to be his friend) to help him  pass
      the TOIEC test.


  32. Mr Singh set out in detail the appellant's interview on 13 March 2015.


  33. Mr Singh noted that the appellant had been asked questions during  his
      interview about his writing score. He replied that did  not  remember.
      He was asked whether he got any help on his writing test.  He  replied
      that his friend explained to him and he wrote that down. He  does  not
      remember the  kinds  of  questions.   He  said  whatever  he  did  not
      understand with regard to that test his friend explained  to  him.  He
      said he asked his friend for help with maybe 40 or  50  questions.  He
      said that he just asked him what he did not understand.


  34. He was asked (Question 115) whether  he  only  took  a  listening  and
      writing test with TOIEC in 2012. He agreed that it was just those two.
      It was put to him at the interview that the TOIEC certificate of  2012
      shows that he scored 180 out of 200. He agreed. He was asked (Question
      117) whether, if his friend had not helped him he  would  have  got  a
      much smaller score. He answered "could be a bit up and down."


  35. It was put to him (Question 118) that the TOIEC  certificate  that  he
      used was in his submission for the Cinnamons job and visa. That showed
      someone with his name sat a speaking and  reading  test  as  well.  He
      answered "maybe, I don't remember."


  36. He was then asked (Question 119) "so you don't remember at all  having
      taken a  speaking  or  reading  test?"  He  answered  "yes."  He  then
      confirmed that he did not remember whether or not he took those tests.




  37. He was then asked (Question 21) with regard to the TOIEC speaking test
      whether somebody else took it. He said "Ok - I think I  did  the  test
      but don't remember."


  38. The question was repeated. He was  again  asked  with  regard  to  the
      speaking test taken, whether somebody took it for him.  There  was  no
      reply to that question.


  39. He was asked at Question  123  whether  he  had  anything  to  say  in
      response to that. He replied that "they talked to me in the test,  but
      I don't know if anyone else took the test." He  was  asked  what  they
      said to him "in the test." He answered that he did not remember.  They
      spoke in English and then explained it in  Bengali.  The  same  person
      asked him in English and then explained in Bengali.


  40. He stated with regard to the English speaking test that "my friend was
      taking the test with me" (Question 132).


  41. It was put to  him  -  Question  136  -  that  there  was  information
      available showing that someone took the speaking and reading test  for
      him. He replied "I don't know." He then said  that  he  did  take  the
      test.


  42. He was asked whether his friend helped him  on  the  reading  test  as
      well. He replied "yes" - Question 138.


  43. He was asked about the reading test.  When asked how it took place, he
      replied "what reading test? What is a reading test?" - Question 140.


  44. He also admitted during interview that he worked at  Roy  Whitney  Ltd
      without a work permit visa. He stated that he did not have  any  paper
      to work there but it was not a proper job. He just helped them.


  45. It was put to him that he also admitted that his friend helped him  in
      his TOEIC exam, to which he answered "yes." It was  also  put  to  him
      that if his friend had not helped him, he  would  have  got  very  low
      marks, to which he replied "a bit less, yes."


  46. He was directly asked at Question 144, whether,  "when  someone  helps
      you in a test, is that cheating?" He gave no answer.


  47. He was then asked "yes or no". He answered "you can  discus  a  little
      bit in the exam" - Questions 144-146.


  48. It was put to him that the records show that he did not even  sit  the
      speaking or reading exam, but someone else did. He did not respond.


  49. It was put to him that he said in very broken English at the beginning
      of the test that he wanted Bengali with no English.  Accordingly,  how
      could he have scored full marks on his  TOEIC  speaking  test,  namely
      200/200? There was again no response. He was asked whether  he  had  a
      response. He replied "I have nothing to say."


  50. Mr Singh submitted that the point taken on behalf  of  the  appellant,
      namely that he obtained assistance from his friend prior to  the  test
      being taken is accordingly not correct. It  is  particularly  striking
      that he obtained full marks for speaking.


  51. Accordingly, Mr Singh submitted that the findings by the Judge at [22]
      were open to  him.  He  referred  in  particular  to  the  finding  at
      paragraph [22(v)] that the appellant made disingenuous attempts during
      cross examination to suggest that his friend, whom he could  not  even
      name initially in interview, and who did not appear as  a  witness  at
      the hearing or make a witness  statement,  in  fact  only  helped  him
      during what  amounted  effectively  to  preparation  for  the  English
      language test, as opposed to during the test itself.


  52. Mr Singh submitted that each page of the interview record  was  signed
      by the appellant, including the front page.  The  appellant  wanted  a
      Bengali interpreter. He stated at the end of  the  interview  that  he
      understood the questions.


  53. The Judge also found at [26] that  the  appellant  had  in  any  event
      clearly  admitted  on  numerous  occasions  during  the  interview  to
      effectively having cheated during the test and therefore, that he  has
      still deceived the authorities when obtaining the grant of the Tier  2
      General Migrant leave on 16  November  2012.  The  Judge  referred  to
      Questions 90-103, 107, 112-114, 131, 138, 142-146.


  54. Mr Singh referred to Questions  29-31  of  the  interview.  There  the
      appellant accepted that he did  not  work  from  December  2010  until
      June/July 2012, namely, one and a half years.  He  said  that  he  was
      looking for a good restaurant. He worked for one or two hours now  and
      then. He was asked what he did for one and a half years when he was in
      the UK. He said he was in his  relative's  house.  He  was  not  doing
      anything. He just ate and slept. He only worked  at  the  Roy  Whitney
      restaurant, namely his cousin's, one  or  two  hours  "to  help  him."
      (Questions 34-42) This was not permanent work.


  55. Ms Singh submitted that the appellant left the Shadhana restaurant  in
      December 2010 and had not worked there until 2012. This indicates that
      he did not work for that  restaurant  but  for  Whitney.  The  Judge's
      findings at [22(iv)] are accordingly sustainable.


      Assessment


  56. I have had regard to the interview record at  appendix  G  which  took
      place on 13 March 2015. It  commenced  at  19h43  until  approximately
      22h.14. The appellant stated at the outset that he  wanted  a  Bengali
      interpreter  as  "I  understand  very  little  English."   A   Bengali
      interpreter was accordingly booked.


  57. The appellant was asked whether  he  understood  the  interpreter,  to
      which he replied "yes." He also stated that he does not want to eat or
      drink anything.


  58. He signed the interview on 13 March 2015 at 22h14. He has also  signed
      each of the 20 pages of the interview.


  59. At the end of the interview, the appellant was asked whether he wished
      to add anything. He replied "what can I say?"


  60. The appellant answered the questions at the interview. He was able  to
      give substantial detail. He was able to concentrate. During the course
      of the interview he appeared to become annoyed. He stated that he  has
      not eaten or slept and that is why. He was reminded that he  had  been
      asked if he wished to eat "now". He replied that he did  not  want  to
      eat anything.


  61. He was then given the opportunity to obtain a drink. He then left  the
      interview room in order to obtain a hot drink (G9).


  62. The Judge considered the evidence of  the  appellant,  both  oral  and
      documentary as well as submissions.


  63. He was not satisfied on the evidence that the appellant's  account  of
      having personally taken the test was a consistent  and  credible  one.
      The Judge has set out his reasons for  that  finding  at  [22(i-vii)].
      That included his inability to  remember  so  many  things  about  the
      English language test that he claimed to have sat personally.


  64. The Judge accepted the record  of  the  interview  as  accurate,  even
      making allowances as requested by counsel, for his recent journey from
      Bangladesh.


  65. The appellant made a  "clear  admission"  of  having  worked  for  Raj
      Whitney Ltd, his cousin's restaurant, without the necessary permit  or
      paperwork at a time when he was unemployed or  was  not  working  with
      permission anywhere else. He was thus not undertaking  "supplementary"
      work as was subsequently claimed. He was therefore in  breach  of  his
      Tier 2 conditions.


  66. The appellant sought  to  cover  up  his  having  worked  without  the
      necessary permit or paperwork  after  leaving  the  Shadhana  Tandoori
      Restaurant by asking the interpreter not to tell the interviewer about
      this work at his cousin's restaurant.


  67. The appellant disingenuously sought to contend that  his  friend  only
      assisted him in preparing for the English language test as opposed  to
      during the test itself. That person was not called as  a  witness  and
      the appellant could not  even  remember  his  name  initially  in  the
      interview.


  68. The judge also considered the appellant's request for  an  interpreter
      for the appeal hearing despite his claim to  having  personally  taken
      and passed the test in August 2012 with record scores of  465/495  for
      listening; 180/200 for writing and 435/495  for  reading  and  finally
      200/200 for speaking.


  69. In those circumstances, the Judge concluded that there was  sufficient
      evidence that his certificate was fraudulently obtained leading  to  a
      cancellation of the test results. The Judge was thus satisfied that he
      had obtained his Tier 2 General Migrant leave to  remain  in  November
      2012 by deception.


  70. In summary, the Judge has considered all the  evidence  including  the
      appellant's evidence at the hearing. He has properly directed himself.
      In the event he  made  a  positive  finding  that  the  appellant  has
      admitted that he used a friend to help him pass the test. He has given
      sustainable reasons at [22] for rejecting the appellant's assertion of
      having personally taken the English language test on 21  August  2012.
      He has also given sustainable reasons  for  his  conclusion  that  the
      appellant breached the conditions of his leave to remain.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any error on a point of law. It shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.










      Signed                             Date  25 January 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

