
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11855/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 26 January 2015                            |On 4 March 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     JN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, Counsel instructed by Peer & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes before me following a hearing before  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Hanson on 6 November 2014.  At that hearing he decided that First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Graham had erred in law  in  her  decision  in  the
    appellant's  appeal  against  an  immigration  decision  made  by   the
    respondent.

 2. The appellant, who is a citizen of Burundi  born  on  18  August  1981,
    appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of   the
    respondent dated 28 March 2013, being a  decision  to  refuse  to  vary
    leave to remain.  The application was made with reference to  paragraph
    287 of HC 395 (as amended) and it was  refused  under  the  immigration
    rules, including with reference to paragraph 322(1A) having  regard  to
    the appellant's failure to  disclose  a  conviction  for  driving  with
    excess alcohol.  Having considered the  Article  8  immigration  rules,
    paragraph 322(1A), and Article 8 proper,  Judge  Graham  dismissed  the
    appeal on all grounds.

 3. For the reasons given in the 'Error  of  Law  Finding  and  Directions'
    Judge Hanson concluded that the decision in respect of Article 8 of the
    ECHR only, was to be set aside, for the decision to be re-made  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.  I  set  out  the  material  parts  of  Judge  Hanson's
    decision as follows:


                    "ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND DIRECTIONS


          1. This is  an  appeal  against  a  determination  of  First-tier
             Tribunal Judge Graham promulgated on 5th August 2014 in  which
             she dismissed the Appellant's appeal, both under the Rules and
             on Article 8 ECHR  grounds  outside  the  Rules,  against  the
             refusal of the Secretary  of  State  to  grant  the  Appellant
             indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the spouse
             of a person present and settled  in  this  country  under  the
             provisions of paragraph 287.


          2. The Judge considered the evidence and sets  out  her  findings
             from paragraph 13 of the determination. The Judge  upheld  the
             dismissal of the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  on  the
             basis  the  Appellant  deliberately  intended  to  mislead  by
             failing  to  disclose  a  previous  conviction  which  engaged
             paragraph  322  (1A).  The  Judge   stated   that   that   was
             determinative and that the appeal must therefore be dismissed.


          3. Judge Graham thereafter went on  to  consider  the  Appellants
             contact with his children. The Judge noted  the  existence  of
             proceedings in the Family Court in Birmingham  and  considered
             the case of RS (Immigration family  Court  proceedings)  India
             [2012]  UKUT  00218.  The  Judge  accepted  that  the   family
             proceedings  may  have  relevance  to  the   appeal   although
             thereafter stated that in light of the findings in relation to
             paragraph 322 (1A) the appeal must be dismissed. The Judge was
             not satisfied the Appellant was able to meet the  requirements
             of the Rules as a parent of a child in the United Kingdom.


          4. The Judge noted  the  existence  of  a  report  detailing  two
             supervised  contact  sessions.   The  Judge  noted  that   the
             children live with their mother and  that  the  Appellant  has
             contact on a  supervised  basis,  fortnightly,  although  also
             states "whether it is in the best interests  of  the  children
             for this to continue or  for  this  level  of  contact  to  be
             increased is to be determined by the Family Court at  a  later
             date".  The  Judge  acknowledged  that  a  favourable  CAFCASS
             report was available  and  her  understanding  that  a  second
             report was required, but thereafter concludes:


                  "Bearing all of this in mind and  based  on  the  evidence
                  before me I am unable to find  that  it  is  in  the  best
                  interests of the children to have more contact with  their
                  father than the present status quo.  The children  are  of
                  an age where the Appellant can communicate  with  them  by
                  modern means of communication whether or not he is in  the
                  UK.   In  the  circumstances  I  do  not  find  that   the
                  Appellant's  contact  with   his   children   amounts   to
                  compelling circumstances which would give rise to a  grant
                  of leave outside the immigration Rules."



         Error of law



          5. The Appellant relies on four grounds of challenge.  Ground one
             asserts  that  the  refusal  of  the  application  made  under
             paragraph 287 on the basis of the engagement of paragraph  322
             (1A), which is mandatory, does not apply to  applications  and
             appeals under Appendix  FM.   Such  cases  are  determined  by
             reference to the  suitability  criteria  in  S-LTR  2.2  which
             provides that false representations and  failure  to  disclose
             material facts are discretionary and not mandatory grounds  of
             refusal.  It is  stated  this  is  a  material  error  as  the
             Appellant arguably met the eligibility requirements for  leave
             to remain as the parent of a child in the UK.


          6. Ms Revill's interpretation of  the  legal  provisions  is  not
             challenged. 322(1A) is a mandatory ground  for  refusal  which
             was found to be established both in relation to the failure to
             disclose a previous conviction and the  Appellant's  intention
             in deliberately not making such disclosure.  The language of S-
             LTR 2.2 indicates that this is a  discretionary  factor  which
             would have to be considered along with all relevant facts when
             thinking about how the discretion  should  be  exercised.  The
             Judge does indicate that the appeal would have to be dismissed
             as a result of the mandatory refusal and also stated  she  was
             satisfied that the Immigration Rules could  not  be  met.  The
             question is whether this is as a result of a  misunderstanding
             of the law by the  Judge  or  not.   Even  if  the  Judge  has
             misunderstood  the  law,  such  that  she  has  erred,  it  is
             necessary to consider whether  such  error  is  material.  The
             conclusion that the Appellant failed under Appendix FM too  as
             a result of his failure to disclose a material  issue  in  his
             application form, when combined with the other relevant  facts
             known to the Judge, does not appear to be a  decision  outside
             those the Judge was permitted to make on  the  evidence.   The
             Upper Tribunal when considering this matter for  itself  would
             have come to the same conclusion on the facts, leading to  the
             finding in relation to this  ground  being  that  no  material
             error of law has been established.


          7. The remaining grounds have arguable merit but only in relation
             to the challenge  to  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the  appeal
             outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8 ECHR in light of
             the material before the Judge and  the  existence  of  contact
             proceedings in the Family Court in Birmingham, which discloses
             legal error. It is not suggested  or  found  that  this  is  a
             contact application made as a means to defeat removal from the
             United Kingdom and it is clear that those proceedings were  at
             a fairly advanced  stage  with  interim  contact  having  been
             arranged to reintroduce the Appellant to his children, who had
             not seen him since 2011, with an initial report  to  hand  and
             further reports anticipated.


          8. The Judge refers to  RS  but  there  are  a  number  of  other
             relevant cases when considering the  correct  approach  to  be
             taken in  relation  to  such  a  matter.  In  addition  to  RS
             (immigration and family court proceedings) India  [2012]  UKUT
             00218 (IAC) there is  RS  (immigration/family  court  liaison:
             outcome) [2013] UKUT 00082 (IAC) (Blake J), and the  judgement
             of the Court of Appeal in Mohan v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ  1363.   In  Mohan  the  court
             refer to the Tribunal case of Nimako-Boateng in which  it  was
             found that the family  court  was  best  placed  to  make  the
             necessary  evaluations.  In  Nimako-Boateng  there  was   also
             material before the Tribunal to justify the conclusion that it
             would be unnecessary to delay determination of the deportation
             appeal in order to await the  judgment  of  the  family  court
             because  the  material  in  favour  of  the  claimant   lacked
             substance  and  the  public  interest   in   deportation   was
             overwhelming. The judgment of the family court,  with  all  of
             the tools at its disposal (including the assistance of CAFCASS
             and the opportunity to assess the adults involved)  could  and
             should inform the decision-making of the Tribunal on the issue
             of the proportionality of deportation, in relation to the best
             interests of the child.


          9. In Mohammed (Family Court proceedings-outcome) [2014] UKUT 419
             (IAC) it was held that the guidance  in  the  above  cases  is
             concerned with whether there is a realistic  prospect  of  the
             Family Court making a  decision  that  will  have  a  material
             impact on the relationship between  a  child  and  the  parent
             facing immigration measures such as deportation.


         10. The Judge, on the basis of the  evidence  available,  arguably
             went  beyond  making  findings  supported  by  the   available
             evidence in finding that it was in the best interests  of  the
             children to have more  contact  with  their  father  than  the
             present status quo permitted. There is no evidential basis  on
             which such a finding could be made and that issue is precisely
             the type of matter that is within the  remit  of  CAFCASS  who
             were tasked with investigating and reporting upon this  matter
             for the Family Court.  The Judge's conclusion that the contact
             with the children did not amount to 'compelling circumstances'
             arguably misses the point. The best interests of the  children
             require a judge to undertake a full and complete  analysis  of
             all the available information. The jurisprudence is  concerned
             with whether there is a realistic prospect of the Family Court
             making a decision that will have  a  material  impact  on  the
             relationship between a child  and  parent  facing  immigration
             measures. Contact in this case has not occurred since 2011 and
             was being reintroduced gradually  to  allow  such  contact  be
             assessed within a secure environment. It was  recognised  from
             the reports that the Appellant was seeking greater contact and
             it was the resolution of that issue that the Family Court  was
             seeking to address.  If further contact in terms of  frequency
             or nature of a greater quality was eventually  ordered  it  is
             arguable  that  there  would  be  a  material  impact  on  the
             relationship between the  appellant  and  his  children  which
             would need to be properly assessed if the Appellant was to  be
             removed. The Judge arguably materially erred in law by  making
             a decision not supported by the available material and in  not
             following the guidance provided by the courts in  relation  to
             such issues.


         11. Once the nature of the contact is known, which would  be  that
             which was deemed to be in the best interests of the  children,
             an  informed  decision  can  be  made.   Whether   there   are
             exceptional compelling circumstances will have to be  assessed
             taking into account the case law relied upon by the Appellant,
             the nature and quality of his ongoing contact, the  effect  of
             that being lost upon the children, and the  case  advanced  by
             the Secretary of State.


         12. In summary, the  Upper  Tribunal  finds  that  the  First-tier
             Tribunal has materially erred in  law.  The  decision  is  set
             aside so far as it relates to the findings concerning  Article
             8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules only  and  the  following
             directions  shall  apply  to  the  future  conduct   of   this
             appeal..."



 4. Essentially, the re-making of the decision was to  be  centred  on  the
    issue of the appellant's relationship with his three children.  To that
    end directions were made, in respect of further evidence  in  terms  of
    that relationship.

 5. It was accepted before me that although  Judge  Hanson  concluded  that
    First-tier Judge Graham had erred in law in her conclusions in relation
    to the immigration rules, her decision in  that  respect  was  not  set
    aside.

    The oral evidence at hearing on 26 January 2015

 6. The appellant adopted his witness  statement  in  examination-in-chief.
    He said that he sees his children every two weeks.   Initially  it  was
    for two hours but in November last year it increased  to  three  hours.
    From February 2015 onwards his contact with them is expected to be  for
    four hours and with the freedom to take the children "outside"  and  on
    little trips.

 7. In cross-examination he said that he separated from  his  wife  in  May
    2010.  There was no period of separation before  that.   The  appellant
    was referred to the CAFCASS report dated 3 December 2013  where  it  is
    recorded that the appellant's wife said that she and  he  separated  in
    2009.  In response, the appellant said that this was not the case.

 8. When they separated they were living at [ -  ]  in  Birmingham.   After
    they separated he went to live in Coventry.  That  is  to  the  address
    that he now lives at which is [ - ].

 9. In response to further questions the appellant explained that  he  left
    their home in May 2010 but there was no  divorce.   There  was  nothing
    official initiated.   There  were  some  small  areas  of  disagreement
    between them.  At  the  time  his  feeling  was  that  those  could  be
    resolved.  It was his hope that they would be able to stay together.

10. The application which is the subject  matter  of  this  appeal  was  an
    application for further leave to remain.  His  family  were,  and  are,
    here.  It is true that  at  that  time  he  could  have  qualified  for
    indefinite leave to remain.  His understanding was  that  he  would  be
    given leave for two years and then he could ask for permanent leave  to
    remain.  He had passed the English language test.  He did  not  do  any
    test in respect of knowledge of life in the UK.

11. As to whether his wife had ever lived at [ - ], Coventry, she had  not.
    In respect of his application for leave to remain  made  on  3  January
    2013, he had completed the application form himself.  The appellant was
    referred to the application form where it states that his wife  resided
    at [ - , Coventry].  The appellant  said  that  he  thinks  he  made  a
    mistake in that respect because he does not  think  he  understood  the
    question in English on the form.  He had thought that  he  was  putting
    his address there.

12. Further questioned on this issue, the appellant said that at that  time
    they had not filed for divorce.  There had already been a  request  for
    them to be a couple within the reconciliation  process  and  there  was
    talk of them sharing a home together as part of that process.

13. Similarly, where it is stated that that address was his  spouse's  main
    residence, again, he does not think that  he  understood  the  question
    correctly on the form.  As to why he wrote that he and his  partner  at
    that time currently lived together, this is because they  had  not  yet
    divorced.  His understanding of the question was that as they  had  not
    divorced and were still married, he was being asked whether  they  were
    still together.

14. The appellant denied the suggestion that he had intended to deceive the
    Home Office into believing that he and his wife were living together.

15. It is true that he was informed that in November 2012 his wife took out
    a non-molestation order against him.  He respected  that  order  fully.
    It is also true that his wife called the police  on  one  occasion  and
    said that he had breached the order.  However, what  had  happened  was
    that they were in a public place and the children ran over  to  embrace
    him.  He is not able to remember when  that  was.   He  thinks  it  was
    before this application for leave to remain in January 2013.

16. It is correct that there was a period of time for about two years  when
    he did not have proper contact with the children.  He thinks  this  was
    for about a year between 2011 and 2012.  There  was  contact  with  the
    children during that time.   The  children's  mother  would  bring  the
    children to him and he would spend one day over the weekend  with  them
    and then take them back to her in the evening.  He had said that he did
    not have proper contact with the children because it was not the result
    of a court order.  It was just informal between him and the  children's
    mother.

17. As to why the CAFCASS report dated 24  January  2014  at  paragraph  27
    states that apart from occasional contact in the  street  the  children
    had not had any proper contact with the  appellant  for  the  past  two
    years, he thinks most of the information in that report came  from  his
    ex-wife.  She was not telling the truth.

18. The appellant accepted that according to the date on the court document
    he made his application to the court for a contact order  on  19  April
    2013.

19. As to why he waited so long to make that application, it was  when  his
    ex-wife decided not to let him see the  children  that  he  decided  he
    should make that application.

20. In respect of his application for leave to remain, it is true that  the
    UKBA had asked him for recent evidence of cohabitation between him  and
    his ex-wife.  He did not reply to the UKBA because he had asked his ex-
    wife if she could provide her ID card but she refused.  He did not give
    any evidence of recent cohabitation because he realised  that  she  was
    not prepared to give him proof  of  this.   It  was  suggested  to  the
    appellant that he did not provide that evidence because they  were  not
    living together.   The  appellant  said  that  he  believed  it  was  a
    temporary situation that could be resolved.

21. He did not write to the UKBA to explain that  they  were  living  apart
    because he thought that this could complicate things for him.

22. He is not able to remember exactly when he received the refusal of  his
    application for leave to remain but accepted that it was about the time
    of the refusal letter on 28 March 2013 or the notice of decision itself
    on 4 April 2013.  It is not true  that  he  made  his  application  for
    contact with the children as a result of his application for  leave  to
    remain having been refused by the Secretary of State.  It  had  nothing
    to do with that he said.

23. As to the CAFCASS report dated 23 July 2014 recommending  at  paragraph
    19 that he would benefit from completing a parent course,  he  had  not
    done such a course.  CAFCASS had  called  him  and  he  went  to  their
    office.  They subsequently told him that it would not be necessary.

24. As to how well he speaks English, at the moment he is  doing  a  "level
    3:3 at college".  He is in employment.

25. He pays maintenance to the children of �25 per week.  That is not as  a
    result of a court order but through the Child Support Agency.

    Submissions

26. Mr Smart relied on the refusal letter and submitted that the  appellant
    was not a witness of truth.  The evidence established that he had  lied
    in  respect  of  this  application  as  well  as  the  one   in   2010.
    Furthermore, he was deliberately evasive when he replied to the refusal
    letter of 13 March 2013.

27. It is clear that he was not living with his wife at  the  time  of  the
    applications made in 2010 or 2013.  In  addition,  the  timing  of  the
    application for contact with the children was relevant.   Certainly  by
    April 2013 his application for further leave had been  refused  and  he
    made his application for contact with the children on  19  April  2013.
    This is despite the fact that it is evident  that  he  had  significant
    difficulties over contact with the children as evidenced by the CAFCASS
    reports.  He clearly had difficulties  with  contact  from  2011.   The
    CAFCASS report dated 3 December 2013 shows that there  was  significant
    information from the children's  mother,  which  puts  the  appellant's
    evidence into context.  He obtained contact  with  the  children  as  a
    mechanism to remain in the UK and to defeat his removal.

28.  His  relationship  with  the  children  is  not  a  genuine   parental
    relationship, as evidenced by the way the situation in respect  of  his
    children had been engineered.

29. I was referred to Section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").   It  is  accepted  that  the  public
    interest does  not  require  removal  where  there  is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with children in  the  UK.   It  was  similarly
    accepted on behalf of the respondent that it would not be reasonable to
    expect the children to leave the UK.

30. On behalf of the appellant Ms Revill submitted that Section  117B(6)(a)
    is a crucial feature of the appeal.   It  is  not  suggested  that  the
    appellant is liable to deportation.  There  is  a  public  interest  in
    maintaining immigration control.  However, whether  the  appellant  had
    intentionally lied in previous  applications  is  somewhat  beside  the
    point in this appeal.

31. Central to the  appeal  are  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
    children.  I was referred to the  decision  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4.  As set out in the skeleton argument, this Tribunal  can
    and should be guided by what the family court had found.  Reliance  was
    placed on the authorities as set out in the skeleton argument.

32. The family court was in the best position to make a judgement about the
    children's  best  interests,  which   judgement   should   inform   the
    immigration court's assessment.

33. The family court could be said to have been aware  of  the  appellant's
    immigration history in the light of the  requests  by  the  immigration
    tribunal for disclosure.  It is clear therefore, that the family  court
    would have been  aware  that  the  appellant  had  ongoing  immigration
    matters and a potential for that to have been used by him as a  way  of
    enhancing his immigration case.

34. The family court even acknowledged that there had been no contact for a
    long period of time.  A series of CAFCASS reports  concluded  that  the
    best interests of the children lay  in  the  appellant  having  regular
    contact with them.

35. Although his ex-wife had made allegations of harassment,  it  is  clear
    from the  CAFCASS  reports  (pages  202  -  203)  that  none  of  those
    allegations were proceeded with by the police.

36. Recent CAFCASS reports reveal that the attitude of the appellant's  ex-
    wife has softened in terms of contact between  the  children  and  him,
    albeit that she does not want to see him herself.  It would be clear if
    she thought he was just using the children for immigration purposes and
    would, therefore, be likely to oppose contact.

37. The appellant has been seeing the children every two weeks, attending a
    contact centre.  His oral evidence is to the effect that  that  contact
    continues.  He had opened a bank account in the children's names.   All
    this shows a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  which  would
    continue into the future.  Whatever could be said about the  timing  of
    the application for contact with  his  children,  the  finding  of  the
    family court is that there is a genuine and subsisting relationship.

38. Similarly, the nationality of the children is an important  factor,  it
    not being expected that they would leave the UK, living as they  do  as
    British citizens with their mother.

39. So far as concerns the point made on behalf of the respondent about the
    possibility of the appellant applying for  entry  clearance  under  the
    rules for contact with the  children,  Section  117B(6)  suggests  that
    there is no public interest in such a requirement.  I was  referred  to
    the decision in Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2008] UKHL 40.

    My assessment

40. The appellant has three sons, one born on 20 September 2004  and  twins
    born on 22 March 2006.  In response to Judge  Hanson's  directions,  it
    was confirmed by Mr Smart at the  hearing  before  me  that  all  three
    children are British citizens.  It was further accepted that  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect the children  to  leave  the  UK  with  the
    appellant.

41. Both parties agreed that,  in  reality,  the  outcome  of  this  appeal
    depends on the assessment of the credibility of the  appellant's  claim
    to have a genuine and subsisting relationship with his children.

42. Although Ms Revill in her skeleton argument advances a case in  support
    of the contention that the appellant  is  in  fact  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Article 8 immigration rules, it was conceded before
    me that Judge Hanson's decision settles the  question  of  whether  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Graham  dismissing  the  appeal
    under the Article 8 immigration rules, was to be set aside.  He decided
    that it was not, concluding that the error of law in her assessment  of
    that aspect of the appeal was not material to the outcome.

43. Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 inserted Sections 117A - D  into
    the 2002 Act.  There was no dispute between the parties before  me  but
    that those provisions apply in this appeal.  So far as relevant,  those
    new provisions provide as follows:





                               "PART 5A


         ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS


         117A Application of this Part

         (1) This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
          (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private  and  family
          life under Article 8, and
          (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human
          Rights Act 1998.
         (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
          (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in  section  117B,
          and
          (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,  to
          the considerations listed in section 117C.
         (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.
         (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
          (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
          (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-
          (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
          (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (4) Little weight should be given to-
          (a) a private life, or
          (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.
         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom."

44. Thus, in the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  which
    this appellant is not, the public interest does not require his removal
    where he has established that he has a genuine and subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child.  A qualifying child is defined in
    Section 117D as a person who is under the age of 18 and who is either a
    British citizen or has lived in the UK for a continuous period of seven
    years or more.  As already indicated, it is accepted on behalf  of  the
    respondent  that  the  appellant's  three  children  are  all   British
    citizens.  In addition, given the  acceptance  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK, the outcome  of  the
    appeal really does depend on the appellant's credibility  in  terms  of
    his relationship with the children.

45. The appellant's evidence is that he separated  from  his  wife  in  May
    2010.  Notwithstanding that, it appears that he made an application  on
    30 November 2010 for further leave to  remain  as  a  spouse.   At  the
    hearing the appellant was referred to a CAFCASS report dated 3 December
    2013 in which his ex-wife said that they had in fact separated in 2009.
     The appellant's evidence was that this was not the case.  Of course, I
    did not hear evidence from the appellant's ex-wife.  That, added to the
    inherent difficulty in resolving factual  disputes  in  cases  where  a
    relationship has broken down,  makes  it  all  the  more  difficult  to
    resolve the question of when they separated.

46. Regardless of that, even on the appellant's own account, at the time he
    made his application for further leave to remain in November  2010,  he
    was no longer with his wife.  I bear in mind his explanation for having
    made the application for further leave to remain on the basis  that  he
    was still in a  relationship  with  her,  he  having  said  that  their
    differences could be resolved.  However, this issue must be seen in the
    context of the other credibility matters  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent before me.

47. The appellant was asked about the application which is  the  foundation
    for this appeal, namely the application for indefinite leave to  remain
    as a spouse dated 3 January 2013.  As can be seen from  my  summary  of
    the oral evidence, he was asked a number of questions  in  relation  to
    that application.  To  summarise,  the  application  form  gives  every
    appearance of the appellant and his ex-wife still being  together,  and
    indeed, residing together.  It is not necessary for me at this point to
    repeat the appellant's evidence.  Suffice to say, that in my view it is
    apparent that on the application form which is to be found at B1 of the
    respondent's bundle the appellant did deliberately intend to convey the
    impression that they were still together and in fact  living  together.
    Thus, at question 2.4 he has ticked a box indicating that  he  and  his
    partner  currently  live  together.   At  question  2.13  he  similarly
    indicated that they had lived together permanently in the UK  since  he
    was granted leave as a partner.  On page 6 of the form he gave his  ex-
    wife's address as the  same  address  as  his.   He  indicated  in  the
    affirmative to the question as to whether that was his  partner's  main
    residence.

48. I  reject  the  appellant's  explanations  for  those  answers  on  the
    application form in terms  of  his  not  having  fully  understood  the
    questions that were being asked.  A consideration  of  the  form  as  a
    whole makes it apparent that the appellant was  able  to  fill  in  the
    application form without any apparent difficulty in all other respects.
     Furthermore, I do not accept his explanation for why he said that they
    were currently living together, namely that they had not yet  divorced.
    My conclusions in this respect also take into account that his  ex-wife
    apparently sought a non-molestation  order  against  the  appellant  in
    November 2012.

49. A further matter relied on by Mr Smart before me was the  date  of  the
    appellant's application for contact with his children.  It is  apparent
    that the application was made  on  19  April  2013  (page  189  of  the
    appellant's bundle).  That date was accepted  by  the  appellant.   The
    significance of it is that it postdated the reasons for refusal  letter
    in connection with this application, the letter being  dated  28  March
    2013, and the notice of decision refusing to vary his leave to  remain,
    served on the appellant on 4 April 2013.

50. The appellant said in evidence that his application  for  contact  with
    the children had nothing to do with those refusals.  In  the  light  of
    the other credibility matters relied on by the  respondent,  I  do  not
    accept that explanation.

51. It is  also  to  be  borne  in  mind  when  assessing  the  appellant's
    credibility, that Judge Graham concluded that he deliberately  intended
    to mislead in his application for further leave to remain as a  spouse,
    when he failed to declare  on  the  application  form  that  he  had  a
    criminal conviction for driving with excess alcohol.  That  finding  is
    undisturbed by Judge Hanson's decision that Judge Graham had  otherwise
    erred in law.

52. Ms Revill submitted that  whether  or  not  the  appellant  lied  in  a
    previous application, to which I infer she meant the one  in  2010,  is
    irrelevant to the issues to be determined in this appeal.   I  do  not,
    however, agree.  In any event, the application  made  in  2010  on  the
    basis that the appellant was still in a  subsisting  relationship  with
    his ex-wife is but one feature of the credibility assessment.

53. I do take the view that the appellant is not someone whose evidence can
    be taken at face value because I am satisfied that he has attempted  to
    mislead the respondent in his applications for leave to remain in  2010
    and 2013.  That is in respect of the state of his relationship with his
    ex-wife, but also in terms of the 2013 application, in relation to  the
    failure to disclose a criminal conviction.  It is  difficult  in  those
    circumstances to rely on the appellant's evidence to  the  effect  that
    the application for contact with his  children  was  unrelated  to  the
    refusal of his application for further leave to remain.  In my view the
    application was directly related to the refusal of his application.   I
    am satisfied that prior to the making of  that  application  there  had
    been difficulties between the appellant and his ex-wife in terms of his
    contact with the children such that it is reasonable to  have  expected
    him to have made the application for contact much earlier than he  did.
    The CAFCASS report dated 28 January 2014, which took into  account  the
    views and wishes of the appellant's children, concluded that apart from
    the occasional contact in the street, the  children  had  not  had  any
    proper contact with the appellant for the previous two years,  although
    the report does describe the occasional and often ad hoc nature of that
    previous contact.

54. On the other hand, the CAFCASS report dated 3 December 2013 does  state
    at [16] that the  appellant's  ex-wife  would  not  agree  to  contact,
    following their separation, because  he  had  refused  to  provide  his
    address and she did not know where he would  be  taking  the  children.
    Other reasons were given in terms of  his  apparently  having  harassed
    her.  It does seem apparent from the CAFCASS reports, that even  though
    the appellant and his ex-wife had separated, the  appellant  did  still
    express an interest in the children, albeit as already indicated,  that
    his contact was rather sporadic and ad hoc.  At that time, I note  that
    at [20] of the December 2013 report the appellant's ex-wife  said  that
    she did not believe that he was genuinely interested in the  children's
    welfare, he having been so preoccupied with verbally abusing her rather
    than focusing on the children.  He had also not apparently  contributed
    financially to  their  upbringing  or  offered  to  contribute  towards
    necessities like school uniforms, or expressed any  interest  in  their
    lives.

55. I have already alluded to the difficulty in resolving factual  disputes
    of this nature, and the appellant was not asked about  that  aspect  of
    that CAFCASS report.  Nevertheless, the CAFCASS reports do  not  reveal
    that the appellant had lost interest in the children.

56. Whilst I have rejected the appellant's  explanations  for  the  various
    credibility matters that were put to  him,  that  does  not  of  itself
    indicate that he does  not  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his children.  That he  may  have  initiated  contact
    proceedings  at  least  in  part  through  cynical  motives  does   not
    necessarily mean that there  is  no  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship between him and them.

57. The Child Arrangements Order is described as  being  effective  as  the
    final hearing of the appellant's application for a  Child  Arrangements
    Order.  It appears to be dated  15  August  2014.   The  final  CAFCASS
    report dated 23 July 2014 made a  recommendation  for  such  an  order,
    plainly concluding that it was in the children's best interests for the
    children to continue to develop their relationship with  the  appellant
    (as set out at [23]).

58. As Ms Revill, rightly  in  my  view,  submitted,  in  reliance  on  the
    decision in Nimako-Boateng (residence orders - Anton considered) [2012]
    UKUT 00216 (IAC) the family court is best placed to evaluate  the  best
    interests of children in proceedings before it and the decision of  the
    family court is  itself  material  to  the  Article  8  balance  to  be
    conducted by the immigration judiciary (see [32] of the judgment).   As
    was also pointed out in that case, the family court has, amongst  other
    things, procedural advantages in  investigating  what  a  child's  best
    interests are, independent of the interests of the parent, as  well  as
    the necessary expertise in evaluating them.  Nevertheless, as indicated
    in Mohan [2012] EWCA Civ 1363 at [17] the tribunal is not bound or tied
    to the  outcome  of  the  family  proceedings,  the  two  jurisdictions
    applying different tests.  Indeed, in an immigration appeal  there  may
    be further information available which was not before the family court.

59. As  I  think  is  apparent  from  my  analysis  of  the  evidence,  the
    appellant's motives in securing a Child  Arrangements  Order  were  not
    entirely free from cynicism.  Nevertheless, that does not  lead  me  to
    conclude that he does  not  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his three children.  Putting it another way,  and  no
    doubt more correctly, I am satisfied that the appellant has established
    on a balance of probabilities that he does have such a relationship.

60. That being the case, Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act comes  into  play.
    It means that the public interest  does  not  require  the  appellant's
    removal.

61. Applying the structured approach set out in Razgar v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27, the appellant does have  family
    life with his children.  The decision of the respondent amounts  to  an
    interference with  that  family  life.   That  interference  will  have
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    Article 8.  The decision does at least in principle pursue a legitimate
    aim, namely the maintenance of effective immigration control.  It is  a
    decision which is in accordance with the law.

62. The ultimate question in this case being  one  of  proportionality,  is
    answered by the statutory provision to  which  I  have  referred.   The
    legitimate aim pursued does not require the appellant's  removal.   The
    "public interest question" identified in  Section  117A(2),  means  the
    question of whether an interference with the person's right to  respect
    for private and family life is justified  under  Article  8(2)  of  the
    ECHR.

63. Section 117B(6) does not exclude from the benefit of  it  anyone  other
    than persons who are  not  liable  to  deportation.   People  who  have
    otherwise attempted to deceive, or who have a bad immigration  history,
    are nevertheless entitled to the benefit of that provision in terms  of
    a conclusion that their removal is not in the public interest  where  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship is established.

64. I have regard to the only other issue that was raised on behalf of  the
    respondent, albeit not with much vigour it has to be said,  namely  the
    question of the appellant's  ability  to  speak  English,  relevant  to
    Section 117B(2).  Whilst the appellant did  need  the  services  of  an
    interpreter at  the  hearing  before  me,  and  indeed  during  CAFCASS
    meetings, he did complete the applications for leave to remain  himself
    and is studying English at college, although what level 3:3 actually is
    was not explained.  Even so, it was not  suggested  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent before me that this was a factor  which  would  militate  in
    favour of his removal in circumstances where he was able  to  establish
    the genuine and subsisting parental relationship as set out at 117B(6).

65. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.




    Decision

66. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been
    set aside in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR only, the decision is re-
    made, and the appeal is allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity in order to preserve the anonymity of  his  children.   No
report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      3 March 2015
