


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11720/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 5 February 2014                          |On : 11 February 2014        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               troy mccormick
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman, instructed by Kent Immigration & Visa
Advice


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the First-tier Tribunal's decision allowing Mr McCormick's appeal
   against  the  respondent's  decision  of  27  March  2013  refusing   his
   application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall  refer  to  the  Secretary  of
   State as the respondent and Mr McCormick  as  the  appellant,  reflecting
   their positions  as  they  were  in  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen of New Zealand,  born  on  29  July  1992.  He
   first arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 March 2011 on a  Tier  5  (youth
   mobility) migrant visa valid until 28 February 2013. On 12 November  2012
   he made an application for leave to remain  as  a  partner  of  a  person
   present and settled in the United Kingdom. His  application  was  refused
   for reasons set out in the respondent's letter of 27 March 2013. In  that
   letter the respondent considered that the appellant was  unable  to  meet
   the eligibility requirements  of the immigration rules  in  paragraph  E-
   LTRP1.2 since his sponsor was not considered to meet  the  definition  of
   "partner" under GEN 1.2. The reason for that was that at the date of  the
   application the appellant and the sponsor had not  lived  together  in  a
   relationship akin to marriage or  civil  partnership  for  at  least  two
   years, having resided together only  since  August  2011.  For  the  same
   reasons the  appellant  was  considered  not  to  be  able  to  meet  the
   requirements of EX.1.(b) of the rules.

4. The appellant's appeal was  heard  on  6  September  2013  by  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Emerton. It was conceded on behalf of the  appellant  that
   he could not meet the requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  and  the
   appeal was pursued on Article 8 grounds only.  The judge heard  from  the
   appellant, his partner and his partner's  mother  and  accepted,  on  the
   basis of the evidence before him, that the appellant and his partner were
   in a stable, long-term relationship akin to marriage or civil partnership
   and that they had been living together from  the  second  half  of  April
   2011. Accordingly, at the date the application was  made  they  had  been
   living together for almost 19 months; at the date of  decision  for  just
   under two years; and at the date of the hearing for two years and  almost
   five months. He noted that the appellant had had to make his  application
   before the required two year period in order to avoid overstaying,  given
   that his leave expired in February 2013. He accepted that  the  appellant
   had established a family life in the United Kingdom with his partner  and
   that the requirement for him to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  interfered,
   albeit probably only temporarily, with that family life. With  regard  to
   proportionality, he accepted the submissions made  before  him  that  the
   principles in Chikwamba v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   [2008] UKHL 40 applied so as to enable the appellant to  succeed  on  the
   basis that  by  the  time  of  the  hearing  he  was  able  to  meet  the
   requirements of the rules.  He allowed the  appeal  on  Article  8  human
   rights grounds.

5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the grounds that the judge had  failed  to  identify  any  exceptional
   circumstances  resulting  in  an  unjustifiably  harsh  outcome  for  the
   appellant, pursuant to the principles set out  in  MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
   [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and Nagre, R (on the application of) v  SSHD  [2013]
   EWHC 720.

6. Permission to appeal was granted on 17 December 2013.

Appeal hearing and submissions

7. The appeal came before me on 5  February  2014.  The  appellant  and  his
   partner were in attendance but were not required to give oral evidence. I
   heard submissions from both parties in regard to the error of law.

8. Mr Saunders relied on the grounds of appeal, submitting  that  there  was
   not sufficient in the appellant's case  to  show  that  the  outcome  was
   unjustifiably harsh. There was  nothing  exceptional  to  take  his  case
   outside the rules.

9. Mr Coleman relied on the Administrative Court judgment in  Zhang,  R  (on
   the application of) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 891 which in  turn  confirmed  the
   principles in Chikwamba and which he submitted concerned exactly the same
   point as that arising in the appellant's case. The appellant was able  to
   meet all the requirements of the immigration rules at  the  date  of  the
   hearing, aside from the requirement for entry clearance  in  the  correct
   capacity, and in accordance with the principles in those cases  he  ought
   not, therefore, to be required to return to New Zealand solely  in  order
   to make an entry clearance application. He submitted that  there  was  no
   requirement to show exceptional circumstances  and  MF  applied  only  in
   deportation cases.

10. In response to my enquiry, Mr  Saunders  confirmed  that  there  was  no
   dispute as to the appellant's ability to meet  the  requirements  of  the
   rules in other respects, such as in regard to maintenance, and  that  the
   issue of lack of appropriate entry clearance had not been  taken  against
   him. The only issue taken against the appellant was the fact that he  had
   not been living with his partner  for  two  years  prior  to  making  his
   application and it was on that basis alone that it had been decided  that
   he could not meet the requirements of the rules.  In  such  circumstances
   the appellant could only succeed under Article 8 if he  could  show  that
   the decision refusing to  grant  leave  led  to  an  unjustifiably  harsh
   situation, which he could not.

11. Both parties agreed that, in the event of an error of  law  being  found
   and the decision being set aside, there was no  further  evidence  to  be
   submitted and the decision could simply be  re-made  on  the  information
   already available.

Consideration and findings

12. In my view Judge Emerton erred in law in  his  decision  by  failing  to
   give any consideration to the principles in MF and Nagre and  by  failing
   to identify any exceptional circumstances such that it could be said that
   the appellant's removal would involve unjustifiable hardship.

13. Whilst it is the case that  MF  involved  a  deportation  decision,  the
   Court of Appeal in  that  case  clearly  relied  upon  and  endorsed  the
   principles in Nagre, emphasising at paragraph 41 "The fact that Nagre was
   not a case involving deportation of a foreign criminal is immaterial. The
   significance of the case law lies in the repeated use by the ECtHR of the
   phrase "exceptional circumstances"." The Administrative Court  in  Nagre,
   in turn, endorsed the guidance issued by the UKBA in circumstances  where
   the requirements of the immigration rules could not be  met,  finding  at
   paragraph 14 as follows:

   "The definition of "exceptional circumstances" which  is  given  in  this
   guidance  equates  such  circumstances  with  there  being  unjustifiable
   hardship involved in removal such that it  would  be  disproportionate  -
   i.e. would involve a breach of Article  8.  The  practical  guidance  and
   illustrations  given  in  the   passage   quoted   above   support   that
   interpretation. No  challenge  is  brought  to  the  lawfulness  of  this
   guidance. In my view, it gives clear and appropriate guidance to relevant
   officials that if they come across a case falling outside the new  rules,
   they nonetheless have to consider whether it is  a  case  where,  on  the
   particular facts, there would be a breach of  Article  8  rights  if  the
   application for leave to remain were refused."

14. In such circumstances it seems to me that Mr  Coleman's  submission,  as
   to the limitation of such principles to cases involving  deportation,  is
   not correct.

15. However, even leaving aside the question of "exceptional  circumstances"
   and "unjustifiable hardship", it is plain that Judge  Emerton  failed  to
   consider the strong public interest in meeting the  requirements  of  the
   immigration rules, as emphasised in recent case law. Whilst  he  properly
   considered,  at  paragraph  23,  the  genuineness  of   the   appellant's
   intentions and his reasons for being unable to submit his application  at
   a time when he could have met the rules in terms of the two  year  period
   of cohabitation, he appeared to attach little weight to the fact that the
   rules could nevertheless not be met.  Instead  he  attached  considerable
   weight to the fact that the appellant was able to meet the rules  by  the
   time of the hearing and indeed that was the point upon which  Mr  Coleman
   sought to rely in his submissions.  However,  such  a  consideration  was
   clearly misconceived. The rules specifically link the two year period  to
   the date of the application and accordingly whether or not the  appellant
   had lived with his partner for two years by the date of the  hearing,  he
   still could not succeed under the rules at that time. Had  the  two  year
   period been calculated up to the date of the hearing, the appellant would
   have had to have made his application at a time  when  he  had  no  valid
   leave and would thus still  have  had  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
   EX.1.(b) which includes the question  of  "insurmountable  obstacles",  a
   matter not considered in terms  by  the  judge,  albeit  perhaps  briefly
   touched upon at paragraph 24.

16. It was Mr Coleman's submission that the  appellant's  case  was  on  all
   fours with the case of Zhang which, in turn, relied upon  the  principles
   in Chikwamba. However I  do  not  consider  that  to  be  the  case.  The
   principles in those cases apply to circumstances where an  applicant  was
   able to meet all the requirements of the immigration rules other than the
   requirement for entry clearance or  previous  leave  in  the  appropriate
   capacity (ie for "switching"). However, as  Mr  Saunders  clarified,  the
   respondent, in refusing the appellant's application, had not  taken  that
   particular point against him but had found that he  could  not  meet  the
   requirements of the rules as a  result  of  his  inability  to  meet  the
   definition  of  "partner"  in  GEN.1.2.  Accordingly,   the   appellant's
   situation could not be resolved by applying the principles in  Zhang  and
   Chikwamba.

17. For the above reasons I consider that the judge materially erred in  law
   in his Article 8 assessment. The circumstances referred to at  paragraphs
   23 and 24 of his determination do not go  anywhere  near  establishing  a
   case of "exceptional circumstances" in terms of "unjustifiable  hardship"
   or "unjustifiably harsh  consequences".  Neither,  for  the  purposes  of
   EX.1.(b), has the appellant established, on the evidence before me,  that
   there would be insurmountable obstacles to family life with  his  partner
   continuing outside the United Kingdom. For those reasons, I consider that
   the interference with the appellant's private and family life  caused  by
   the requirement for  him  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  would  not  be
   disproportionate to  the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  an  effective
   immigration control. The appellant is now able to meet the definition  of
   "partner" in section GEN.1.2 and would  therefore  be  able  to  make  an
   application from New Zealand, which I am told  would  take  up  to  about
   eight weeks to be considered. Mr Coleman advised me that he may lose  his
   job if he took the slower and cheaper application route, but  that  would
   not necessarily be the case if he took the more expensive  faster  route.
   In any event there is no reason why  he  would  not  be  able  to  obtain
   another job. Although  that  would  involve  some  inconvenience  to  the
   appellant, I do not consider that it can be said on any interpretation of
   the law that that would  involve  a  breach  of  his  Article  8  rights.
   Accordingly, in re-making the decision,  I  find  that  the  respondent's
   decision is not in breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

DECISION

18. The making of the decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. I set aside that  decision  and  to
   that extent the appeal made  by  the  SSHD  is  allowed.  I  re-make  the
   decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

















                               Signed                                  Date


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
