
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/11045/2014
                                                               IA/11070/2014
                                                               IA/11055/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House London          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 February 2015                  |On 21 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       THE HON. MRS JUSTICE THIRLWALL
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                           LILIAN ELIZABETH AJALA
                         OLUFEMI OLUSHOLA OGUNSANYA
                          ADEMOLA OLUMIDE OGUNSANYA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Ngwuochu, of Carl Martin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. At the end of the hearing we announced that the  appeals  are  allowed.
    This statement contains our reasons for that decision.

 2. The appellants are a family group, the first two being the  parents  of
    the third appellant.  The first  appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  as  a
    visitor on 17 December 2003.  It is not known when the second appellant
    arrived.  The third appellant was born here on 6  April  2004.   On  11
    July 2010, the appellants applied for  leave  outside  the  immigration
    rules because of the ties they had established in the UK and  the  loss
    of ties  to  Nigeria.   That  application  has  been  refused  on  four
    occasions, the last decision having been made on 3 March 2014.   It  is
    against that decision that the appellants brought their  appeals  under
    s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   Subsequent
    to the immigration decision but before  the  appeals  were  heard,  the
    third appellant was  registered  as  a  British  citizen.   It  is  the
    significance of this fact that is the subject  of  the  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 3. Mr Wilding conceded that he could not defend the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision because it simply failed to address the best interests of  the
    British citizen child in accordance  with  regulation  15A(4A)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (as  amended).
    That provision had been introduced to give effect to  the  judgment  of
    the Court of Justice of the European Union in Ruiz Zambrano (case no C-
    34/09) [2011] Imm AR 521.  In  simple  terms  the  case  sets  out  the
    parameters of  rights  of  Union  Citizens  even  when  they  have  not
    exercised their rights of free movement. Mr Wilding informed us that he
    had not seen a case which was so close to the facts in  that  case.  We
    agree.

 4. It appears that both representatives were unaware of  the  decision  in
    Zambrano and regulation 15A(4A) of the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).  This is extremely  disappointing.
    It is also puzzling that the judge, who is a specialist, did not  refer
    to it either.  Whilst Mr  Ngwuochu  suggested  that  he  had  mentioned
    Zambrano during the hearing, we can find no  reference  to  it  in  the
    records.  Before us, it was only when  the  matter  was  raised  by  Mr
    Wilding that Mr Ngwuochu referred to it at all.

 5. The Zambrano decision has  been  discussed  in  a  number  of  reported
    decisions of this Chamber (e.g. Sanade and others (British  children  -
    Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 48 (IAC)).   It is extremely unfortunate
    that it was not referred to in this  case.   It  establishes  that  the
    first and second appellants have derivative rights  of  residence.  The
    failure to consider it is a plain error of law.

 6. In light of this finding we have no option other than to set aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Given  Mr  Wilding's  observation
    that this case was on all fours  with  Zambrano,  it  follows  that  we
    remake the  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  against  the  immigration
    decisions. However, we do so not under the immigration rules or Article
    8 ECHR but under the 2006 Regulation.  It will be for the Secretary  of
    State to issue documentation to  confirm  that  the  first  and  second
    appellant have derivative rights of residence.

 7. We add only one observation.  No application for anonymity was made  on
    behalf of any of the appellants.  This  is  unsurprising.   We  do  not
    understand why the order was made in the First-tier Tribunal.   In  the
    absence of anonymity orders in respect of the first two appellants, the
    third appellant, as their child, is immediately  identifiable.   As  we
    were not asked to make an anonymity order in this case, none is made.

Decision

We set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision and remake it to  allow  the
original appeals.






                               Signed        Date


                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy


