
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11469/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 February 2015                           |On 20 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 subrota das
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a 26 year old citizen of Bangladesh, has appealed,  with
    permission, against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Clapham
    (promulgated 16 October 2014).  Judge Clapham dismissed the appellant's
    appeal against the Home Office's refusal of his application  for  leave
    to remain under Article 8 of the ECHR for reasons falling  outside  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules.

2.   The basis of the appellant's claim is that he is  presently  undergoing
    prescribed treatment  for  heroin  addiction,  that  the  treatment  is
    currently successful and had (at the First-tier Tribunal hearing)  only
    another seven months to run, and the quality of the treatment would not
    be the same in Bangladesh.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  on
    26 December 2014.  The judge found to be arguable the grounds  claiming
    that the UK had assumed responsibility for  the  appellant's  treatment
    for a further period of seven months.

4.   Paragraph 1 of the grounds appears to argue that the  appellant  claims
    the  benefit  of  Article  3  "because  of  the  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution of him if he were to return to his country of origin".  But
    at  paragraph  9  of  the  judge's  decision  it  was  clear  that  the
    appellant's representative acknowledged that Article 3 was not in issue
    but argued  only  that  the  Article  8  discretion  should  have  been
    exercised differently "as treatment in Bangladesh was rudimentary".

5.   The remaining grounds do no more than repeat submissions  and  the  law
    that were put to the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  essentially  to
    disagree with his findings.

6.   In  my  judgment,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    although brief, is adequate and reveals no  error  of  law.   I  cannot
    disagree with his findings at paragraphs 12 and 13 where  he  said  the
    following:

         "12. I agree that treatment would be available in  Bangladesh.   It
             might be that the treatment would not be of the same  standard
             but that is not the issue.  I cannot of course say whether the
             appellant's removal  would  result  in  a  disruption  of  his
             treatment.  That might depend  upon  when  the  removal  takes
             place.  It might also depend upon how quickly the  appellant's
             treatment could be re-commenced in Bangladesh.

          13. In the whole circumstances, however, while  I  can  understand
             why the appellant would wish to  have  his  medical  treatment
             completed in the United Kingdom, I do not  consider  that  the
             United Kingdom would be in breach  of  its  obligations  under
             ECHR if the appellant were removed.  I do  not  consider  that
             removal could be said to be disproportionate.   I  uphold  the
             contents of the reasons for refusal letter."

7.   At the appeal hearing before me the appellant Mr Das told  me  that  he
    only needs five more months to finish his treatment.  He  sees  his  GP
    regularly and the dosage of drugs  that  he  is  given  by  his  GP  is
    reducing every month; after a further five months the treatment will be
    completed and he believes he will then be free  of  addiction.   He  is
    then willing to return to Bangladesh.

8.   I explained to him that none of that disclosed any error of law on  the
    part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge. It is only  the  respondent  who
    has discretion in such a case,  in  particular  as  to  the  timing  of
    removal.

Notice of Decision

9.   There was no error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and that decision shall stand.

10.  No anonymity direction was sought and none is made.

Recommendation

11.  I am, however, taking the unusual step of making  a  recommendation  to
    the respondent.  The appellant must understand that  my  recommendation
    is not binding on the respondent in  any  way  but,  having  heard  the
    evidence of the appellant in person, I am satisfied that the  appellant
    is reaching  the  end  of  successful  medical  treatment  which  will,
    hopefully, cure his heroin addiction.  He now has less than five months
    before that treatment is ended.  I would  express  the  hope  that  the
    respondent, in these compassionate  circumstances,  will  not  seek  to
    remove the appellant before the end of June 2015.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
19 February 2015

