
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11975/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 31 October 2017                    |On 02 February 2018                   |
|                                      |                                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                              PATHUMTHONG TOLEK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D. Bazini, Counsel, instructed by Messrs E&M
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS

                Introduction

    1. The appellant, a citizen of Thailand,  born  on  22  December  1978,
       appeals against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  C.M.
       Phillips, sitting at Taylor House on 26 February 2016, in which  she
       dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  decision
       of 10 March 2015 to refuse to vary her leave to remain in the United
       Kingdom and to remove her by way of directions under section  47  of
       the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.   Permission  to
       appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 9 August 2016.


    2. So far as relevant, paragraph 319C of the immigration Rules provides
       as follows:

              "319C. Requirements for entry clearance or leave to remain


             To quality for entrance clearance or leave  to  remain  as  the
             Partner of a Relevant Points Based System Migrant, an applicant
             must meet the requirements listed below. If the applicant meets
             these requirements, entry clearance or leave to remain will  be
             granted.  If the applicant does not  meet  these  requirements,
             the application will be refused.


             Requirements:


              ......


             e) the applicant and the Relevant Points Based  System  Migrant
             must intend to live with the other as  their  spouse  or  civil
             partner,  unmarried  or   same-sex   partner   throughout   the
             applicants (sic) stay in the UK.

    3. The immigration history of the appellant is essentially as  follows.
       She first entered the United Kingdom in February 2009, with leave to
       enter until 18 July 2010 as a work permit dependant,  subject  to  a
       condition restricting employment and prohibiting recourse  to  pubic
       funds.  On 1 July 2010, she was granted leave  to  remain  until  15
       June 2013 as a Tier 2 dependant  partner,  subject  to  a  condition
       prohibiting employment as  a  doctor  or  dentist  in  training  and
       prohibiting recourse to public funds.


    4.  On 25 January 2012, the appellant was granted leave  to  remain  in
       the United Kingdom until 23 January 2015 as a PBS dependant, subject
       to the same conditions.


    5.  On 23 January 2015, the appellant made a combined application for a
       further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the  partner  of  a
       Tier 2 migrant under the points based system  and  for  a  biometric
       residence permit.


    6.  On 10 March 2015, the respondent issued a  decision,  refusing  the
       applications.  The relevant passage of that letter reads as follows:-




             "In view of the fact you have stated on your application  form
             that you are currently living  at  [address]  Manchester,  M19
             [...] and will continue  to  do  so  as  you  are  working  in
             Manchester,  and  your   spouse   is   living   at   [address]
             Hertfordshire, HP4 [...]  and  that  his  employment  will  be
             continuing  in  [address],  the  Secretary  of  State  is  not
             satisfied that you intend to live with your spouse  throughout
             their stay in the United Kingdom".


   Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


    7. The First-tier Tribunal judge heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,
       with the assistance of an interpreter.  In her statement,  she  said
       that she married her husband in Thailand in 2008 and when he came to
       the United Kingdom to work in 2009 she was granted leave to enter as
       his partner.  The appellant moved to Hertfordshire with her husband,
       when he began to work  for  his  current  employer.   She  was  then
       granted further leave to remain as a dependant partner.

    8. However, the appellant was not able to find a job  in  Hertfordshire
       or nearby and so she went to  live  and  work  in  Manchester.   The
       appellant said that she was "only living there because of  work  and
       that my husband and I were still married and that we are together as
       a couple".


    9. The appellant also said that on their days off  "either  my  husband
       would come up to Manchester to stay with me or I would come down  to
       Hertfordshire to stay with him".


   10. Since 1 April 2015, that is to say, shortly after  the  respondent's
       decision, the appellant said she had been  living  in  Hertfordshire
       with  her  husband,  "in  the  restaurant  downstairs  in  the  same
       restaurant where my husband works."


   11. In oral evidence, the appellant told the judge that, in addition  to
       the contact described, she and her husband  had  kept  in  touch  by
       Google three times a day  and   that  the  sponsor  visited  her  in
       Manchester once a month.


   12. The appellant said that she  and  the  sponsor  husband  had  always
       intended to live together.  She added that they had a "plan".   When
       her husband went to look for work, there had been  no  position  for
       her and so she had to return to Manchester. She  kept  asking  about
       working in Hertfordshire and eventually, when a staff  member  left,
       she joined her husband at his place of work.  Because there were two
       of them, the employer also provided them with accommodation.


   13. At paragraphs 14 to 17 of  her  decision,  the  judge  recorded  the
       submissions of the parties.  The respondent stressed the requirement
       in the  rules  for  there  to  be  an  intention  to  live  together
       throughout the stay in the United Kingdom.  The  appellant  and  the
       sponsor had not been living together and there was no  intention  to
       live together, so the requirement in the immigration rules  was  not
       met.  The purpose of the rules was to require PBS migrants and their
       dependants to live together and not to  live  and  work  separately,
       meeting only when they were only able to do so.

   14. Although it was accepted that the appellant and the sponsor were now
       living together, they had  been  willing  to  live  apart  for  work
       reasons.  Accordingly, in terms of Article 8, there  would,  in  the
       respondent's submission be no undue hardship because the couple  had
       clearly agreed to live apart for  a  substantial  period  and  could
       continue to communicate as they had been doing, when  living  apart.
       It was not unreasonable for them to  return  to  Thailand  to  enjoy
       family life there.


   15. For the appellant, it was  submitted  that  the  appellant  and  the
       sponsor  intended  to  live  together.    Their   relationship   was
       subsisting  and  their  credibility  had  not  been  attacked.   The
       relevant immigration rule did not  require  the  appellant  and  the
       sponsor to live together.  The requirement was one of intent. It was
       the intention that mattered. The rule  acknowledged  the  fact  that
       there may be reasons why the  applicant  and  the  sponsor  did  not
       actually live together all the time.  The gap in  co-habitation  did
       not demonstrate a lack of intention. There had been no job  for  the
       appellant and no accommodation until that became available.

   16. The judge's conclusions in respect of the immigration rules were  as
       follows:-

         "30. I find that the appellant does not meet  the  requirements  of
             paragraph 319C(e), which is satisfied when the parties  intend
             to live together throughout the  appellant's  stay.  The  word
             "throughout"  is  I  find  a  qualification   under   relevant
             Immigration Rule has to be read as a whole, not separately  in
             the way that was submitted strongly on the appellant's behalf.




              31. I am not  persuaded  to  read  the  words  intention  and
             throughout as meaning that the requirements  are  met  in  this
             case when the intention to live together has been  demonstrated
             to be qualified by other considerations so that  the  appellant
             and sponsor lived apart  from  very  shortly  after  a  Tier  2
             dependant visa was granted in February 2012 that from 01  March
             2012 until after her visa application was refused on  10  March
             2015, that is from the beginning of April 2015.


              32. There may indeed as was submitted be reasons why a couple
             could be apart for a short period of time, for example, because
             of personal circumstances entirely out  of  their  control,  so
             that there are circumstances in which it can be envisaged  that
             the requirements are met despite short  absences.   However,  I
             find that the appellant and  sponsor  have  clearly  and  as  a
             matter of fact demonstrated their intention to work rather than
             their intention to live  together  throughout  the  appellant's
             stay.  The fact that other couples in the modern world may make
             a decision to live apart by  reason  of  work  but  still  have
             genuine and subsisting relationships does  not  I  find  assist
             this appellant, the success of whose application  depends  upon
             her meeting the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   It
             follows that the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules
             is dismissed because all the requirements in paragraph  319C(e)
             are not met".


   17.  As far as Article 8 was concerned, the judge noted  it  was  common
       ground that the appellant and the sponsor were  married  and  had  a
       subsisting relationship.  Removal of the appellant  would  interfere
       with family life, engaging Article 8.  However, the judge noted that
       she had to  have  regard  to  section  117(B)  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  insofar  as  weight  was  to  be
       attached to the public interest and the maintenance  of  immigration
       control.  Little weight should also be given to the private life  of
       the appellant established in the United Kingdom because  her  status
       had been precarious.


   18. In paragraph 35, the judge found that the appellant and the sponsor,
       both being nationals of Thailand,  could  return  to  live  in  that
       country.  Neither would have any significant obstacles on return.


   19. In conclusion, at paragraph 38 of  her  decision,  the  judge  found
       that, giving weight to the  immigration  rules  and  to  the  public
       interest in the maintenance of effective  immigration  control,  any
       interference with the appellant's private and  family  life  flowing
       from the decision to refuse her application, and then to remove, was
       proportionate.


    Submissions


   20. At the hearing before us, Mr Bazini stressed the significance of the
       word "intention" in the rules.  The issue, in  his  submission,  was
       whether the intention was genuinely held. If, as here,  the  parties
       had not actually lived together for a period of time, then the focus
       had to be on their intention. There was no requirement that the fact
       of their not living together had to be due to circumstances entirely
       outside their control.  Although  it  would  be  easier  to  find  a
       genuine intention to live together if  there  had  been  only  short
       periods of separation, this was not essential. A person could  still
       have an intention to live with another person, even  if  he  or  she
       also had other intentions.  Each case turned on its own facts. On  a
       literal meaning of the rule, the appellant  and  her  husband  could
       live apart, as long as they had an intention to live together.


   21. Reference was made at the hearing to the definitions in paragraph  6
       of the immigration rules;  in  particular,  the  definition  of  the
       expression "intention to live permanently with the other".  That  is
       defined as meaning:


            "an intention to live together, evidenced by a clear commitment
           from both parties that they will  live  together  following  the
           outcome of the application in question or soon as  circumstances
           permit thereafter".

   22. Mr Clarke referred to the wording in  that  definition,  whereby  an
       intention to live permanently with the other requires  an  intention
       to do so "as soon as circumstances permit".  Given that the  husband
       of the appellant had to be earning at least �29,000 a year, in order
       to qualify as a relevant PBS migrant under the immigration rules the
       decision of the appellant and her husband to  live  respectively  in
       Manchester and Hertfordshire was, Mr Clarke submitted, purely one of
       choice.  As the judge had found, their intention was in each case to
       work, rather than to live together.

   23. In reply, Mr Bazini said that if  only  circumstances  beyond  one's
       control could count, then this would destroy the significance of the
       words "intend to live with the other" in paragraph 319(C)(e).


       Discussion


   24. We agree with Mr Bazini that, as required by Mahad  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home  Department  [2009]  UKSC  16,  the  Tribunal  is
       required to apply the ordinary meaning of the words in the  relevant
       provisions of the immigration rules.   Paragraph  319C(e)  uses  the
       word "intends".


   25.  Mr Bazini submitted that, if the respondent had wished  to  achieve
       the result for which she contends in the  present  case,  then  sub-
       paragraph (e)  could  and  should  have  omitted  the  reference  to
       intention. We disagree. Sub-paragraph (e) clearly has to cover those
       cases where the applicant and the spouse  or  partner  are  not  yet
       living  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Accordingly,  the  reference  to
       intention is unavoidable.

   26. We accept Mr Bazini's submission that a person can  have  more  than
       one intention, at any particular time.   The  problem,  however,  is
       that the present appellant's actual, operative intention was to work
       in Manchester, rather than to go with her husband to  live  together
       in Hertfordshire, where she had been unable to find employment.   As
       a result,  the  appellant's  intention  to  live  with  her  husband
       throughout the period of leave fell away.  It yielded to her  choice
       that, rather than live with him  and  face  the  prospect  of  being
       economically inactive, she preferred to live and work in Manchester.


   27. It is, we consider, stretching the concept of intention too  far  to
       conclude, as Mr Bazini would have us do, that the appellant and  her
       husband intended to live together throughout the relevant period, in
       the sense that this was their preference if -  and  only  if  -  the
       appellant's wish to engage in paid employment could be satisfied.

   28. Although the  definition  in  paragraph  6  of  "intention  to  live
       permanently with  the  other"  does  not  expressly  extend  to  the
       provisions of the rules with which we are concerned, we nevertheless
       consider that the definition is  of  assistance  in  construing  the
       ambit of paragraph 319C(e) of the rules.  The concept of what future
       circumstances might permit is, in the definition, part  of  how  one
       determines  whether  the  requisite  intention  is   present.    The
       existence  of  the  concept  in  our  view  nullifies  Mr   Bazini's
       submission that the meaning of "intend" would be destroyed  if  only
       circumstances beyond a person's control could enable that person  to
       have the requisite intention, where the  parties  are  not  in  fact
       living together.  Despite the fact  that  the  definition  does  not
       apply to paragraph 319C, the concept is, in our  view,  nevertheless
       inherent in the words "must intend" in sub-paragraph  (e).  This  is
       because having an intention is not to be equated with merely  having
       a wish.


   29. In the present case, there is no suggestion that the  appellant  had
       to live in Manchester, rather than with her husband in Hertfordshire
       because, if she had lived with him in Hertfordshire, they would have
       been unable  adequately  to  maintain  and  accommodate  themselves.
       Indeed, it is difficult to see how she could show  this.   Paragraph
       319(C)(g) requires an applicant such as  the  present  appellant  to
       show that there is "a sufficient level of funds available [to  her],
       as set out  in  Appendix  E."  The  respondent  did  not  grant  the
       appellant leave on the understanding that the  appellant  needed  to
       work in the United Kingdom in order to maintain  herself.  The  fact
       that she was permitted to work (except as a doctor or a dentist)  is
       beside the point.


   30. Accordingly, the factual position, as  found  by  the  judge,  shows
       clearly that the couple's circumstances were such as to  permit  the
       appellant to live with her husband in Hertfordshire. The  fact  that
       she did not do so until it suited her was fatal to her case.


   31. As the judge found, as a matter of fact and degree periods of  short
       separation, for the purposes of employment or  otherwise,  may  well
       not preclude a person  from  satisfying  the  requirements  of  sub-
       paragraph (e).  If, for example, a person works away from home for a
       period of time, that person and his or her spouse or partner may, on
       the facts, still properly be said to be living with each  other.  If
       so, then it will matter not what motivated the working away.

   32. On the facts of the present case, the judge was  fully  entitled  to
       take the view that the appellant and her husband were  not  in  this
       situation. They were not living together but, rather, were living in
       separate domestic establishments in  Manchester  and  Hertfordshire.
       The fact that they visited each other regularly and kept  in  touch,
       whilst demonstrating the genuineness of their relationship, did not,
       on the facts, require the  judge  to  find  that  they  were  living
       together for the purposes of sub-paragraph (e).


   33. Paragraph 339C(e) of the immigration rules  is,  plainly,  intensely
       fact-sensitive.  A judicial fact-finder must determine  whether  the
       relationship is a genuine one; that is to say, whether  the  parties
       intend to live with each other "as their spouse  or  civil  partner"
       etc.  He or she must carefully  consider  whether  any  evidence  of
       physical separation means that the parties have established separate
       households.  If so, then the judicial fact-finder must consider  the
       intention of the parties in the way  we  have  set  out  above.   In
       particular, he or she must determine whether a  period  of  separate
       living is due to the free wishes of the  parties  or  is  caused  by
       other circumstances.


   34. There are no "bright lines" in either of the last two exercises just
       described; namely, deciding if the  parties  are  living  with  each
       other and, if not, whether they lack an  intention  to  do  so.  The
       judicial fact-finder must draw the  relevant  conclusions  from  the
       facts, as established in evidence.


   35. We agree with Mr Bazini that it  would  be  wrong  to  construe  the
       requirement, which we regard as inherent in the words "must intend",
       to live with each other once circumstances permit, so narrowly  that
       it can be met only if there are  circumstances  keeping  the  couple
       apart that are physically entirely beyond their  control.  One  can,
       for example, envisage a case where the terminal illness of  a  close
       relative or friend might lead to a period of  separate  living.  The
       fact that this would still be the choice of  at  least  one  of  the
       parties does not preclude  a  finding  that  there  are  objectively
       powerful moral and/or emotional reasons for the parties to  have  to
       live apart, which do not destroy their intention to live together.


    36.  In the present case, however, the appellant and her sponsor husband
        lived separately, in separate households, for a significant  period,
        entirely because they could earn more money that way.


   37. So far as Article 8 is concerned, there is no error of  law  in  the
       judge's decision.  The appellant and her husband can continue  their
       family life in Thailand.  The appellant's private life can  also  be
       continued in that country.  Since the appellant has failed  to  meet
       the requirements of the immigration rules, the judge was correct  to
       have regard to the importance of maintaining immigration control  in
       considering whether removal would be disproportionate.  The  judge's
       findings on the precariousness of the appellant's  private  life  in
       the United Kingdom were in accordance with the judgments in  Ruppiah
       v secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ  803.
       In all the circumstances, the judge was fully entitled  to  conclude
       that giving effect to  the  immigration  decision  would  not  be  a
       disproportionate  interference  of  the  Article  8  rights  of  the
       appellant and her husband.


       Decision

   38. This appeal is dismissed.


                                                    The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                                                                   President


                                                       Dated 1 February 2018









