
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11731/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 May 2016                           |On 7 June 2016                      |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                          oluwafemi samuel adesanya

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Alim of Messrs Thoree & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Nigeria  born  on  17  September  1981,
    appealed against a decision of the respondent  refusing  him  leave  to
    remain under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  as  amended.   His
    appeal was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Majid  and
    dismissed in a determination promulgated on 5 October 2015.
2.      The  grounds  of  appeal  argued  that  there  had  been  procedural
    unfairness in that the First-tier Judge had stated in the hearing  that
    he was adjourning  the  appeal  for  the  respondent  to  consider  new
    evidence when in fact there was no new evidence and also  that  he  had
    recorded that the appellant had adopted his witness statement  when  in
    fact he was not given any opportunity to do so.  No relevant issues  or
    law had been considered by the First-tier  Judge  in  arriving  at  his
    decision and he had stated that he had upheld the respondent's  adverse
    credibility allegation when no such allegation had been made.

3.   In a Rule 24 statement  Mr  Kotas  of  the  Presenting  Officers'  Unit
    accepted that there were material errors of law  in  the  determination
    and invited the Tribunal to remit the case for a fresh hearing.

4.   There are clear errors of law in the determination of the judge in  the
    First-tier  as   set  out  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the  only
    appropriate action is to remit this appeal for a hearing afresh in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is remitted for hearing afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

The appeal will be heard afresh at Taylor House: Time estimate 2 hours.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy           7th June 2016
