
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11577/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2015                  |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                               AMANPREET SINGH
                         (anonymity Order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett of the Special Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 20  October  1990.   On  29
    October 2013 he applied for further leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student
    Migrant.  On 30 January 2014 the  Respondent  refused  the  application
    because she considered the Appellant did not meet the  requirements  of
    paragraph 245ZX(d) of the Immigration Rules and Appendix C (Maintenance
    (Funds)).  He  had  failed  to  show  he  had  sufficient  funds.   The
    Respondent came to this conclusion because she did not accept the  bank
    statements which the Appellant had supplied were genuine  and  on  that
    basis further refused the  claim  by  way  of  reference  to  paragraph
    322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.

 2. On 7 March 2014 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under Section  82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds are brief, formulaic and generic.   They  refer
    to the burden of proof on the Respondent in respect of  any  allegation
    of a false document and requested a decision  without  a  hearing.  The
    Appellant subsequently requested and was  given  a  date  for  an  oral
    hearing.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 3. By a decision promulgated on 25 February 2015 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal S J Walker heard the appeal in the absence of the Appellant or
    any representative for the Appellant.  The appeal had been  lodged  for
    the Appellant by solicitors.  The Respondent was  represented  and  the
    Judge was satisfied as to service of notice of the time, date and place
    set for the hearing and that it was just to proceed in the  absence  of
    the Appellant or any representative for him.  He dismissed  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

 4. On 6 March 2015  the  Appellant  in  person  lodged  notice  of  appeal
    although the grounds bear the hallmark of  having  been  drafted  by  a
    lawyer.

 5. The grounds refer to the Document Verification Report  (DVR)  submitted
    for the Respondent and that at paragraph 23 of his decision  the  Judge
    had referred to the absence of an attachment referred to in the report.

 6. The grounds cite RP (proof of forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT  00086  and
    other determinations and the judgment in AA  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 773 about the burden and standard  of  proof  in  relation  to
    forged or false documents.

 7. The thrust of the grounds is that there  was  no  independent  evidence
    provided to support the  Respondent's  allegation  he  had  used  false
    documents and the Judge's failure to address this amounted to an  error
    of law.

 8. On 28 April 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Brunnen  granted
    permission to appeal because it was arguable the  Judge  had  erred  in
    treating a DVR as sufficient evidence that financial evidence was false
    in the circumstances where the evidence on which that report was  based
    was missing.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 9. The Appellant who is unrepresented did not attend the hearing  nor  any
    newly appointed representative.  There was  no  letter  of  explanation
    from him and he had not informed the Tribunal on any of  the  forms  in
    the file of his telephone number.  I was satisfied that notice  of  the
    time, date and place  set  for  the  hearing  had  been  given  to  the
    Appellant in accordance with Rule 36 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal)  Rules  2008  as  amended  (the  Procedure  Rules).    Having
    considered the papers in the  file  and  the  overriding  objective  of
    Procedure Rule 2, I decided it was just to proceed with the hearing  in
    the absence of the Appellant or any representative for him.

10. Ms Everett for the Respondent relied on the Procedure Rule 24  response
    of 14 May 2015 and  the  DVR.   The  Appellant  had  not  produced  any
    evidence to contradict the Respondent's assertion  he  had  used  false
    documents and the Judge's decision contained no material error of  law.



Findings and Consideration

11. The Appellant was on notice  from  the  reasons  for  the  Respondent's
    refusal on 30 January 2014 of his application for further  leave  as  a
    student.  Since that time  the  Appellant  has  produced  no  evidence,
    documentary or  oral,  to  show  the  bank  statements  submitted  were
    genuine.

12. The missing attachment from the DVR is referred to  in  the  "Comments"
    section of the DVR.  The DVR without the attachment gives  reasons  why
    the Respondent  considered  the  Appellant  had  submitted  false  bank
    statements.  Those reasons are based on enquiry of the issuing bank and
    in the circumstances the DVR itself  is  sufficient  to  establish  the
    "precedent facts" to support the allegation of fraud and  to  pass  the
    burden of proof to the Appellant.

13. The Judge adequately dealt with this at paragraphs 25  and  28  of  his
    decision.  If the Appellant was to assert the documents were genuine or
    had been innocently provided then the burden of proof  had  shifted  to
    him.  The Judge correctly noted the Appellant's failure in any  way  to
    address the allegation of use of false documents at paragraph 31 of his
    decision relying in part on the judgment in TK (Burundi) v SSHD  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 40.

14. The grounds disclose no material error of law and the Judge's  decision
    shall stand.

Anonymity

15. There was no request for an anonymity order and having  considered  the
    appeal I find that none is warranted.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and shall stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 04. ix. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

