
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11958/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                   |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 25th April 2016                              |On 7th June 2016           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                             OYEDAYO OYEBAMGBOSE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs U Sood of Counsel instructed by 1st Call
Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion and to be consistent, I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Background

 2. On 11th February 2016 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Fisher  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal A  Hussain  in  which  he  allowed  the  appeal
    against the decision of the  respondent  to  refuse  further  leave  to
    remain applying the provisions of Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 3. In granting permission Judge Fisher summarised  the  grounds.   It  was
    argued that the judge had erred in law because he failed  to  make  any
    findings under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules
    before considering Article 8 outside the  them.   Additionally  it  was
    argued that the judge had made inconsistent findings about  the  health
    of the appellant's sponsor and  also  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    provisions of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

Submissions

 4. Mr McVeety confirmed that  the  respondent  relied  upon  the  grounds.
    These contend, in greater detail, that the judge failed to have  regard
    to the approach recommended in  SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  by
    identifying compelling circumstances to support a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules.  The inconsistency in  evidence  relating  to
    the appellant's spouse's physical health derives from the fact that the
    judge found, initially, that the sponsor's health had improved  to  the
    extent that she could take on part-time work  but,  when  conducting  a
    proportionality balancing test, referred to the same person's inability
    to work.  It is also submitted that  the  judge  failed  to  apply  the
    factors set out in Sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act.

 5. Mr McVeety also drew attention to the judge's conclusions in  paragraph
    39 to the effect  that  the  appellant  had  been  unable  to  live  an
    independent life in the United Kingdom but then, paragraph 41, referred
    to circumstances showing that the appellant did not have an independent
    life.

 6. Mrs Sood drew attention to the arguments put forward  in  her  skeleton
    submitted to the First-tier Tribunal to support her contention that the
    judge had not erred in allowing the appeal.  However, she  was  obliged
    to concede that the decision did not show that the judge had considered
    the application of the Rules or applied the provisions of Section 117A-
    D of the 2002 Act to the decision.  She thought  it  relevant  to  note
    that the appellant had only ever claimed leave to remain on  Article  8
    grounds and therefore contended that the judge was not wrong to proceed
    immediately to deal with that right.  Further, she submitted  that  the
    claimed inconsistency about the appellant's independence should not  be
    seen as such although she offered no argument to support that claim.

Error on a Point of Law

 7. After I had considered the matter for a few moments, I  announced  that
    the decision showed material errors on  points  of  law  such  that  it
    should be set aside and re-made before the First-tier Tribunal  on  all
    issues.  My reasons for that conclusion follow.

 8. Whilst in the section of the decision headed  "The  Issues"  the  judge
    refers to the relevant Immigration Rules and identifies the main  issue
    under section EX. as whether there are  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to
    the appellant and his wife's family continuing their lives outside  the
    United Kingdom, the decision fails to examine any of those  provisions.
    From paragraph 21 onwards, the  judge  apparently  deals  with  matters
    relevant to an Article 8 claim outside the Rules yet overlooks the need
    to examine the insurmountable obstacles test set out in section  EX  of
    the Rules.  The judge was obliged to consider the  application  of  the
    Rules and then if the Rules could not avail the appellant, to  consider
    Article 8 issues outside them only if compelling circumstances could be
    identified to warrant a grant of further leave  on  that  basis.   This
    approach was made clear by the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo).

 9. The judge's consideration of Article 8 issues is further flawed by  the
    failure to make any reference to Section 117  of  the  2002  Act  which
    codifies the public interest in removal.  Additionally,  it  cannot  be
    said that the judge made reference to any matters set  out  in  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act which  might  show  that  he  had  regard  to  its
    provisions (AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)).

10. The above matters, alone, amount to material errors on points  of  law.
    It is also evident that the decision contains  inconsistencies  in  the
    conclusions, as referred to  in  the  grounds  and  submissions,  which
    suggest that the decision is irrational in the legal  sense.   That  is
    because the judge reached conflicting conclusions about the appellant's
    employability and independence. These are further material errors.

11. For the preceding reasons it is appropriate that this appeal should  be
    re-made by the First-tier Tribunal having regard to the  need  for  the
    evidence to be re-heard  and  issues  re-examined.   In  reaching  that
    conclusion I have regard to  the  Practice  Statements  of  the  Senior
    President of Tribunals of 25th September 2012 at paragraph 7.2.

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested before the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  the  Upper
Tribunal nor do I consider it appropriate in the circumstances of the case.

DIRECTIONS

12. The appeal is to be heard afresh before the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at the Stoke Hearing Centre on a date to be specified by  the  Resident
    Judge.

13. No interpreter will be required for  the  hearing  unless  the  parties
    indicate to the contrary.

14. The time estimate for the hearing is two hours.

15. The re-making of the decision should not be before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal A Hussain.

Signed                              Date 7.6.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
