
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11416/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 November 2013                            |On 4 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                            JAMAL MUHAMMAD EHSAN
                                               No anonymity Direction has
been made.
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Appellant:     Mr Rahman, Mayfair Solicitors, Hounslow

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  18  August  1989.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated  21  March  2013
    refusing his application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as
    Tier 4 (General) (Student) Migrant under the PBS.  His appeal was heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Prior on 3 September 2013.  The appeal was
    dismissed and the determination promulgated on 9 September 2013.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Macdonald  on  1  October
    2013.  The grounds for application are that the judge  wrongly  refused
    to adjourn the hearing causing unfairness.  The Home Office  Presenting
    Officer produced, at the hearing, copies of emails between the  British
    High Commission and MCB Bank which went to the issue of false documents
    being  produced  by  the  appellant.   The   appellant   requested   an
    adjournment of 2 weeks to enable him to  investigate  these  documents.
    This was not granted and  the  permission  states  that  the  issue  of
    fairness may be an arguable error of law.
The Hearing

 3. The appellant's representative submitted that these emails had not been
    seen by the appellant  before  the  hearing.   They  were  not  in  the
    respondent's bundle and so the appellant should have  been  granted  an
    adjournment to enable him to make enquiries about these  documents  and
    hopefully rebut the accusation.  The emails are dated 18 January  2013.
    The refusal letter is dated 21 March 2013.   He  submitted  that  these
    documents should have been in the respondent's bundle.

 4. I was referred to the determination at paragraph 1 which deals with the
    adjournment request.  It is stated therein that the appellant's  father
    is in contact with MCB Bank and will seek from the bank evidence of the
    authenticity of the bank documentation.

 5. I asked the  representative  how  the  appellant's  father  can  obtain
    information about a bank account which is in his son's name.   He  said
    that the appellant's father has permission from the appellant to access
    his account.  It was his father who put the  money  into  the  account.
    The representative submitted that before the hearing all the  appellant
    had was the refusal letter which refers to false bank documents but  if
    he had seen these emails he could have made  proper  enquiries  at  the
    Bank.  He submitted that the judge used the wrong  test  and  made  his
    decision based on a presumption.  I was referred  to  the  case  of  SH
    Afghanistan [2011] EWCA  Civ  1284.   He  submitted  that  because  the
    appellant had not seen the emails, the judge's decision  is  unfair  as
    the appellant had been unable to rebut this accusation  as  he  had  no
    details of the person who had dealt with the matter at  MCB  Bank.   He
    submitted that there is a material error of law in the determination.

 6. I asked the representative if he accepts that there is  a  verification
    report in the respondent's bundle and that this was before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  He checked his file and accepted this.   I  asked
    him  if  this  perhaps  defeats  his  argument.   He  said   that   the
    verification report does not state the content of the  emails  and  his
    instructions are that when the emails were shown to the appellant,  the
    judge only gave him a short period to consider them,  but  during  this
    period, he had spoken to his father who said that he  would  look  into
    this.  The representative was unable to tell me why the  appellant  had
    not gone to the bank with the verification report  to  try  to  produce
    documentation to rebut the accusation.

 7. The Presenting Officer submitted as there is a verification report  the
    appellant had been made aware of the false documents.  At  the  hearing
    the appellant said that he did not know whether the bank documents were
    genuine or not but thought that they were.  He  provided  no  assurance
    from MCB  Bank  rebutting  the  verification  report.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the judge was entitled to come to the conclusion
    he did.  The verification report and the refusal letter make clear what
    the problem is with the application so surely the appellant could  have
    got a letter from the bank or his father could have given a  statement.
    She submitted that the appellant had known what the problem was and had
    produced nothing.  She submitted that it  was  open  to  the  judge  to
    refuse the adjournment and  that  the  decision  is  not  unfair.   The
    appellant had months to get documentation to rebut the accusation.  The
    appellant asked for the case to  be  dealt  with  on  the  papers.   He
    therefore had had an opportunity to give evidence but he did  not  take
    this and he has not appeared  for  this  hearing.   His  representative
    informed me that the appellant had telephoned him that morning  to  say
    he was not coming because of health  issues.   The  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that his non-appearance is significant.

 8. I was referred to paragraph 9 of the determination which gives  details
    of the bank account with MCB Bank and states that  the  appellant  must
    have been aware that he had to deal with this matter if his appeal  was
    to  succeed.   The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  there  is  no
    unfairness.

 9. The appellant's representative submitted that  there  was  nothing  the
    appellant could have added before the First-tier Tribunal but he  might
    now be able to produce documents and an explanation if I find there  to
    be an error of law in the First-tier decision.
Determination

10. I have considered what was before the judge at the  First-tier  hearing
    on 3 September 2013.  The appellant knew from the date of  the  refusal
    of 21 March 2013 that  his  application  had  been  denied  because  he
    appeared to have submitted  false  MCB  Bank  documents.   During  that
    period he did not obtain  a  letter  of  rebuttal  from  the  bank  and
    although he turned up for the  First-tier  hearing  he  instructed  his
    representative to ask the judge to determine the appeal on the  papers.



11. It is clear that the verification report was before the judge and  that
    the appellant had seen this.  The emails  produced  at  the  First-tier
    hearing added nothing.  The Presenting Officer is correct to  say  that
    nothing was produced at the First-tier hearing to rebut the accusation.
     There is still nothing before the Tribunal.

12. The judge gave the appellant a short time to consider the emails.  That
    was sufficient.  The appellant had an opportunity to give  evidence  at
    the hearing but did not do so.  Because of the  terms  of  the  refusal
    letter and the verification report the judge did not make an  error  in
    refusing to adjourn the hearing for 2 weeks to enable the appellant  to
    consider the emails.
DECISION

13. There is no error of law in the judge's determination.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal must stand.

14. No anonymity direction has been made.
Signed                                  Date

Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


