
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/11425/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 9 February 2016                   |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              AARATHI SOMARAJAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by RH & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent refused the appellant's application for leave to  remain
    in the UK for reasons explained in her decision  dated  9  March  2015.
    Designated Judge Murray dismissed the appellant's appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal by decision promulgated on 15 July 2015.

 2. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is on the following grounds:-
          1. The appellant is an Indian national.   She  was  born  on  9th
             January 1989.  She first entered the UK on 19th August 2007 on
             a student visa.  Her mother was already in the UK  on  a  work
             permit.  Her sister and father arrived in the  UK  in  January
             2008 as dependants of the appellant's mother.  The appellant's
             mother, father and sister were all granted indefinite leave to
             remain in 2012.  Her parents own their own house which  has  a
             mortgage.  They are working.  The appellant has  always  lived
             with her family (apart from very short periods apart when  she
             had to return to India to apply for a visa).  Her stay in  the
             UK has always been lawful.  She has never lived in India  (for
             any substantial period of time) as her father worked in  Libya
             (her parents had not  lived  in  India  for  30  years).   The
             appellant  maintained   she   would   suffer   from   language
             difficulties were she to return to live in India.  She  has  a
             very  limited  number  of  relatives  living  in  India.   She
             maintained she was emotionally and  financially  dependant  on
             her parents.  She relied on Paragraph 276ADE and  also  relied
             on her case being granted outside  the  Immigration  Rules  in
             relation to Article 8, ECHR.  The FTT refused the  appellant's
             appeal.
         Ground  1  -  error  of  law  in  approach   taken   to   assessing
         proportionality
          2. The FTT accept that the appellant has family life in the UK at
             paragraph 60.  However, the FTT erred in law at  paragraph  57
             by failing to assess proportionality from the  starting  point
             of separation of the family, having regard to  the  fact  that
             the appellant's parents and sister have  indefinite  leave  to
             remain and are entitled to remain in the UK, and whether there
             were sufficiently weighty factors justifying  such  separation
             between the appellant and her family (see Mirza v Secretary of
             State for the Home Department [2015] CSIH 28).   The  FTT  has
             adopted  the  approach  that  the  family  relocate  with  the
             appellant to India.  This is not the correct approach  and  as
             such the decision of the FTT is legally flawed to  a  material
             extent.
          3. Had the FTT taken the  correct  legal  approach,  it  had  not
             identified  any  sufficiently  weighty  factors   to   justify
             separation.   There  are  no  sufficiently   weighty   factors
             justifying such separation  where  the  appellant  has  always
             lived with her family, her stay in  the  UK  has  always  been
             lawful, she has never lived in India, she is  emotionally  and
             financially dependent on her family, she speaks  English,  she
             is not a burden on the tax payer, she has a limited number  of
             relatives in India, she would have language difficulties,  her
             health  issues,  her  parents  own  their  house  and  have  a
             mortgage, and in any event it is  not  reasonable  for  family
             life to be conducted by way of the occasional visit, Skype  or
             email  (see  Mansoor  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
             Department [2011]  EWHC  832  (Admin)  (at  paragraph  16  per
             Justice Blake).
          4. The FTT has erred  in  law  at  paragraph  62  by  failing  to
             recognise that the terms of the Immigration Rules  are  not  a
             legitimate aim in their own right.  A judgement  needs  to  be
             made as to how significant the aim, and how far the removal of
             the particular claimant in the circumstances of  her  case  is
             necessary to promote that aim (see Mansoor, supra at paragraph
             35).  On the facts in this appeal (see previous paragraph), it
             cannot be said that the removal of the appellant is  necessary
             to promote that aim.   The  FTT  has  thus  erred  in  law  at
             paragraph 61  when  finding  that  the  public  interest  must
             succeed over the appellant's Article 8, ECHR rights.  The  FTT
             erred in law at paragraph 62 in finding that the  weight  must
             fall  in  favour  of  the  public  interest  in  removing  the
             appellant.  Had the FTT approached the  case  in  the  correct
             manner it would not have  reached  these  findings.   The  FTT
             reached an irrational decision as on no view can  it  be  said
             that there is any public interest in  removing  the  appellant
             from the UK when all relevant factors are properly  considered
             and assessed.
         Ground 2 - arriving  at  findings  which  are  unsupported  by  the
         evidence
          5. The FTT erred in law at paragraph 54 when finding that  it  is
             likely that she will not remain staying with her  parents  and
             sister for much longer.  There was insufficient or no evidence
             to support that finding and when the appellant has lived  with
             her family all her life.  There was no evidence that she would
             not remain with her parents.
         Ground 3 - failing to exercise anxious scrutiny in relation to  the
         country information
          6. Further the  FTT  has  erred  in  law  at  paragraph  54  when
             referring to the Country of  Origin  Information  report  (COI
             report).  The FTT has referred to single women living in major
             cities in India.  However the FTT has erred in law by  failing
             to exercise anxious scrutiny in relation to  the  COI  report.
             In particular the COI report states there is gender inequality
             (paragraph 24.03 of the COI report),  women's  marginalisation
             within the Indian economy has increased  (paragraph  24.06  of
             the COI report), women suffer from  a  general  inadequacy  in
             health  care  provision,  physical  vulnerabilities  that  are
             gender specific and biases in access to health care (paragraph
             24.06 of the COI report), there  is  a  prevalence  of  gender
             based violence such as sexual assault (see paragraph 24.07  of
             the COI report), sexual harassment of women in  the  workplace
             including physical and verbal abuse from male supervisors (see
             paragraph 24.15 of the COI report) and there was high level of
             crime against women (see paragraphs 24.30 and 24.37 of the COI
             report).  The FTT  has  either  not  taken  account  of  those
             paragraphs of the  COI  and/or  has  failed  to  assess  those
             paragraphs when  assessing  whether  it  is  proportionate  to
             remove the appellant.  The  FTT  has  thus  erred  in  law  by
             failing to exercise anxious scrutiny.
         Ground 4 - failure to give adequate reasons and/or failing to  take
         account of all  relevant  factors  and/or  failing  to  assess  all
         relevant factors and/or reaching irrational findings
          7. In particular, the FTT finds that it  is  totally  unrealistic
             for the family to remain together, that it is now time for the
             appellant to start a life outside the  family  unit  and  that
             this would not be unreasonable.  Those findings do not address
             the relevant legal question  of  proportionality  and  whether
             having regard to all relevant circumstances it can be said  to
             be proportionate to separate the family.   The  FTT  does  not
             explain why it is totally unrealistic for the family to remain
             together and in particular in light of AP (India) v  Secretary
             of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA   Civ   89
             (paragraphs [45]-[47] per McCombe LJ).  The FTT considers that
             the appellant has studied and has qualifications and  on  that
             basis it is time for her to start a life  outside  the  family
             unit.  The FTT does not assess all the other factors  outlined
             in  paragraph  3  of  this  application  together   with   the
             paragraphs  referred  to  in  relation  to  the  COI   report.
             Although the judge has referred to the fact that the appellant
             has been lawfully in the UK (see paragraph 55), the ability of
             the appellant to speak English (see  paragraph  58),  and  the
             fact that she is not a burden on the taxpayer  (see  paragraph
             59, although this paragraph focuses on the appellant's private
             life), it is unclear how these have been assessed when the FTT
             assesses the appellant's  family  life  at  paragraph  60  and
             whether the decision is proportionate.  If it is said that the
             FTT has assessed  all  relevant  factors  when  assessing  the
             appellant's family life, the decision of the FTT is irrational
             as on the facts of the appeal it reached a decision  which  no
             other reasonable tribunal would have reached.
         Ground 5 - error of law in looking for "exceptional circumstances"
          8. Further and in any event the FTT erred in law at paragraph  52
             by looking for exceptional circumstances and erred in  law  at
             paragraph 55 in finding that there is nothing unusual in  this
             case.  The correct test is proportionality (see  Mirza,  supra
             quoting from Lord Reed's judgement in the UK Supreme Court  in
             Bank Mellat v HM Treasury [2014] 2 AC 700).

 3. There is also a "ground  6"  headed  "error  of  law  in  FTT  refusing
    permission to appeal", which disputes the reasoning of the  First  Tier
    Tribunal's refusal of permission.  That is not  apt  to  be  framed  or
    considered as a ground of appeal.  Permission now having been  granted,
    the question is simply whether the grounds  disclose  any  legal  error
    such as to require the decision of the First Tier Tribunal  to  be  set
    aside.

Submissions for Appellant

 4. The grounds all went to show that the Tribunal erred on  the  basis  of
    family life, outwith the terms of the Immigration Rules.  At  paragraph
    60 the Judge accepted that family life existed in  the  UK.   Ground  1
    disclosed an error of not taking the separation of the  family  members
    as the starting point.  The case was analogous  to  Mirza.   The  other
    family members could not be expected to leave the UK.

 5. By way of background, the appellant's father now works mainly  in  Iran
    but  he  returns  regularly  to  spend  time  with  his  family.    The
    appellant's mother  continues  to  work  in  the  UK.   In  India,  the
    appellant has two grandmothers, both elderly, one aunt, and  a  cousin.
    There were no weighty factors and indeed no public interest at  all  in
    removal of the appellant.

 6. The Judge made an irrational finding that the appellant was  likely  to
    leave the family home.  All the  evidence  was  that  they  would  stay
    together, at  least  until  the  appellant  marries,  and  nothing  was
    presently contemplated in that respect.  There was nothing to show that
    she was about to embark on an independent life.  Reference was made  to
    AP (India) [2015] WL 537878, EWCA Civ 89, at paragraph 45:-
         "...  adult  children  ...  who  are  young  students,  from   most
         backgrounds, usually continue to form  an  important  part  of  the
         family in which they have grown up.  They attend their courses  and
         gravitate to their homes during the holidays, and upon  graduation,
         while ... they seek to "make their own way" in the world.   Such  a
         child is very much part of the ongoing  family  unit  and  until  a
         child does fly the nest his or her belonging to the  family  is  as
         strong as ever.   The  proportionality  of  interference  with  the
         family rights of the  various  family  members  should  receive,  I
         think, careful consideration in individual cases where this type of
         issue arises."

 7. Lord Justice McCombe continued at paragraph 47:-
         "It seems to me that while  three  members  of  the  family  passed
         through the gate (by means other than a success based upon historic
         injustice) this nuclear family as a whole,  including  the  student
         son, wanted to settle in the UK.  Three of them were held  entitled
         to do so.  Not surprisingly, the son continued his studies for  the
         time being in India, but he alone  was  ultimately  refused  entry.
         The idea that this family's family  life  (as  it  existed  before)
         should be maintained by telephone, other forms of communication and
         occasional visits, as the FTT considered possible ... is to my mind
         wholly unrealistic."

 8.  It  was  accepted  that  the  present  appellant  has  no   legitimate
    expectation to a grant of leave on the same basis as  obtained  by  the
    other family members.  Nevertheless, the proportionality assessment was
    bound to come down in her favour.

Submissions for Respondent

 9. In a Rule 24 response dated 31 December 2015 the respondent  says  that
    the Judge directed herself appropriately and  made  sound  findings  in
    relation to Article 8, based on the evidence and the case law, and that
    the grounds are only disagreement and argument.

10. Mrs O'Brien pointed out that the appellant came to the UK as  an  adult
    and as a student, and has never been here in the capacity of  a  family
    member.  She was not on a route which led  to  settlement  and  had  no
    status which linked her to the rest of the family.   Mirza  had  to  be
    read along with other and subsequent authority, and  in  light  of  the
    significant distinction between UK citizens and non-nationals.  All the
    family members in this case are citizens of India, and only  of  India.
    It is realistic to consider that they have the option of locating there
    if they prefer.  They may prefer to remain in the UK and have leave  to
    do so, but they do not have the rights of citizens.

11. The Judge was criticised for not tackling the case on  the  basis  that
    the family would be separated, but she plainly did resolve  it  on  the
    assumption of separation.  If  her  decision  was  based  only  on  the
    alternative that they might all leave the UK to remain together,  there
    would have been nothing else to say.  The determination was not  to  be
    read as saying simply that they all ought to leave.

12. Although the Judge said at paragraph 60 that the appellant  had  family
    life in the UK, that was in a passage using  ordinary  language  rather
    than a finding of family life  for  Article  8  purposes  going  beyond
    normal emotional links. In the same paragraph and elsewhere  the  Judge
    declined to find such links.  It was scarcely surprising to find that a
    well educated adult in her mid 20's was likely to  start  life  outwith
    the bounds of the family unit.  The appellant had  lived  independently
    as a student in the past, and came here independently in that capacity.
     The Judge's use of the phrase "totally unrealistic"  was  meant  as  a
    rejection of the argument that for her to leave the family  unit  would
    amount to a devastating schism.  It should be read as  a  finding  that
    the evidence from the appellant and her relatives  on  this  point  was
    highly exaggerated.

13. The appellant said that there could be only  one  rational  outcome  to
    this case, but that was far from the  case.   The  Judge  balanced  all
    relevant factors and was entitled to come down on  the  side  that  she
    did.  There was nothing legally wrong with describing the situation  as
    disclosing nothing unusual.  That was simple and correct language.  The
    Immigration Rules were designed so as in  general  not  to  give  adult
    relatives the right to chose  to  reside  together  in  the  UK  simply
    because some of them were entitled to reside there.  Such rights  arose
    only  in  strictly  defined  circumstances,  e.g.  advanced   age   and
    extraordinary dependency.

14. The use of the  phrase  "exceptional  circumstances"  at  paragraph  52
    appeared to reflect the submission made to the Judge.

15. The grounds did not disclose  irrationality  and  amounted  only  to  a
    classic example  of  disagreement  with  a  proportionality  assessment
    properly reached on the facts.

Response for appellant.

16. No matter what the submission had been to the Judge, it  was  an  error
    for her to approach the assessment in terms either of what was  "usual"
    or "exceptional".  The only question was proportionality.  The  outcome
    was simply irrational, there being so many factors  in  favour  of  the
    appellant that there could properly only be an outcome in  her  favour.
    There should have been no finding that she was likely to start life  on
    her own, because there was no evidence to  that  effect,  only  to  the
    contrary.  She remained integral in her family.  It should be borne  in
    mind that there are cultural factors bearing on this family and also  a
    changed social and economic climate generally  for  young  adults,  who
    increasingly tend to remain for  longer  periods  in  their  family  of
    birth.

Discussion and conclusions.

17. There did not have  to  be  explicit  evidence  from  anyone  that  the
    appellant was about to start out on her own in order  for  a  judge  to
    conclude that she was capable of doing so, and likely to  do  so.   The
    witnesses had a common interest in asserting the opposite, but from the
    surrounding evidence the inference could  sensibly  be  drawn.   No-one
    would be much surprised, for example, by the  appellant  taking  up  an
    attractive job offer in another town or even country.

18. There is always a public interest in maintaining the Immigration Rules.
     The House of Lords said so in Huang [2011] UKHL 11  at  paragraph  16,
    referring to "the general administrative desirability of applying known
    rules". This is reflected in section 117B(1)  of  the  2002  Act:  "The
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the   public
    interest".  The Judge did not fall into an error of  finding  that  the
    public interest must always prevail.  She gave the Rules no more and no
    less than their proper place.

19. There was no direct reference for the appellant to  Mirza.   I  do  not
    think it is authority for the proposition that persons with  indefinite
    leave to remain in the UK may never reasonably be  expected  to  leave.
    In any event, the Presenting Officer was  correct  to  point  out  that
    separation of the family is  precisely  the  assumption  on  which  the
    substance of the decision is based.

20. The high points of the argument for the appellant are, I think,  to  be
    found in the comparison with AP and in  the  criticism  of  the  phrase
    "totally unrealistic".

21. AP is not an authority that all young adults,  capable  of  leading  an
    independent life, who prefer to remain within the bosom of their family
    have a right to do so protected by Article 8 of  the  ECHR  until  such
    time as they choose, overriding the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The argument for the appellant, aiming at the  high  target  of
    irrationality, amounted or came very close to such a proposition.  Each
    case turns ultimately on its own facts and circumstances.

22. I find it not entirely clear at first sight of the  sentence  what  the
    term "totally unrealistic" is intended  to  convey.   However,  put  in
    context of the rest of paragraph 60 and the  rest  of  the  decision  I
    accept the  submission  of  the  Presenting  Officer.   The  underlying
    meaning is that the appellant  and  her  relatives  were  significantly
    overplaying their ongoing emotional interdependence and the  extent  of
    the wrench if the appellant were to  embark  upon  a  more  independent
    life.  That is a sensible judgment of the evidence.

23. Proportionality assessments should not be displaced  by  searching  for
    words such as "unusual" or "exceptional" and giving their use  a  legal
    analysis taking them beyond ordinary language.  Such terms are used  in
    both ordinary and technical senses in varying contexts  throughout  the
    case law.

24. Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice 9th. ed.,  vol.  1,  paragraph
    7.96 refers to the body of law on the precise scope  of  Article  8  as
    "characterised, unhelpfully in our view, by a proliferation of  phrases
    which all simultaneously attempt to define thresholds and  legal  tests
    for the application of Article 8".  This  case  did  not  turn  on  any
    nicety of legal formulation, or on whether a particular word or  phrase
    is used at any point in the  determination  in  an  ordinary  or  in  a
    specialised sense.

25. I do not  agree  with  the  submission  that  the  case  had  only  one
    conceivable answer, and that it was irrational to find in favour of the
    respondent.  The facts were such that an assessment had to be made.  In
    doing so, the Judge did not stray into any  error  of  legal  approach.
    She did not fail to give adequate reasons or to  take  account  of  all
    relevant factors on each side.  The grounds are, in  the  end,  only  a
    disagreement with the final proportionality assessment which the  judge
    reached on a clear appreciation of the facts.

26. The determination shall stand.

27. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           11 February 2016
