
IAC-AH-RG-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11857/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 September 2014                            |On 13 January 2015         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Safia Kousar
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Jamil, Arndale Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. In this determination, I shall refer to the respondent as the appellant
    and to the appellant as the respondent (when they appeared respectively
    before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant had made an application for leave  to  remain  under  the
    Immigration Rules (Appendix FM).  A  decision  to  refuse  her  further
    leave to remain was made by the respondent on 17  February  2014.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge A M Baker) which, in a determination promulgated on 3 July 2014,
    allowed  the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born on 5  February  1969  is  the
    mother of a child born 7 July 2006  who  is  a  British  citizen.   The
    appellant has separated from her husband (also a British  citizen)  who
    is the father of the child.  The child is in the  physical  custody  of
    the appellant.  The father of the child is significantly older than the
    appellant (63 years).  He has other adult children in addition  to  the
    child by the appellant.

 4. The grounds challenge the judge's decision to allow the appeal  on  the
    basis that there was no evidence that the child might have to be  taken
    into care if the appellant were removed from the United Kingdom because
    his father would not care for him.  At the present time  the  appellant
    and the child live in accommodation provided by  the  father  who  also
    maintains the child.  There is weekend contact between the  father  and
    child.

 5. I find parts of the determination to be difficult  to  understand.   As
    Judge White noted when granting permission the  judge  had  found  [14]
    that the appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  and
    would therefore consider the appeal under Article 8  ECHR  outside  the
    Rules.  Despite that, the judge then allowed the appeal  on  the  basis
    that the decision of the respondent was "not in accordance with the law
    and the applicable Immigration Rules" [17].  Relying on  the  authority
    of ZH (Tanzania) 2011  UKSC  4),  the  judge  had  described  the  best
    interests of the child as "the primary  consideration"  rather  than  a
    primary consideration for a decision-maker.  I have to consider whether
    these problems in the determination are so serious that I should set it
    aside.  Equally,  I  must  determine  whether   the   judge   had   any
    justification for concluding that the best interests of the child might
    suffer to the extent that he would be admitted to  care  in  the  event
    that his custodial parent (the  appellant)  was  removed  to  Pakistan.
    Having considered the evidence very carefully, I find  that  the  judge
    was entitled to conclude that the welfare of the  child  might  be  put
    into serious doubt by the removal of the appellant.  I note that social
    services have previously been involved in this case and had indicated a
    serious level of concern.  There was evidence that the father  was  not
    only unwilling to take on the custody  of  the  child  he  might  also,
    partly on account of his age, be unable to do so.  Although much of the
    language used in the determination is  inappropriate,  unclear  and  at
    times even chaotic, I am satisfied that it was open to  the  judge,  on
    the evidence, to conclude that there was a  "real  chance  of  the  boy
    having to go into care" in the event  that  the  appellant  is  removed
    [15].  Unlike the Upper  Tribunal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  the
    opportunity  of  hearing  the  oral  evidence  and  of  assessing  that
    testimony  together  with  the  other  evidence  before  it.   In  such
    circumstances, the Upper Tribunal should be reluctant to interfere with
    findings of fact made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  have  been
    properly supported  by  adequate  reasons.   In  the  circumstances,  I
    dismiss the appeal.



DECISION

 6. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed        Date 19 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

