
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
IA/11619/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 April 2016                          |On 29 April 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                               mr jibran khan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bellara of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He was born on 10 April  1992.
    He appealed against the  respondent's  decision  dated  12  March  2015
    refusing his application for a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a
    right to reside here as the spouse of an EEA national.  The appeal  was
    allowed by Judge Majid (the judge)  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  2
    October 2015.

 2. The respondent sought permission to appeal  the  judge's  decision  and
    submitted that he failed to take into account and or resolve  conflicts
    of fact or opinion on material matters and failed to  give  reasons  or
    any adequate reasons for findings on material matters.

 3. The respondent submitted that the judge failed to take into account and
    or resolve any of the discrepancies raised in the Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter.  Further, that the judge failed  to  engage  with  any  of  the
    reasons raised in the Reasons for Refusal Letter for finding  that  the
    marriage was one of convenience.

 4. Further, the judge failed to provide any adequate reasons for  allowing
    the appeal.  He referred to largely immaterial matters  and  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons why the appellant succeeded in showing that he
    met the requirements of the 2006 Regulations.  See in  particular  [23]
    of the decision.  There was an absence of reasoned  evidence  based  on
    the findings.  All the judge did was  express  simple  bare  statements
    that the appellant succeeded.

 5. The respondent submitted that as a  result  of  the  issues  identified
    above, the judge's findings were flawed.  He failed to resolve the  key
    conflicts in  the  evidence  or  even  consider  them.   There  was  no
    consideration of the issues anywhere in  his  decision  such  that  the
    respondent could not identify why it  was  that  the  judge  found  the
    appellant had addressed the concerns of the Secretary of State in terms
    of the reasons for refusal and  how  it  was  that  the  appellant  had
    discharged the burden of proof to show that his marriage was not one of
    convenience.

 6. Judge Astle granted permission to appeal on 21 March 2016.   She  found
    all grounds were arguable.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Ms Isherwood relied upon the grounds.

 8. Mr Bellara submitted that if the judge had erred,  the  error  was  not
    material.  He was entitled to come to his decision on the facts  before
    him.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. It was incumbent upon the judge to consider and take into  account  the
    issues raised by the respondent in her Reasons for Refusal Letter dated
    12 March 2015.  Budhathoki (reasons for decisions)  [2014]  UKUT  00341
    (IAC) at [14] reads:

         "We are not for a moment suggesting that judgments have to set  out
         the entire interstices of the evidence presented or  analyse  every
         nuance between the parties.  Far from it.  Indeed, we  should  make
         it clear that it is generally unnecessary, unhelpful and  unhealthy
         for First-tier Tribunal judgments to seek to rehearse every  detail
         or issue raised in the case.   This  leads  to  judgments  becoming
         overly long and confused.   Further,  it  is  not  a  proportionate
         approach to deciding cases.  It is, however, necessary  for  First-
         tier Tribunal judges to identify and resolve the key  conflicts  in
         the evidence and explain in clear and brief terms their reasons for
         preferring one case to the other so that the parties can understand
         why they have won or lost."

10. I find the judge wholly failed to engage with  the  issues  and  either
    gave no reasons or inadequate reasons for his decision.  The respondent
    had set out in her refusal the issues with  which  she  was  concerned.
    The full interview had been  transcribed  and  was  before  the  judge,
    however, he failed to engage with the same.

11. In my view, none of the judge's findings should stand.  The  respondent
    has shown errors of law in the decision such  that  it  should  be  set
    aside and heard again de novo.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  errors  of  law,  is  set
aside and shall be remitted to the First-tier to be heard again de novo.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date: 25 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart



