
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/11708/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|on 19 December 2016             | on 22 December 2016           |




                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                KAWSER JEEBON
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr D Clarke - Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge A.J.M Baldwin ('the  Judge')  promulgated
        on the 11 May 2016 in which the Judge allowed  Mr  Jeebon's appeal
        against the refusal of his application  for  a  Residence  Card  in
        recognition of a right to reside as the spouse of an  EEA  national
        exercising treaty rights in the UK.
     2. The Judge found that the marriage was genuine and  not  a  marriage
        contrived for the purposes of evading immigration control.  It  was
        found that the marriage is not a marriage of convenience [16]. This
        is not challenged by the respondent.
     3. When considering whether the EEA national sponsor  was  exercising
        treaty rights in the UK, the  Judge  found  that  the  sponsor  had
        worked previously but that since a date in 2014 had given  up  work
        and lived off savings. It was found that the sponsor will not be  a
        burden on the State and there was  no  evidence  to  show  the  EEA
        national has claimed benefits. It is written at  [16]  "...She  has
        made it clear that she does not want or need to rely on alternative
        provision of temporary inability to work due to illness or accident
        because she has been self sufficient, as I accept is the case given
        the lack of any challenge to her evidence about this."   The  Judge
        found the appellant has proved that the EEA national was exercising
        treaty rights and allowed the appeal.


Discussion


     4. Permission to appeal was sought by and granted to the Secretary  of
        State.  Although there has been no attendence by or  on  behalf  of
        the appellant I am satisfied there has been valid service  of  a
        notice which specifed the time, date, and venue of todays  hearing.
        No application to adjourn or explanation for the failure to  attend
        has been  provided.  It  is  in  the  interests  of  the  overiding
        objectives and of justice to proceed and determine the merits  of
        the case in the absence of the appellant.
     5. The EEA national claimed to be self sufficient, a status recognised
        in the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (as
        amended). Regualtion 4 defines a 'worker'  'self-employed  person',
        'self-sufficient person' and 'student'.  In  relation  to  a  self-
        sufficient person, regulation 4(c) defines the same as a person who
        has (i) sufficient resources not to become a burden upon the social
        assitance system  of  the  United  Kingdom  during  his period  of
        residence, and, (ii) comprehensive sickness  cover  in  the  United
        Kingdom.
     6. The Judge deals with the first of the criteria but makes no mention
        of the second. I find this to be a material error of law such that
        the decision must be set aside and remade. The findings in relation
        to the marriage are preserved.
     7. The EEA national had worked in the UK previously in exercise of her
        treaty rights. It was not claimed, and has not been made out,  that
        the EEA national was temporarily unable to  work  as  a  result  of
        illness  or  accident  or,  was  in   duly recorded   involuntary
        unemployment and registered with the relevant unemployment office.
        As a result the EEA national had not shown she could bring herself
        within regulaion 6(2), (a), (b), (ba).
     8. The need to satisfy the second element of possessing  comprehensive
        sickness  cover  relects   a   fundamental   part   of   the   self
        sufficiency provisions of the Regulations. FY (Kenya) v Secretay of
        State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 1302,  and  Mouvement
        contr la recisme, I'antisemitisme et la xenephobie  ASBL  (MRAX)  v
        Belgium (C-459/99) [2002] ECR I-6591 considered. In the more recent
        decision of Ahmed v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
        [2014] EWCA Civ 988 it was held that where an EEA  citizen  resided
        in the UK but was not economically active, the  right  of  the  EEA
        citizen's spouse to reside was conditional, under Artcile  7(1)  of
        Directive 2004/38/EC, upon the EEA  citizen  holding  comprehensive
        sickness  insurance  cover.  That  condition  had  to  be  strictly
        complied with, and could not be  satisifed  by  the  EEA  citizen's
        entitlement to free heathcare under the NHS.
     9.  There  is  no  evidence   that   the   EEA   national   has   ever
        had comprehensive heathcare in place. As such, it has not been made
        out that the EEA national is able to satisfy the definition of  a
        'self  sufficient  person'  set  out  at  regulation  4(c)  and  so
        the appeal must be dismissed.
    10. If the EEA national  returns  to  work  and  can  provee  that  she
        is exercising treaty rights there may be the option for her husband
        to make a fresh application  in  light  of  the  finding  made  in
        relation to               the               marriage.




   Decision

    11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


         I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19 December 2016

