



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11197/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
 Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On: 23 April 2015
    On: 5 May 2015

|                                  |Before                                   |
|                                  |                                         |


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR MILAN GURUNGE
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, counsel (instructed by NC Brothers &
Co   Solicitors)




                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant appeals with leave against the decision  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal, promulgated on 8 January 2015. The  Judge  allowed  the
      claimant's appeal to the extent that the decision was remitted to  the
      Secretary of  State  for  full  consideration  of  the  policy  issues
      relevant to the decision.


   2. In granting permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Foudy stated that it was arguably an error of  law  not
      to have determined the issue raised in the appeal.


   3. At the hearing on 23 April 2015, Mr Duffy on behalf of  the  appellant
      applied for permission to withdraw the case as there is  a  subsequent
      policy which is now in force. The claimant's case will accordingly  be
      reconsidered.


   4. Mr Howells did not  oppose  the  application.  He  asked  that  it  be
      recorded that the claimant had not made any application for  an  order
      for costs.


   5. In the circumstances, I consent to the withdrawal of the secretary  of
      state's case.





         The Upper Tribunal  must  notify  each  party  in  writing  that  a
withdrawal has taken       effect under Rule 17 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


         No anonymity direction is made.








         Signed                              Date 23/4/2015


         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer




