
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11200/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2014                               |On 14 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                          EUNICE ABIKE ADENIGBAGBE
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Chipperfield, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

   1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 15 February 1952.  She
      has appealed with the permission of the First-tier Tribunal against  a
      decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-Stewart  dismissing  her
      appeal against the decision of the respondent, made on 21 March  2013,
      to remove  her  to  Nigeria  as  an  overstayer,  having  refused  her
      application for leave on article 8 grounds.


   2.   At the heart of the appellant's case was that her adult son, Adewale
      Adeyemi Adeninbagbe, born on 5 July 1975, has  serious  mental  health
      problems and the appellant's presence is necessary to  care  for  him.
      There was a previous appeal on human rights  grounds  brought  by  her
      son, determined by Judge Taylor, in which he found there was no family
      life between the appellant  and  her  son.  At  paragraph  12  of  his
      determination he wrote:


         "According  to  the  medical  report,  the   appellant   lived   in
         accommodation for people with no access to benefits,  although  his
         mother gave the same address in evidence, it is not clear that  she
         would have been eligible to live in the  same  accommodation  as  a
         visitor. I am not satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  established
         family life in the UK with his mother."


   3.    Judge Taylor found that removing  the  appellant's  son  would  not
      cause a breach of either article 3 of article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention.


   4.   The appellant's son has since claimed asylum and awaits a  decision.
      Judge  Bart-Stewart  refused  the  appellant's  application   for   an
      adjournment to await the outcome of the appellant's son's application.
      She treated the findings of Judge Taylor  as  her  starting-point  and
      found there was nothing before her to lead her to  depart  from  those
      findings. In paragraph 20 she stated that she had set out the evidence
      in the appeal of the  appellant's  son  in  some  detail  and,  "there
      appears to be little that has changed since then. The  facts  are  the
      same ...  Nothing  has  been  put  before  me  to  show  a  change  of
      circumstances or reason to depart from [Judge Taylor's] findings." She
      noted there was more recent medical evidence in the form of  a  letter
      from Dr Benito and there was a fear of relapse if the appellant's  son
      returned to Nigeria. However, there  was  no  prospect  of  him  being
      removed at present. Even if he were removed,  the  cost  of  treatment
      could reasonably be met by the appellant's other son, who is a medical
      doctor living in the USA. In any event, the appellant's  son  was  not
      dependent on her  and  her  continued  presence  in  the  UK  was  not
      necessary.


   5.   The appellant sought permission to appeal on the  ground  the  judge
      had overlooked the fact Judge  Taylor's  finding  that  there  was  no
      family life was mainly based on his doubts about whether the appellant
      was living with her son. There was evidence before Judge  Bart-Stewart
      confirming they lived at the same address, which she  had  overlooked.
      She had also overlooked evidence that  the  appellant's  presence  was
      important in assisting her son to recover. Permission  to  appeal  was
      granted by Judge P M J Hollingworth because it was arguable the  judge
      had not recognised the change in the factual  matrix  as  between  the
      dates of the two appeals.


   6.   The respondent filed a rule 24 response  opposing  the  appeal.  The
      grounds seeking permission to appeal are simple disagreement with  the
      judge's cogent findings. The case concerns the question of whether the
      judge correctly applied the principles set out in  Devaseelan  (Second
      Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial  Effect)  Sri  Lanka  [2002]  UKIAT
      00702 Starred.  The principles  set  out  in  that  case  include  the
      following:

         d.  Our guidelines on procedure in second appeals

         37... The first Adjudicator's determination  stands  (unchallenged,
         or not successfully challenged) as an assessment of the  claim  the
         Appellant was then making, at the time of that  determination.   It
         is not binding on the second Adjudicator; but, on the  other  hand,
         the second Adjudicator is not hearing an appeal against it.  As  an
         assessment of the matters that were before the first Adjudicator it
         should simply be regarded as unquestioned.  It may be  built  upon,
         and, as a result, the outcome of  the  hearing  before  the  second
         Adjudicator may be  quite  different  from  what  might  have  been
         expected from a reading of the first determination only.  But it is
         not the second Adjudicator's role to consider arguments intended to
         undermine the first Adjudicator's determination.

         38. The second Adjudicator must, however be  careful  to  recognise
         that the issue before him is not the  issue  that  was  before  the
         first  Adjudicator.   In  particular,  time  has  passed;  and  the
         situation at the time of the second Adjudicator's determination may
         be shown to be  different  from  that  which  obtained  previously.
         Appellants may want to  ask  the  second  Adjudicator  to  consider
         arguments on issues that were not - or could not be - raised before
         the first Adjudicator; or evidence that was not - or could not have
         been - presented to the first Adjudicator.

    The Tribunal then set out  examples  of  exceptions  to  the  above  in
    paragraphs 39 and 40.  In particular:

         Facts happening since the  first  Adjudicator's  determination  can
         always be taken into account by the second Adjudicator.   If  those
         facts lead the second Adjudicator to the conclusion  that,  at  the
         date of his determination and  on  the  material  before  him,  the
         appellant makes his case, so be it.  The previous decision, on  the
         material before the first Adjudicator and  at  that  date,  is  not
         inconsistent.

     However,

         Facts personal to the  Appellant  that  were  not  brought  to  the
         attention of the first Adjudicator, although they were relevant  to
         the issues before him, should be treated by the second  Adjudicator
         with the greatest circumspection.  An Appellant  who  seeks,  in  a
         later appeal, to add to the available facts in an effort to  obtain
         a more favourable outcome is properly regarded with suspicion  from
         the point of view  of  credibility.   (Although  considerations  of
         credibility will not be relevant in cases where  the  existence  of
         the additional fact is beyond dispute.)  It must also be  borne  in
         mind that the first Adjudicator's determination was made at a  time
         closer to the events alleged and in terms of both fact-finding  and
         general credibility assessment would tend to  have  the  advantage.
         For this reason, the adduction of such  facts  should  not  usually
         lead to any reconsideration of the conclusions reached by the first
         Adjudicator.


   7.   I heard submissions on the issue of whether the  judge  had  made  a
      material error of law which vitiated  her  decision.  Mr  Chipperfield
      pointed out that nearly four years had passed between the two hearings
      and he argued that there was important, material evidence  before  the
      second judge which was capable of  showing  that  she  ought  to  have
      considered the issue of family life for herself rather than  find  the
      decision of the first judge should not be disturbed. In particular, he
      relied on three medical documents. A letter  from  Dr  Benito  to  the
      appellant's son's GP, dated 8 April 2013, referred to the  appellant's
      son's address as Flat 40 Arica House, which was the same address given
      for her in a report by her GP, dated 19 July 2013, and also  shown  on
      her medical notes. Mr Chipperfield argued  these  were  sufficient  to
      show there had been a change of  circumstances  since  Judge  Taylor's
      decision.


   8.   Mr Chipperfield also argued that the judge erred in paragraph 24  of
      her determination in finding the appellant's son was not dependent  on
      her. He said there was a great  deal  of  evidence  before  the  judge
      showing there was an unusual degree of dependency.  For  example,  the
      letter from Anneke Grindley, Community Mental  Health  Nurse,  to  the
      Home Office, dated 6 March 2013, which stated the  appellant  was  her
      son's "main carer  and  support  person".  She  went  on  to  say  the
      appellant provided "intensive support" for her son and she  played  an
      important role in his recovery. She needed to live in close  proximity
      to her son to ensure he remained well. I note she gave the appellant's
      son's address as 47 Hurstbourne Road. A  similar  thread  ran  through
      letters going back to 2009. None of this evidence had  been  addressed
      in the determination. Mr Chipperfield argued the judge's  finding  was
      unsound.


   9.   Mr Avery argued the fact the appellant relied on reports going  back
      to 2009 showed there had been  no  material  change  of  circumstances
      since the first determination and therefore the judge had  not  erred.
      There was, in his view, no firm evidence showing the  appellant  lived
      with her son, as it might be reasonable to expect.


  10. I reserved my determination on the question of whether the judge  made
      a material error of law. Having carefully considered the arguments,  I
      have concluded that she did  not  and  that  her  determination  shall
      stand. My reasons are as follows.


  11. I consider the judge correctly applied the Devaseelan  principles,  as
      she directed herself to do. This is clear from  paragraph  20  of  her
      determination. The same paragraph also shows she was familiar with  Dr
      Benito's letter and there is no basis for saying  she  was  not  fully
      aware of that  letter's  contents,  including  the  reference  to  the
      appellant's son's address. In any case, as Mr Avery said,  this  is  a
      clinical letter updating his GP. Whilst it can  generally  be  assumed
      the address shown would reflect what  was  in  the  hospital  records,
      without more, I do not think the judge can be faulted for not basing a
      factual finding on it. It is far from clear that the judge's attention
      was ever drawn to cogent evidence regarding the  question  of  whether
      the appellant and her son lived together. As noted, the letter from Ms
      Grindley, dated a month earlier, throws doubt  on  the  claim  in  any
      event. Looking through the evidence which would have been available to
      the judge, most of it records the appellant's son as living elsewhere,
      at 211 Springbank Road and then 47 Hurstbourne Road. I do not find any
      error in the judge's assessment of the evidence and even the documents
      which I am now asked to consider as crucial would not necessarily have
      led a judge to decide differently to Judge Bart-Stewart on  the  point
      about accommodation.


  12. On the dependency point, the challenge is a broader one to the  effect
      that the judge ought to have concluded differently on the strength  of
      all the evidence before her, particularly the letter from Ms Grindley.
      However, the judge gave adequate reasons  for  her  finding  that  the
      appellant's son was not  unusually  dependent  on  her.  Paragraph  18
      contains her summary of the evidence regarding the  appellant's  son's
      state of health. She returns to the letter from Dr Benito in paragraph
      20, explaining she found no change since findings were made  by  Judge
      Taylor. Her sentence beginning, "[n]othing has been put before  me  to
      show a change of circumstances ..." is unparticularised  in  terms  of
      what evidence she had been shown. However, as Mr Avery pointed out, if
      this went back to 2009 then the judge was well-placed to take  a  view
      whether there had been a significant change of circumstances.  I  find
      the judge was entitled to reach the conclusion  she  reached  and  she
      gave adequate reasons for her decision on the point.

DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error  on
    a point of law and her decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall
    stand.




                               Signed                 Date 11 July 2014






                               Neil Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of the
                               Upper Tribunal

