
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11763/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2016                   |On 27 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                            MOHAMMAD BURHAN UDDIN
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     no representative and Appellant did not attend
For the Respondent:    Mrs Peterson a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. I make no anonymity order as none  was  requested  and  it  is  not
         required.  The Appellant had requested the appeal be heard  in  his
         absence. I did as there was no unfairness in proceeding as  he  was
         aware of the date time and venue of the hearing.


      2. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
         remain on 10 March 2015. His appeal on human rights grounds against
         this was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Owens ("the Judge")
         following a hearing on 26 April 2016.

The Judge's findings

      3. In summary the  Judge  found  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
         obstacles to him returning to live in Bangladesh.  In  relation  to
         his fear of ill treatment by the government due  to  his  political
         activity, he could make an asylum claim.

The grant of permission

      4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson granted  permission  to  appeal
         (20 September 2016) on the ground that it is arguable  that  having
         made a claim protection, that should have  been  considered  within
         the framework of article 3 as  that  would  have  impacted  on  the
         article 8 claim.

Appellant's position

      5. In his application covering letter (22 January 2015) he  said  that
         in Bangladesh he was a leader of Bangladesh Jamat  e  islami  (BJI)
         politics and before that was a leader of Bangladesh  Islami  Chatra
         Shibir (student wing of BJI). He suffered ill treatment and inhuman
         treatment at the hands of the Awami  regime  who  were  the  ruling
         party. False cases were laid against him. He fears for his life and
         safety.

Respondent's position

      6. In the refusal letter (10 March 2015) it was said he  should  apply
         for asylum. His application for protection was  therefore  ignored.
         Mrs Peterson conceded that the article 3  claim  should  have  been
         considered by the Judge as it fell within the human rights ambit of
         the appeal.

Discussion

      7. The Respondent's refusal  to  consider  his  protection  claim  has
         damaged her ability to test his article 3 claim. That is  a  matter
         for her. Having made the protection claim  and  appealed  on  human
         rights, his article 3 claim should  have  been  determined  by  the
         Judge as it was before him.


      8. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge made a  material  error  of
         law.


      9. Having heard submissions, I decided to  remit  the  matter  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing with no findings  preserved
         to enable the article 3 claim to be determined. That decision would
         impact on the article 8 decision.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


    I set aside the decision.


    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by  a  Judge
    other than Judge Owens.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
26 October 2016

