
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/11257/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 15th June 2017               |On 30th June 2017                       |
|                                |                                        |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     D V
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Norman, Counsel, instructed by Sterling & Law
                    Associates LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a Ukrainian national born on [ ] 1990.  He entered the
    UK on 27th January 2013 as a student in a  Tier  4  category,  had  his
    leave to remain extended  as  a  student  and  then  made  an  in  time
    application outside the immigration rules.  He noted that  his  partner
    was awaiting a decision on her own application and that he had received
    call-up papers to  the  Ukrainian  Army.   He  initially  appealed  the
    Secretary of  State's  refusal  of  his  application  on  human  rights
    grounds.  He subsequently instructed Sterling  &  Law  Associates,  who
    obtained permission to amend his grounds of appeal to rely on asylum as
    well as human rights grounds on the basis of Article 3.

 2. The claim is made on the basis that his mobilisation which would  leave
    him with a choice of  non-compliance  which  carries  a  real  risk  of
    imprisonment  and  following  the  country  guidance  of   PS   (prison
    conditions:military service)Ukraine 2006 UKAIT 00016 would leave him at
    risk of prison condition in breach of Article 3.

 3. The appeal was heard before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fletcher-Hill,
    who dismissed his appeal in a determination promulgated on 2nd November
    2016, finding, inter alia, i) that he was eligible for mobilisation  to
    the Ukrainian Army and ii) that refusal to comply  could  lead  to  his
    imprisonment and iii) that compliance created a possible risk  that  he
    would  be  compelled  to  engage  in  acts  contrary  to  international
    standards.

 4. The judge, however, found that prison  conditions  no  longer  breached
    Article 3 and that the possible risk of engaging in  acts  contrary  to
    international standards did not discharge the standard of proof.

 5. On dismissing  that  appeal  the  appellant  made  an  application  for
    permission to appeal:

    Ground (i)

    An erroneous approach to Article 3 in the context of prison conditions.

 6. It was submitted  that  the  judge  should  have  followed  PS  (prison
    conditions:military  service)   Ukraine.    The   Country   of   Origin
    Information Report on prison conditions January  2016  was  not  expert
    evidence but a statement of the Secretary of  State's  policy  and  the
    judge in relying on that COI relied on selected pieces of evidence from
    the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture Report 2015  (CPT)
    which favoured  the  respondent's  approach  and  was  not  a  balanced
    document.

 7. The CPT report which formed the basis of the COI did  not  support  the
    conclusion that the prison conditions in Ukraine had improved.

    Ground (ii)

    There was an erroneous approach to the standard of proof in the context
    of Refugee Convention.

 8. There was no requirement that persecution must  be  inevitable,  merely
    that it might indeed take place.  The evidence of the expert  was  that
    the Ukrainian military had indeed been implicated in acts that violated
    international humanitarian  law.   It  was  submitted  that  there  was
    nevertheless a risk for there to be a  real  risk  that  the  appellant
    might be involved in such acts.

    Ground (iii)

    Failure to consider relevant evidence in relation to  Article  8.   The
    judge merely dismissed this on the basis that it was the  same  factual
    matrix as Article 3.

 9. At the hearing before me Ms Norman and Mr Tufan appeared to agree  that
    the conclusions in relation to the Article 3 risk were unsustainable in
    the light of VB and  Another  (draft  evaders  and  prison  conditions)
    Ukraine CG [2017] UKUT 00079 (IAC).  The  appellant  was  eligible  for
    conscription and mobilisation.

10. Ms Norman submitted that the judge dealt  briefly  with  the  Ukrainian
    military and the judge rather overstated the test in  relation  to  the
    appeal on asylum grounds.  The correct test was  that  as  set  out  in
    Sepet and Bulbul v the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2001] EWCA  Civ  681  and  acts  with  which  the  appellant  "may  be
    associated".

11. In conclusion Mr Tufan conceded that there was an error of law and both
    representatives considered that there needed to be  fresh  findings  in
    the light of VB and  Another  (draft  evaders  and  prison  conditions)
    Ukraine CG [2017]  UKUT  00079  (IAC).   This  decision  was,  I  note,
    promulgated on 2nd November 2016, having been heard at Hatton Cross  on
    19th July 2016.  VB confirmed at head note 3 that there is a real  risk
    that the conditions of detention  and  imprisonment  in  Ukraine  would
    subject a person returned to be detained or imprisoned to a  breach  of
    Article 3 but was promulgated after the determination was  promulgated.
    Nonetheless a  judge  needs  strong  reasons  to  depart  from  country
    guidance and the judge does not appear to have taken this  approach  in
    the decision and VB confirms that  the  prison  condition  difficulties
    persist.

12. I note that the judge did refer at paragraph 7.15 of the decision to it
    being 'possible but unlikely that the appellant  would  be  ordered  to
    partake in committing warcrimes'.  I accept  that  the  judge  did  not
    appear to have considered, as Ms Norman pointed  out,  the  concept  of
    whether he may be 'associated with' gross human rights  abuses.   As  I
    pointed out to Ms Norman, that test has been somewhat diluted by Krotov
    v  the  Secretary  of  State  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  69  which  refers   to
    'participation' but nonetheless is a  matter  which  should  have  been
    considered and the reference to 'possible but unlikely'  does  indicate
    an erroneous approach to the standard of proof.

13. As such the Article 8 findings remain at large.

14. Both representatives concurred that this matter should be  returned  to
    the First-tier Tribunal in the light of  the  errors  as  disclosed.  I
    therefore remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  fresh
    findings without preserving any of the findings.

15. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                             Date 30th June 2017

Helen Rimington

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

