

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/11623/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 1st October 2014                 |On: 24th November 2014               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                             Muhammad Waqas Ajaz
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr S. Malik, Lex Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan date of birth 6th August  1983.
    He appeals with permission[1] against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Hindson) to dismiss his appeal  against  a  refusal  to
    vary his leave to remain and to remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to s47 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


 2. The Appellant had applied for further  leave  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Migrant. His application was refused on the 31st January 2014  for  one
    reason.  He had claimed  to  be  maintained  by  his  father,  and  had
    submitted evidence of funds held by a Mr  Ajaz  H.Butt  to  demonstrate
    that the money was available. He had however failed to demonstrate,  to
    the Respondent's satisfaction, that Mr Ajaz H.  Butt  is  in  fact  his
    father.

 3. The evidence relied upon by the Appellant in order to  demonstrate  his
    relationship with Mr Ajaz H. Butt was a 'NADRA' certificate, issued  by
    the Pakistani government,  an  affidavit  from  his  father  confirming
    paternity, and all of the Appellant's other official documentation from
    Pakistan which names his father (ie his degree certificate  etc).   The
    First-tier Tribunal does not dwell in detail on any of  this  material,
    simply noting that although evidence has been supplied  to  demonstrate
    paternity, it is not the documentation required by the Rules, namely  a
    birth or adoption certificate.  On that basis the appeal was dismissed.

 4. On appeal the Appellant accepts that paragraph 13B (a)(i) of Appendix C
    does require that he produces a birth certificate naming  his  parents.
    He however relies on  a  document  entitled  'Tier  4'  Guidance  v25.0
    published on the 5th September 2014.  This states that  decision-makers
    within UKVI can "also accept a government-issued household register  as
    evidence of the relationship...you should accept  whatever  document  a
    country issues and not restrict it to only those documents specifically
    called 'birth certificates'".  A NADRA is an extract from the household
    register issued by the government of Pakistan.   As Mr Tarlow  accepts,
    it falls squarely within this policy and should have been  accepted  as
    evidence of the Appellant's relationship to Mr Ajaz H.Butt.  Indeed  it
    was the very document that he relied upon in order to get  his  initial
    grant of leave to enter as a Tier 4 migrant. The  appeal  is  therefore
    allowed.




      Decisions

 5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


 6. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           31st October 2014
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Garratt on the
24th June 2014, but granted upon renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge C. Lane on
the 12th August 2014

