
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11741/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     VF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Cooke, Counsel instructed by Chris & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against a  judgment
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bowes promulgated on 17 June 2015 in which
    she allowed the appeal  of  the  appellant,  who  as  a  result  of  an
    anonymity direction I shall refer to as VF,  on  human  rights  grounds
    whilst dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

2.   VF was born on 2 April 1962 and is a citizen of  Jamaica.   It  is  not
    disputed that she arrived in the United Kingdom in February 2002 with a
    visit visa lawfully but she overstayed after  the  expiration  of  that
    visa and has remained in the United Kingdom  since  that  date  without
    leave to remain.  On 25 September 2013 VF was served  with  an  IS.151A
    notice which is the commencement of  enforcement  action  as  a  person
    liable to removal.

3.   Representations  were  made  by  her  solicitors  that  she  should  be
    permitted to  remain  on  the  basis  of  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights, which was considered by  the  Secretary  of
    State and rejected.  The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  was  an
    appeal against that immigration decision.

4.   There is no need for me to set out  the  wording  of  Article  8  ECHR,
    which is known to all  parties,  or  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules.
    Needless to say, the appeal under the Rules was refused and there is no
    cross-appeal by VF challenging that decision, which for the purposes of
    today's hearing is not a matter before this Tribunal.

5.   Although Ms Cooke has in her submissions stressed  that  the  basis  of
    the application and claim made to the First-tier Tribunal was what  one
    could describe as a traditional freestanding Article 8 ECHR claim based
    upon the existence of family and private life in the United Kingdom and
    not a case advanced on the basis of the quality of care  available  for
    VF's aunt, whom  I  shall  refer  to  as  MM,  it  is  clear  from  the
    determination, the facts and the discussions that  we  have  had  today
    that these two issues are inextricably linked and appear to  have  been
    the foundation upon which the First-tier Judge found that the  decision
    to remove VF was not proportionate.  I  find  that  in  including  that
    element the judge did not make a legal error as the senior courts  have
    expressed on numerous occasions, as indeed has this Tribunal, that when
    assessing the proportionality of a decision it is necessary to consider
    all relevant facts.

6.   VF was found by the First-tier Judge to be a credible witness who  gave
    her evidence in a straightforward manner and that her oral evidence was
    consistent with the  written  evidence  contained  within  the  bundles
    before the judge.  It is not disputed for example  that  VF  has  since
    2006 been a live-in carer for her aunt MM  where  she  has  provided  a
    number of important services identified in the care report prepared  by
    Eleanor Nursing and Social Care Limited which appeared at  Annex  C  of
    VF's bundle for the purposes of the hearing.

7.   The judge noted that VF had made previous  applications  to  regularise
    her status under the Carer Concession that was previously  set  out  at
    Chapter 17 of the respondent's IDIs but at the  date  of  the  impugned
    decision in relation to this matter the Concession had been revoked  or
    rescinded by the Secretary of State.  The first  of  such  applications
    was refused on 8 November 2004 with no right of appeal and a request to
    reconsider that decision made on 4 June 2010 was also  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State.  At that time, in the reconsideration  request,  it
    was stated that VF was caring for her aunt to whom  she  provided  care
    during the day and night.  They lived in the same house.  The  aunt  is
    wheelchair-bound.   The  aunt  receives  direct  payments  from  Social
    Services that she used to pay the appellant.  Any social care  services
    provided were not sufficient to provide for the aunt although,  as  the
    judge notes, the application was refused.

8.   The difficulty for the First-tier Tribunal and  this  Tribunal  on  the
    papers that have been made available is that there is no indication  of
    the basis upon which the claim and the request for further  submissions
    to be considered were rejected by the  Secretary  of  State.   What  is
    clear and would have been known to the parties and the First-tier Judge
    is that as VF had no lawful leave to remain  and  as  her  attempts  to
    secure status had failed she remained in the United Kingdom  unlawfully
    with there being no evidence that she made any  attempt  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom as she was arguably required to do.

9.   It is also the case that there was no  evidence  before  the  judge  of
    what arrangements or  enquiries  had  been  made  in  relation  to  the
    provision of alternative care as a result of VF's application for leave
    to remain as carer having been refused.  I will deal at this point with
    an issue raised by Ms Willocks-Briscoe in her submissions that  because
    MM was paying VF a proportion of her carer's allowance VF was in effect
    reliant upon the public purse and in  receipt  of  public  funds.   The
    payments that MM  received  are  payments  to  which  she  is  lawfully
    entitled in her own right as a result of her  disability.   Whilst  the
    source of payment of those funds is likely to be the public  purse  and
    it has not been proved otherwise they are not payments made as a result
    of VF's presence in the United Kingdom but rather as  a  result  of  an
    identified disability requiring payment of the carer's element  of  the
    appropriate allowances.

10.  It is arguable  that  as  MM  is  lawfully  entitled  to  receive  such
    payments what MM does with those payments is a matter for  her  and  if
    she chooses to pay the carer's element to VF as a reward for  the  work
    she is doing to help her and meet some of  her  care  needs  that  that
    cannot fall within the classification of VF receiving  a  payment  from
    the public purse or being dependent upon the public  purse.   It  is  a
    private arrangement, a private payment  by  MM  to  VF.   As  indicated
    during the course of the submissions this is not a matter on which  the
    Tribunal has received detailed legal argument and it may in fact  be  a
    matter that if it arises in a suitable case has to be looked at at some
    point in the future when adequate preparation time has been available.

11.  I did refer during the course of the discussions with the advocates  to
    previous authorities in relation to the maintenance requirements  under
    the Immigration Rules pre 9 July 2012 where there was a  discussion  of
    similar issue which may be of assistance if  this  matter  ever  arises
    again but which from what I can recollect is  in  accordance  with  the
    observation I have made above.

12.  It is also accepted by the judge and not disputed before me today  that
    since 2005 VF has had a relationship with a gentleman I shall refer  to
    as BC.  BC, who is  a  retired  Irish  citizen  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom, has been diagnosed with an unfortunate medical issue for which
    it is hoped he is receiving adequate treatment.  It was accepted by the
    First-tier Judge that this is  a  genuine  relationship  and  that  the
    structure and the nature of the relationship is in fact  impacted  upon
    as a result of the degree of care that VF provides for MM.  It  is  for
    this reason that VF and BC do not cohabit but they do  see  each  other
    and spend time together and there is an emotional, mental and financial
    interaction between them.

13.  It was not suggested before the  First-tier  Judge  and  is  not  being
    suggested today that VF is able to rely upon any  rights  arising  from
    European law based upon the status of BS  as  an  Irish  and  therefore
    European citizen within the United Kingdom.  That is not a live  matter
    in this appeal so far as the factual issues are concerned  although  it
    is noted in the grounds of appeal, recorded  in  paragraph  11  of  the
    determination, that one of the challenges  raised  was  that  the  case
    should have been considered under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006.  I say nothing further in relation to that element as it was  not
    a matter made out before the judge.

14.  The judge sets out  her  findings  and  conclusions  having  noted  the
    available evidence and  submissions  made  from  paragraph  29  of  the
    determination.  In paragraph 30 it is noted that Ms Cooke, the advocate
    appearing on behalf of VF today and at the First-tier hearing, conceded
    that the appeal was an appeal as to Article 8  of  the  ECHR  only  and
    although the judge considered the matter under EX.1. of Appendix FM  it
    was not a live issue on the basis of there being any realistic prospect
    of VF being able to satisfy any requirement of  the  Immigration  Rules
    such as to entitle her to leave on that basis.

15.  The judge dealt with paragraph 276ADE and paragraph 31 and again it  is
    not suggested that the judge's finding that VF could not succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules is one that was arguably  not  available  to  the
    judge.  There is no cross-appeal challenging the  decision  to  dismiss
    the appeal on that basis and it is important to note in 276ADE that the
    finding  was  that  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to   VF
    reintegrating to  Jamaica  if  she  was  to  be  returned  or  returned
    voluntarily.

16.  An issue did arise in the  pleadings  that  I  have  seen  relating  to
    whether the judge was correct in law to consider the matter outside the
    Immigration Rules by reference to Article 8 ECHR.   I  will  deal  with
    that matter at this point and make it clear in finding that  the  judge
    was lawfully entitled and indeed  on  the  facts  it  is  arguable  was
    required in this matter to go on to consider  the  matter  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  This is specifically because the relationship  with
    BC was one that was found could not satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules but it had within it this additional element of  the  reason  why
    the relationship was structured in the way it was albeit it could  also
    be argued that  that  was  a  matter  that  would  have  been  properly
    considered under the Rules and it was accepted and  conceded  that  the
    requirements of the Rules could not be met.

17.  The main reason why it was appropriate for the judge  to  consider  the
    matter outside the Rules is this interaction  between  the  family  and
    private life that VF has  with  MM  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  MM's
    physical condition and disability and the  role  that  VF  plays  as  a
    carer.  It was not submitted before me today  that  that  is  a  matter
    adequately  considered  within  EX.1.  of  Appendix  FM  or  any  other
    requirement of the Immigration Rules.  If it was and it had been  shown
    it had been examined within the Rules and rejected then  there  may  be
    merit in the argument of saying this is not a matter that needed to  be
    considered twice.

18.  As stated, the judge went on to consider  the  relevant  factors.   The
    judge refers to paragraph 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 at paragraph 34 and sets  out  the  five  step  approach  that
    judges are encouraged to take under the Razgar guidance  before  moving
    in paragraph 35 to consider what I shall refer to as Razgar 1  in  line
    with the nature of the family and  private  life  that  it  is  claimed
    exists. The judge examined Razgar 2 in paragraph 36 and then from 37 to
    39 the judge sets out the finding and reasons in relation to  Razgar  5
    and the proportionality of the decision which led to the  appeal  being
    allowed.  The Secretary of State challenges that by way of an  in  time
    application dated 24 June 2015 in which  over  six  paragraphs  various
    challenges to the determination are set out.

19.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by  a  Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Heynes,  on  2
    September 2015.  It is a short grant but  the  relevant  parts  are  in
    paragraphs 2 and 3, which are in the following terms:

         "2.  The grounds of appeal complain that the judge  failed  to  pay
             sufficient regard to the public interest and gave insufficient
             reasons for considering Article 8 outside the Rules",

    while the second part of that has no arguable merit  so  far  as  these
    proceedings are concerned.

         "3.  It is arguable that  insufficient  weight  was  given  to  the
             public interest amounting to an error of law."

    Whilst that is the basis of the grant, if Robinson obvious points arise
    in relation to a determination the Tribunal  is  entitled  of  its  own
    merit to consider whether such issues give rise to arguable legal error
    in relation to a determination.

20.  Moving on to the legal structure which the judge  should  have  applied
    and the relevant legal provisions, as stated, the judge refers  to  the
    Razgar five step approach and  mentions  Part  5  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Indeed because they are short I  will
    read out paragraphs 37  to  39,  which  need  to  be  included  in  the
    determination:

         "37. As to Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
             2002, I have considered  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
             immigration control is in the public interest.   I  have  also
             borne in mind that I should give little weight to any  private
             life established by the appellant whilst she  was  in  the  UK
             unlawfully.  However, little  weight  does  not  mean  that  I
             should not put any weight on such a private life.

         38.  On balance I find that the decision to  remove  the  appellant
             would be disproportionate to the legitimate public end  to  be
             achieved.  The respondent did not dispute the amount  of  care
             the appellant gave  to  MM.   Mr  Collins  said  that  in  the
             appellant's absence the number of care hours would  simply  be
             increased.  However, I have no evidence to suggest  that  this
             would be the case.  I find it unlikely that the same level  of
             care would be provided by the local authority as  provided  by
             the appellant.  It is reasonable  to  posit  that  as  she  is
             completely immobile she may have to enter a care home.  I find
             it is unlikely that she would be able to  remain  in  her  own
             home in the absence of the appellant.  I note that MM recently
             had another stroke and the appellant  had  undertaken  special
             training in peg feeding provided by the hospital.

         39.  For the reasons set out at paragraphs 33 and 38  I  find  that
             the appellant provides an extraordinary but  requisite  amount
             of care to MM.  The  appellant  speaks  English  and  has  not
             received public funds.  Notwithstanding the fact that most  of
             the appellant's  private  life  would  have  been  established
             whilst she was in the UK unlawfully, I find that the  decision
             to  remove  her  would   have   a   significant   and   wholly
             disproportionate effect on her and on MM.   Such  interference
             is not proportionate to the legitimate public end."

21.  There is a reference in paragraph 38 to the findings  in  paragraph  33
    to which I was referred by Ms Cooke.  At paragraph 33 the judge finds:

         "33. I note the appellant's dedication to the care of MM  and  that
             she provides such care on a full-time basis.  MM  is  immobile
             and depends on the appellant for many tasks of  basic  living.
             I accept that carers arranged by the local authority attend to
             her personal hygiene.  In fact it would be difficult  for  the
             appellant to manage such tasks on her own because MM can  only
             be moved using a hoist.  The appellant attends to MM's feeding
             needs and to her domestic tasks.  I do not doubt that  she  is
             also a source of company during the day when MM is  unable  to
             move from her chair.  I consider that these circumstances  are
             such that there are good reasons for me to consider Article  8
             of the ECHR directly."

22.  The judge refers in that decision to the provisions of Section  117  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which is to be  found
    at pages 332 to 333 of the ninth edition of Phelan.  Before turning  to
    those provisions and the case law of the Tribunal it  is  necessary  to
    remind ourselves of the historic case law in relation to  the  question
    of immigration control weight generally.   This  is  because  what  the
    judge was required to do was to undertake an Article  8  assessment  in
    accordance with the Razgar principles and look at the  balance  of  the
    case before her having regard to the Part 5 criteria.  What  the  judge
    is not required to do is to ignore all previous relevant case law.

23.  There are two House of Lords decisions which should have  been  in  the
    judge's mind, being Huang and Kashmiri [2007] UKHL 11 and the  one  the
    judge did refer to which is Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27.   In  Razgar  Lord
    Bingham said  that  decisions  taken  in  the  pursuit  of  the  lawful
    operation of immigration control will be proportionate in  all  save  a
    small minority of exceptional cases, identified only on a case by  case
    basis.

24.  In SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at paragraph 29 the Court  of  Appeal
    and specifically Lord Justice Richards in his lead judgment stated:

         "It is clear, therefore, that it cannot be maintained as a  general
         proposition that LTR or LTE outside the  Immigration  Rules  should
         only be granted in exceptional cases.  However, in certain specific
         contexts, a proper application of Article  8  may  itself  make  it
         clear that the legal test for grant of LTR or LTE outside the Rules
         should indeed be a test  of  exceptionality.   This  has  now  been
         identified  to  be  the  case,  on  the  basis  of   the   constant
         jurisprudence of the European Court  of  Human  Rights  itself,  in
         relation to applications for LTR outside the Rules on the basis  of
         family life (where no children are  involved)  established  in  the
         United Kingdom at a time when the presence of one or other  of  the
         partners was known to be precarious: see Nagre,  paragraphs  38  to
         43, approved by this court in MF (Nigeria)  at  paragraphs  41  and
         42."

25.  The Court of Appeal also considered the  public  interest  argument  in
    the case of R (on the application of Kiarie) and R (on the  application
    of Byndloss) [2015] EWCA Civ 1020 where it was found at  paragraphs  38
    and 44 that in deciding the issue of proportionality in  an  Article  8
    case the public interest was not a trump card but it was  an  important
    consideration in favour of removal.

26.  The significance of Section 117 of the 2002  Act,  which  falls  within
    Part 5 of that Act, is that  from  28  July  2014  Section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014 was brought into force that amended the  2002  Act
    by introducing a new Part  5A  which  applies  where  the  Tribunal  is
    considering an Article 8 to ECHR issue directly.  By virtue of  Section
    117A in considering the public interest question the Tribunal  must  in
    particular have regard (a) in all cases to the considerations listed in
    Section 117B.  SubSection 2 of that Section provides  that  the  public
    interest question means the question of whether an interference with  a
    person's right to respect for private  and  family  life  is  justified
    under Article 8(2).  Section 117A(2) is mandatory  and  the  effect  of
    Section 117 being  incorporated  into  statute  is  that  that  statute
    overrides existing case law.

27.  Section 117A(3) confirms that the Tribunal is required to carry  out  a
    balancing exercise, in other words the Tribunal cannot just rely on the
    list of public interest factors as a basis for rejecting  a  claim  but
    must carry out a balancing  exercise  where  a  person's  circumstances
    engage Article 8(1) to decide  whether  the  proposed  interference  is
    proportionate in all the circumstances.

28.   Two  recent  Tribunal  decisions  are  those  of  Bossade  (ss.117A-D-
    interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC)  in  which  it  was
    held that:

         "1.  For courts and Tribunals, the coming into force of Part 5A  of
             the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  has  not
             altered the need for a two stage approach to Article 8 claims.

         2.   Ordinarily a  court  or  Tribunal  will,  as  a  first  stage,
             consider an appellant's Article 8 claim by  reference  to  the
             Immigration Rules that set out substantive conditions, without
             any  direct  reference  to  Part  5A   considerations.    Such
             considerations have no direct application  to  Rules  of  this
             kind.  Part 5A considerations only have direct application  at
             the second stage of the Article 8 analysis.   This  method  of
             approach does not amount to according priority  to  the  Rules
             over primary legislation but rather to  recognition  of  their
             different functions."

    The judge was therefore correct to consider the matter under the  Rules
    but therefore on the facts correct to move on to  consider  the  matter
    outside the Rules and correct to apply the  Part  5A  criteria  to  her
    consideration of the secondary step.

29.  The second stated case is that of Dube (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT  90
    (IAC) which I do not need to refer to in detail.  It is a matter that I
    am sure both advocates are fully familiar with as they appear regularly
    in these Tribunals but it sets out and considers  the  requirement  for
    the judge to take into account a number of  considerations  in  Section
    117A to D but which are  not  an  a  la  carte  menu  as  the  Tribunal
    describes  it.   But  the  court  must  have  particular  regard   when
    considering an Article 8(2) proportionality assessment to those matters
    set out in Section 117.  The Secretary of State's  case  is  of  course
    that that is precisely what the judge failed to properly do.

30.  In relation to the submission which has been made by Ms Cooke that  the
    case was not advanced on  an  alternative  care  basis  but  rather  an
    Article 8 proportionality matter, as stated earlier, the issue of  care
    and the proportionality of the decision are interlinked and a  Tribunal
    or court is entitled to take  into  account  additional  considerations
    providing they are relevant in the sense that they properly bear on the
    public interest question, the authority for that  being  Forman  [2015]
    UKUT 412 (IAC), the case I referred to during the course of submissions
    when the issue of financial dependency arose for in Forman it was  held
    that the public interest in firm immigration control is not diluted  by
    the consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article  8  ECHR
    has at no time been a  financial  burden  on  the  state  or  is  self-
    sufficient or is likely to remain so indefinitely.  The significance of
    these factors is that where they are not present the public interest is
    fortified.

31.  The judge was required to look at the merits of the case  by  reference
    to a substantial volume of case law but also the  statutory  provisions
    that had been put before her.  It was submitted by Ms Cooke  that  what
    the judge  did  in  relation  to  this  matter  was  conduct  a  proper
    proportionality assessment.  If it is found that the judge had provided
    a proper proportionality  assessment  the  only  ground  on  which  the
    judge's findings  could  be  properly  challenged  are  on  public  law
    grounds, i.e. that the conclusions the judge reached arise as a  result
    of  inadequate  consideration  of  the  evidence   or   perversity   or
    irrationality in the conclusions.

32.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe challenged the judge's  approach  by  reference  to
    the weight that the judge gave to the  various  factors.   The  leading
    case in relation to weight, or one leading case as there are a  number,
    is that of SS (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2012] EWCA Civ 155 where the Court of Appeal confirmed the established
    position that weight was a matter for the judge.  What the  court  did,
    however, is state that there are two important criteria  that  must  be
    satisfied.  The  first  is  that  the  judge  must  be  shown  to  have
    considered the evidence with the required degree  of  anxious  scrutiny
    and secondly that the judge must have given adequate reasons in support
    of the findings made.  If either of those two elements are missing then
    a party may have good grounds for challenging the weight the judge gave
    to the evidence.

33.  The judge records in paragraph 37 of the determination that one of  the
    provisions of Part 5 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (the 2002 Act) is that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  any
    private life established by VF during the time that she has been in the
    United Kingdom unlawfully.  That is an accurate statement of law.   The
    judge also goes on to state in paragraph  37  "however,  little  weight
    does not mean that I should not put any weight on such a private life",
    which  is  in  accordance  with  Tribunal  jurisprudence  stating  that
    judicial independence cannot be restricted in any way by  the  specific
    provisions of Section 117, which, to be fair to  the  drafter  of  that
    statutory provision, does not actually appear to be attempting  to  say
    no weight can be attached.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  attach  some
    weight to the private life being relied upon by VF in relation to  this
    appeal.

34.  To identify what fell within the private life category it is  necessary
    for us to look at the findings in paragraph 35  of  the  determination.
    The reason for that is because the judge made a specific  finding  that
    the relationship between VF and MM satisfies the definition  of  family
    life recognised by Article 8 ECHR.  This is  based  upon  the  evidence
    that the relationship between the two is a  longstanding  relationship.
    MM is VF's aunt and did provide some form of care for VF  or  had  some
    involvement in her life when  VF  was  a  child  although  the  current
    relationship and dependence since VF has attained her majority  appears
    to have only arisen from 2006.

35.  The judge found that the relationship between VF  and  MM  was  far  in
    excess of the normal emotional ties and it is arguable that that  is  a
    sustainable finding based upon the evidence that was given in  relation
    to the role that VF has in MM's life.  The judge, however, went  on  to
    state that, in the alternative, if she was wrong on that point then the
    relationship between VF and MM would form a part of VF's  private  life
    in the United Kingdom.  The relationship with BC is not  such  that  it
    satisfies the definition of family life but  the  judge  accepted  that
    that formed part of VF's private life.

36.  The judge appears in paragraph 38 to set out a finding that  to  remove
    the appellant would be  disproportionate  and  then  goes  on  to  give
    reasons for that finding.  I accept that that in itself in terms of the
    structure of the determination is not arguably wrong or a  legal  error
    as there is no basis for finding that a judge must approach a matter in
    any specific way.  It has not been shown that  there  is  a  structural
    failure in the determination such as the judge  had  decided  that  the
    decision was proportionate and then  fished  around  to  try  and  find
    reasons to justify that finding.

37.  As stated, Ms Cooke in her submissions claimed  that  this  was  not  a
    case that was being advanced as would have  been  the  case  previously
    under  the  carer  concession  by   reference   to   alternative   care
    arrangements but rather in relation to the  family  life  that  existed
    between VF and MM and I will deal with the findings in relation to that
    matter first.

38.  In paragraph 38 it is recorded that the  Secretary  of  State  did  not
    dispute the amount of care that VF gives to MM.  It  was  submitted  to
    the judge that in the appellant's absence  the  number  of  care  hours
    would simply be increased although the judge found that  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that this would be the case  and  the  judge  found
    that it was unlikely that the same level of care would be  provided  by
    the local authority as provided by the appellant.  The  judge  mentions
    that as MM is immobile it may be that if VF was  removed  MM  would  be
    required to enter a care home.  If she entered a care home it is likely
    that full-time care would be available to meet her needs.

39.  It is arguable that the judge appears in paragraph 38 to  have  applied
    the wrong test to consideration  of  the  factual  elements  which  was
    clearly a substantial part of the proportionality findings in  relation
    to MM's ongoing  care.   The  reason  the  judge  had  no  evidence  in
    connection with the care arrangements that would be put in place if  VF
    was removed from the United Kingdom is because there  was  no  evidence
    that anybody had bothered to go and make that enquiry or  to  establish
    what the alternative provision arrangements would be.

40.  Ms Cooke could not explain why such an obvious  enquiry  had  not  been
    made and indeed if it had been made and the Social Services  or  caring
    authorities had come back saying that the care provision they would  be
    able to offer was insufficient to meet MM's basic needs so that she did
    would not have adequate care.  This may have been a case  in  which  it
    was argued VF's case would have been substantially strengthened if such
    evidence existed.  Ms Cooke to her credit, however, has confirmed today
    that the case was not advanced on the basis that  there  would  not  be
    adequate care available for MM if that care had to be provided by other
    than VF.

41.  The fact that VF may be able to provide the best care for MM  does  not
    mean that MM cannot be cared for adequately by the local authority.  It
    is not disputed  that  local  authorities  are  under  a  duty  to  put
    themselves in a position to arrange suitable alternative care  for  all
    categories of those for whom they have community  care  functions.   It
    was known in this case that there has been previous local authority and
    Social Services  involvement  as  indeed  the  instruction  of  Eleanor
    Nursing and Social Care arises as a result of a referral by  the  local
    authority.  It would have been straightforward,  one  would  have  been
    anticipated, for a letter to be written to  the  social  worker  asking
    whether alternative arrangements had been made and  if  they  have  not
    what alternative arrangements could be made.

42.  The judge fails to explain in paragraph 38 why it was necessary for  MM
    to receive the gold-plated standard of care  that  she  appears  to  be
    currently receiving at the hands of VF.  For reasons that I shall refer
    to shortly this was clearly an important element in the  judge's  mind.
    It may be that if VF is removed MM will have  to  go  into  residential
    care but it was not shown that care that could be provided within  such
    a caring environment would not be sufficient to meet all MM's  physical
    and emotional needs.  MM has family members in the United Kingdom.   Ms
    Cooke very kindly  assisted  with  their  names  and  summarised  their
    position as recorded in the evidence and although it is  accepted  that
    if they have families and lives of their own, employment and social and
    personal lives, they cannot provide the standard  of  'in  house'  care
    that VF has provided, that does not mean that VF's  removal  will  mean
    that MM will effectively be abandoned within the United Kingdom.  It is
    not being suggested that this will be the case.

43.  In paragraph 39 the judge finds that VF has provided  an  extraordinary
    but requisite amount of care to MM.  The basis  of  the  definition  of
    extraordinary is that set out in paragraph 33 and I do not find  as  an
    explanation of the sacrifices that VF has  made  for  the  purposes  of
    caring for MM this is not an inappropriate description, although VF  is
    the United Kingdom without leave unlawfully and  it  may  be  that  the
    arrangement has suited her own situation as much as it suited MM as she
    would have been unable to obtain accommodation or  employment  lawfully
    without the required status in the United Kingdom.

44.  In paragraph 39 the judge refers to use of English  and  not  receiving
    public funds but I have set out the case law and I  accept  Ms  Cooke's
    submission that the judge does not go  on  to  state  that  that  is  a
    positive factor that should be taken into account, it should in fact be
    treated as a neutral factor as there has been no arguable  reliance  on
    public funds.

45.  The core finding is the statement in  paragraph  39  by  the  judge  as
    follows: "I find that the decision to remove [VF, described  as  'her']
    would have a significant and wholly disproportionate effect on her  and
    on MM."  I accept the submissions that have been made by Ms Cooke today
    that if there is a change in the caring arrangements that  involve  the
    removal of VF that in fact it would be a  significant  change  in  MM's
    circumstances but what the judge fails to do in paragraphs 37 and 39 is
    explained with adequate reasoning why it would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference by reference to the impact of removing VF  and  the  judge
    fails within the determination, although accepting that some weight can
    be put upon a private life, to set out exactly what  weight  the  judge
    has considered it appropriate to attach to VF's family and private life
    in the United Kingdom.

46.  The statement in the Rules regarding little weight  being  attached  to
    private life specifically refers to private, I think not  family  life,
    but European jurisprudence in cases such as Y v Russia and a number  of
    cases that followed made it clear that so far as the European Court  of
    Human Rights is concerned a Higher Contracting State such as the United
    Kingdom is fully entitled to place little weight  upon  a  relationship
    that constitutes family life if it is formed at a time that the parties
    were aware that their immigration situation is precarious.

47.  I therefore find that the judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    findings made, specifically in relation to the application  of  Section
    177B and in that respect that the Secretary of State's grounds are made
    out and the determination is set aside.

48.  In going on to remake the decision I will start with  the  relationship
    between VF and BC,  which  has  been  found  to  be  a  genuine  loving
    relationship.  BC has come  to  court  today  to  support  VF  and  the
    Tribunal is very grateful to see his presence as indeed, I am sure,  is
    VF to have him sat next to her during the course of  this  hearing  and
    particularly the outline judgment I am giving today.

49.  The fact of the matter is that notwithstanding the sacrifices  that  VF
    has made this is a relationship that has been formed at a time when  VF
    has no right to remain in the United Kingdom.  BC is here lawfully  and
    so there is no issue with regard to  his  status.   I  have  considered
    whether more than little weight should be attached to that relationship
    as it could be argued that the relationship may have in fact  developed
    further into cohabitation and marriage but for the  sacrifices  VF  has
    made caring for MM.  Even if that had been the case, when assessing the
    proportionality of any interference with that  relationship  under  the
    Article  8  ECHR  jurisprudence  and  considering  Section  117B,   the
    proposition  would  still  have  been  the  same  namely  that  as  the
    relationship was formed at a time where one party had  no  expectation,
    legitimate or otherwise, that they would be entitled to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom little weight should be attached to the relationship.  I
    find the Secretary of State has discharged the burden of proof upon her
    to show that removal of VF from the United Kingdom, notwithstanding the
    loss of the private life currently enjoyed with BC, is proportionate on
    the facts.

50.  I take into account two statements that have been made by Ms  Willocks-
    Briscoe which is that if VF is removed and she is able  to  satisfy  an
    Entry Clearance Officer that she  can  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules it maybe that in the future VF could  return  to  the
    United Kingdom lawfully and that  some  form  of  relationship  can  be
    maintained between them way of Skype and/or other indirect means.

51.  Moving on  to  the  relationship  between  VF  and  MM.   This  is  the
    relationship at the core of the decision that has been made.  VF should
    be commended for the sacrifices that she has made in the  care  of  her
    aunt.  She is not the only family member in  the  United  Kingdom.   As
    stated, there are other family members but it  is  not  suggested  that
    they would be able to provide an  identical  degree  of  care  to  that
    provided by VF and I accept that.

52.  It was submitted by Ms Cooke that VF was  providing  a  service  to  MM
    which is one that saves the  public  purse  a  considerable  amount  of
    money.  That is an argument that is in some  respects  supported  by  a
    reading of the personalised care plan prepared by Eleanor  Nursing  and
    Social Care dated 9 October 2014.  It is a somewhat dated document  and
    does suggest that there will be a six month assessment but no copies of
    any assessments  have  been  provided.   What  is  clear  reading  that
    personalised care plan is that what the professional carers were  doing
    was identifying MM's total needs, identifying which of those needs  are
    in fact met by MM/VF and then setting in place a plan to provide  those
    which VF is unable to meet, such as the fact that due to MM's situation
    and physical presentation she needs a hoist to lift her out  of  a  bed
    which requires two persons  who  also  assist  her  with  her  personal
    hygiene as set out in the personalised care plan.

53.  It is an obvious submission that if VF  was  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom she could not provide the services for MM that Eleanor  Nursing
    and Social Care identify in the care plan that would therefore have  to
    be provided by others, likely at increased cost to the public purse.

54.  Article 8 ECHR, however, does not give a person  the  right  to  choose
    where  they  wish  to  live  and  it  is   accepted   within   European
    jurisprudence that the Higher Contracting States  such  as  the  United
    Kingdom government have a margin of appreciation  in  relation  to  how
    they apply Article 8 ECHR.  It is therefore a matter for the  Secretary
    of State and HM government who actually control the public purse as  to
    the weight they give to the fact that there would be increased costs if
    VF is removed.  That in itself does not assist VF when looking  at  the
    proportionality of the decision because public policy  in  relation  to
    the public purse in the Secretary of State's view trumps the fact  that
    there would be increased cost and the need for effective  and  workable
    immigration control notwithstanding a slight  increase  to  the  public
    purse is felt by the Secretary of State to  be  a  far  more  important
    factor.

55.  So far as the relationship between VF and MM is concerned if  that  was
    a relationship that had  no  aspect  of  care  needs  based  upon  MM's
    situation and was just a relationship between two  individuals  in  the
    United Kingdom with VF having a dependency on  MM  because  VF  has  no
    resources of her own, the weight to be given to  it  would  be  little.
    Whether the decision is proportionate  therefore  comes  back  to  this
    issue of MM's needs.

56.  I stated earlier by reference to the judge that the level of care  that
    would be provided by the local authority would be not the same as  that
    provided by VF.  The test in a child care cases is not  that  of  'best
    parenting', but of 'adequate parenting'.  In a care case  the  test  is
    also that of  whether  adequate  care  is  available  and  it  was  not
    submitted by Ms Cooke that she could advance a case to show  that  MM's
    care needs would not be met by adequate care provided in the absence of
    VF.

57.  The input by Social Services and the work that has been  undertaken  so
    far suggest that Ms Cooke was right to make that submission as in  fact
    it appears more likely than not that if VF was removed Social  Services
    or the local authority on the basis of their statutory duties and  MM's
    needs as found to exist would provide adequate care to meet  her  basic
    needs.  The finding of the judge that there was no evidence to  suggest
    that if VF was removed the number of care hours would be  increased  is
    an odd finding and it is clear that once  needs  have  been  identified
    that cannot be met without VF's presence on the basis  of  the  current
    care arrangements that in fact an increase in care will be required.

58.  As stated, I accept that the removal of VF will  have  an  impact  upon
    MM, not only on a physical level, which can be overcome, but also on an
    emotional and psychological level as a person whom MM has probably come
    to  depend  upon  to  quite  a  significant  degree  and  who  provides
    companionship for her would be removed but the evidence does  not  show
    that such companionship could not be provided by other family  members.
    There is insufficient evidence to prove that  the  impact  upon  MM  of
    removing VF from the United Kingdom in  relation  to  her  physical  or
    emotional and  psychological  needs  is  such  to  make  this  decision
    disproportionate when considering Section 117 and the factors  set  out
    therein, European jurisprudence and the accepted facts of this case.

59.  Even though VF has provided a valuable role  to  MM  I  find  that  the
    Secretary of State has discharged the burden of proof upon her  to  the
    required standard to show that on the basis of the  evidence  that  was
    relied upon before the First-tier Tribunal and which was  available  to
    this Tribunal the decision to remove is proportionate to the legitimate
    aim of immigration control being relied upon and for that reason I have
    to dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her any member of her family.   This  direction  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

