


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11495/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 22 January 2015                          |On: 28 January 2015          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                           aboo sawley seyedchane
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bruiyan, instructed by Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius, born on 4 December 1969. He  has
   been given permission to appeal against the decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal dismissing his  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
   remove him from the United Kingdom.

2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 23 October  2011  and  was
   given leave to enter as a visitor. His  son,  then  aged  15  years  old,
   arrived in the United Kingdom on 28 December 2011,  also  as  a  visitor.
   Both decided to stay after the expiry of their period of leave and on  12
   October 2013 an application was made on behalf of the appellant for leave
   to remain on Article 8 grounds,  with  his  son  as  his  dependant.  The
   application was refused on 16 December 2013 and a decision was made on 26
   February 2014 for his removal to Mauritius.

3. In refusing the appellant's application, the  respondent  considered  the
   immigration rules relating to family and private life but concluded  that
   he met the criteria of neither. With regard to Appendix FM and EX.1,  the
   respondent accepted that he had a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
   with a child, but noted that the child was not British and had not  lived
   in the United Kingdom for seven years. With regard to paragraph 276ADE it
   was not accepted that the appellant had lost all ties  to  Mauritius.  It
   was  not  considered  that  there  were  any  exceptional   circumstances
   justifying a grant of leave outside the rules.

4. The appellant appealed against that decision. His  appeal  was  heard  in
   the First-tier Tribunal on 6 October 2014 by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Shamash. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and had  before
   her a statement from the appellant's brother with whom  he  and  his  son
   resided and upon whom they claimed to  be  dependent.  She  recorded  the
   appellant's evidence that he was the primary carer for his son  and  that
   he had suffered domestic violence at the hands of his ex-wife  which  had
   adversely affected his son and had led to them both not wishing to return
   to Mauritius. The appellant's oldest son was also in the  United  Kingdom
   and both sons were musicians, playing rock music,  which  would  was  not
   culturally acceptable in Mauritius.

5. It was accepted on behalf of the appellant  that  he  could  not  succeed
   under the family or private life immigration rules,  namely  Appendix  FM
   and paragraph 276ADE and the appeal was therefore pursued  in  the  wider
   Article 8 context. The judge noted that the appellant's son was no longer
   a minor, but was 18 years of age, and concluded that there was no  family
   life between them for the purposes of Article 8. Neither was it  accepted
   that family life existed between the appellant and his brother or on  any
   other  basis.  The  judge  considered  that  any  interference  with  the
   appellant's private life would  not  be  disproportionate  and  that  his
   removal would not breach Article 8. She dismissed the appeal.

6. Permission to appeal was granted on 16 December 2014 in relation  to  the
   judge's findings on family life between the appellant  and  his  son  and
   also with respect to his proportionality assessment.

Appeal hearing and submissions

7. At the hearing the appellant was in attendance but was  not  required  to
   give oral evidence. I heard submissions on the error of law.

8. Mr Bruiyan submitted that whilst the judge had quoted from  the  relevant
   provisions of the rules and case law,  she  had  failed  to  apply  those
   provisions. She found that there was no  private  life,  yet  there  were
   aspects of private life that she ought to have considered,  such  as  the
   appellant's brother and his sons studying in the United Kingdom.

9. Mr Nath submitted  that  the  judge  had  conducted  a  full  and  proper
   analysis of the facts in the context of the law and relevant case law and
   had considered the well-being of the appellant's son who was by  then  in
   any event no longer a minor. There were no errors of law in her decision.

10. Mr Bruiyan responded by submitting that the judge  had  failed  to  make
   findings of fact and had not considered the fact that the appellant's son
   had not had any removal directions issued against him. The  stages  in  R
   (Razgar) v SSHD (2004) UKHL 27 had not been followed.

11. I advised the parties that in my view there was no error of law  in  the
   judge's decision and my reasons for so finding are as follows.

Consideration and findings

12. I fail to see any merit in Mr Bruiyan's criticism of the  judge's  fact-
   finding and application of the law. It seems to me that, on the contrary,
   her  decision  is  a  detailed  and  thorough  one  including  a  careful
   assessment of  the  appellant's  circumstances  and  a  full  and  proper
   application of the relevant case law  and  statutory  provisions  to  the
   facts. It was accepted on behalf of the appellant that he could not  meet
   the requirements of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  of  the  rules  and
   accordingly it was for him to demonstrate the existence of any particular
   compassionate or other circumstances justifying a grant of leave  outside
   the rules. For reasons  cogently  given  the  judge,  having  taken  into
   account all relevant matters and having considered the appellant's family
   and private life ties to the United Kingdom,  was  entitled  to  conclude
   that no such circumstances existed.

13. The judge considered the relationship between the appellant and his  son
   and was entitled to place weight upon the fact that his son was no longer
   a minor. She specifically took into account that  no  removal  directions
   had been set for his son but properly found that his son nevertheless had
   no basis of stay in the United Kingdom  and  could  return  with  him  to
   Mauritius. At [19] she considered his son's circumstances in  the  United
   Kingdom and those to which he would return  in  Mauritius.  At  [20]  she
   considered other family relationships but again properly  found  that  no
   family life existed for the purposes of Article 8. Whilst it may be  that
   it was open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  private  life  had  been
   established in the United Kingdom,  contrary  to  her  finding  at  [20],
   nothing material arises in that regard given that she went on to consider
   proportionality on the basis that private life had been established.  She
   took account of the new statutory  provisions  in  section  117B  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  and  found,  as  she  was
   entitled to do, that the appellant's claim could not succeed and that  it
   was indeed an extremely weak one.

14. Taken as a whole, the judge's  determination  contains  a  detailed  and
   thorough assessment of the appellant's circumstances  and  the  interests
   and circumstances of his son, together with clearly and cogently reasoned
   findings properly open to her on the evidence before her. The grounds  of
   appeal disclose no errors of law in her decision.

DECISION

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The decision
   to dismiss the appeal stands.









Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
