
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/11106/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 03 June 2015                      |On 10 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                    MLMI
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jones, counsel, instructed by Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) we make an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the
         Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these
         proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall  directly  or
         indirectly identify  the  appellant.  This  direction  applies  to,
         amongst others, all  parties.  Any  failure  to  comply  with  this
         direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Background

      2. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal A M Black who, in a decision  promulgated  on  13/11/2014,
         dismissed the appeal of the appellant, a  national  of  Sri  Lanka,
         against a decision of the respondent to refuse to grant him further
         leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant  and  to  remove
         him from the United Kingdom (UK) by way of directions under section
         47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

      3. The appellant had made an in-time application for further leave  to
         remain on 02/02/2013 as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant. He applied
         on the basis that he had access  to  �50,000  from  two  3rd  party
         financial sponsors. These sponsors were  based  in  Sri  Lanka.  In
         order to meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  41-SD(c)(i)(6)  of
         Appendix  FM  he  had  to  provide  letters  from   the   financial
         institutions that held the 3rd parties' funds naming  him,  thereby
         indicating  that  funds  were  available  to  the  appellant.   The
         appellant was unable to meet this requirement and  the  application
         was refused on 18/03/2013. The appellant appealed to the First-tier
         Tribunal. The appellant produced three bank letters from the  banks
         holding the 3rd parties' funds.  These  indicated  that  the  banks
         were, as a result of Sri  Lankan  banking  rules  and  regulations,
         unable to comply with the requirements of  paragraph  41-SD.  In  a
         determination promulgated on 04/09/2013  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Griffiths allowed the appeal. Judge  Griffiths  considered
         the 3 letters from the Sri Lankan banks. Judge Griffiths noted  the
         submissions made on the appellant's behalf that it  was  impossible
         for him to comply with the requirements of the  immigration  rules.
         Judge Griffiths stated,

             "I find that the decision is not in accordance with the law as
             it cannot be lawful for the respondent  to  impose  conditions
             which are impossible to be complied with."

      4. Judge Griffiths directed that the decision be remitted back to  the
         respondent to make a lawful decision. On 20/02/2014 the  respondent
         remade the decision refusing the application. The respondent  noted
         that although the three letters from the NDB  Bank,  the  Pan  Asia
         Bank and the People's Bank contained sufficient funds, the  letters
         did not confirm that the funds were accessible  by  the  appellant.
         Under 'flexibility arrangements' the respondent had again requested
         the documents to be in the  required  format  but  the  appellant's
         representative conformed that documents in the form  required  were
         not available. The reconsidered application was  therefore  refused
         on exactly the same basis as it had originally been.

The decision under appeal

      5. The appellant once again appealed the  respondent's  decision.  The
         appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal A M Black.  It
         was submitted before  Judge  Black  that  the  respondent  was  not
         entitled to refuse the application on the same basis and relying on
         the same evidence as her  earlier  decision  (relying  on  Chomanga
         (binding effect of unappealed decisions) Zimbabwe [2011]  UKUT  312
         (IAC)).  In  a  decision  promulgated  on  13/11/2014  Judge  Black
         dismissed the appeal. Judge Black stated that  since  the  previous
         determination of Judge Griffiths  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  issued
         guidance  in  respect  of  the  issue  under  appeal.  Judge  Black
         considered the authority of Durrani (Entrepreneurs:  bank  letters:
         evidential flexibility) [2014] UKUT 295 (IAC)  and  concluded  that
         there was no evidence to support the assertions  contained  in  the
         three bank letters. She found it was unlikely that the  Sri  Lankan
         banks would have difficulty in reporting on the availability of the
         funds to the appellant if instructed to do  so.  Judge  Black  also
         relied on the authority of VK  v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  1435  in
         finding that the inferences  drawn  by  Judge  Griffiths  from  her
         findings could no longer be sustained in light of Durrani.

      6. Judge Black then went on to consider, inter alia, the relevance  of
         paragraph 245AA(d). This provision enabled the respondent to  grant
         an application exceptionally, even  if  a  specified  document  had
         missing information, provided  that  the  missing  information  was
         verifiable from, amongst others, other documents submitted with the
         application.  Judge  Black  considered  two  Financial  Sponsorship
         Declarations dated 21/01/2013 from the financial sponsors. She  was
         not however satisfied that the missing information  was  verifiable
         from these Declarations.

The grant of permission to appeal

      7. In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul found
         it arguable that the First-tier Judge had erred in her approach  to
         the findings of Judge Griffiths that it  would  be  impossible  for
         banks in Sri Lanka to provide the assurances needed by paragraph 41-
         SD, and in her approach to the letters from the  three  Sri  Lankan
         banks.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

      8. Ms Jones submitted that it was clear  from  the  letters  from  the
         three Sri Lankan banks that the rules and regulations  of  the  Sri
         Lankan Central Bank prevented them from issuing letters  containing
         the information required  by  paragraph  41-SD(c)(i)(6).  Ms  Jones
         noted that Judge Griffiths  findings  were  not  appealed.  It  was
         submitted that Durrani related to banks in the UK. It was submitted
         that the instant appeal was a paradigm case for the application  of
         paragraph 245AA(d). In response to an observation from  us  it  was
         accepted by  Ms  Jones  that  the  respondent  had  not  considered
         exercising her discretion under paragraph 245AA(d). Mr  Duffy  very
         fairly indicated that the Chomanga point  presented  him  with  the
         most difficulty. He had considered the respondent's file and  found
         there had been consideration of the decision of Judge Griffiths but
         that no potential error of law had been identified. Mr Duffy  noted
         that the Sri Lankan bank letters referred  to  their  inability  to
         state that funds were 'accessible' by the appellant, although  this
         was in contrast to paragraph 41-SD which required  the  letters  to
         indicate the funds were 'available'  to  the  appellant.  Mr  Duffy
         accepted that this point had not been argued  before  Judge  Black,
         nor had it been considered by  her.  Mr  Duffy  accepted  that  the
         respondent's  decision  made  no  mention  or  reference   to   the
         possibility of exercising discretion under paragraph  245AA(d).  We
         reserved our decision.

Discussion

      9. We are satisfied, for  the  following  reasons,  that  Judge  Black
         materially erred in her decision. Judge  Griffiths  found  that  it
         "...cannot be lawful for the respondent to impose conditions  which
         are impossible to be complied with."  Judge  Griffiths  could  only
         have reached this conclusion based on the three  letters  from  the
         Sri Lankan banks. These letters in turn indicated that, as a result
         of rules and regulations of the Central Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  they
         were unable to issue letters indicating  that  the  funds  held  in
         their  customers'  accounts  were  accessible  to  a  third  party.
         Although the particular rules and regulations were  not  identified
         Judge Griffiths was entitled to rely on  letters  issued  by  three
         financial institutions regulated by  Sri  Lankan  banking  law  and
         whose reliability was not challenged before her. The respondent did
         not seek to appeal this decision. Following Chomanga the respondent
         was bound by the unappealed  findings  of  fact.  This  was  indeed
         accepted by Judge Black in her  determination  (at  paragraph  16).
         Judge Black however  relied  on  the  case  of  Duranni  which  was
         promulgated on 13/06/2014, after the respondent's decision.

     10. Durrani concerned an appellant from Pakistan who was relying on 3rd
         party financial sponsorship from sponsors whose funds were held  in
         two UK based banks. The headnote in Durrani reads,

             "The requirements listed in paragraph 41-SD(a)(i) of the Rules
             are to be construed reasonably and  sensibly,  in  their  full
             context. Approached in this way,  the  letters  required  from
             banks or other financial  institutions  are  not  designed  to
             provide, and do not commit them to, any form of  guarantee  or
             assurance to any party. Rather, the function of the prescribed
             letters is to attest to the state of the relevant bank account
             on the date when they are written and to provide certain other
             items of information designed to confirm the  authenticity  of
             the application for entrepreneurial  migrant  status  and  its
             economic viability. There is no difficulty in the third  party
             bank,   with   its   customer's   consent,   expressing    its
             understanding, based on the customer's instructions, that  the
             use of specified funds in the  customer's  bank  account/s  is
             contemplated or proposed by the customer for  the  purpose  of
             financing   the   applicant's   proposed   business   venture.
             Accordingly, there is no substance in the  argument  that  the
             relevant  requirements  contained  in  paragraph   41-SD(a)(i)
             produce an absurd result and must, therefore,  be  interpreted
             in some other manner."

     11. There was no consideration given in Durrani to the banking rules or
         regulations in Sri Lanka. The appellant in the present  appeal  had
         produced three letters from  Sri  Lankan  banks  that  were,  prima
         facie, reliable. The respondent had not produced  any  evidence  to
         rebut the assertions contained in the letters from the  banks.  The
         findings  of  the  UT  in  Durrani  are  not  dispositive  of   the
         appellant's assertion, supported as it was  by  the  bank  letters,
         that Sri Lankan banking regulations prevented him from meeting  the
         requirements of paragraph 41-SD. Judge Black stated that there  was
         no evidence  to  support  the  assertions  contained  in  the  bank
         letters. There was  however  no  reason  to  doubt  the  assertions
         contained in official bank letters, certainly in the absence of any
         contrary evidence.

     12. We note that, subsequent to Judge Black's decision,  the  Court  of
         Appeal has considered the issue under appeal in Iqbal &  Dependants
         v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 169. A
         First-tier Judge had allowed an appeal on the  basis  that  banking
         regulations in Pakistan prevented compliance with paragraph  41-SD.
         However, on appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it  found  there  was  no
         clear evidence that the requirements were contrary to  the  law  of
         Pakistan or contrary to the regulations of  the  banking  industry.
         The appeal proceeded in the Court of Appeal on the basis  that  the
         Upper Tribunal's conclusion was correct. In the present appeal  the
         appellant  had  produced  letters  from   three   different   banks
         suggesting that rules and regulations of the central  bank  of  Sri
         Lanka prevented  them  from  complying  with  the  requirements  in
         paragraph 41-SD.  Once  again,  in  the  absence  of  any  contrary
         evidence from the respondent, and in light of the decision  not  to
         appeal the determination of Judge Griffiths, we  find  the  letters
         constituted clear evidence as to understanding of  the  Sri  Lankan
         banks of  Sri  Lankan  banking  regulations.  We  are  consequently
         satisfied there has been no material change or clarification in the
         law since the decision of Judge  Griffiths  that  would,  following
         Chomanga, entitle the respondent or Judge Black to depart from  the
         findings of Judge Griffiths.

     13. Judge Black additionally relied on the authority of VK. This  Court
         of Appeal decision concerned the distinction  between  findings  of
         fact and inferences drawn from those findings by an earlier  judge.
         Judge Black found that, in light of the authority  of  Durrani,  it
         could no longer be inferred  from  the  facts  as  found  by  Judge
         Griffiths that the appellant's sponsors' banks  could  not  provide
         the confirmation of availability of funds, as  required  (paragraph
         21). We have already found that Judge Black erred in  her  reliance
         on the decision in Durrani given  that  Durrani  concerned  English
         banks, made no assessment of the laws of other countries, and was a
         case where there was no reliable evidence that rules or regulations
         prevented compliance. In the earlier appeal Judge Griffiths made  a
         direct finding based on  seemingly  reliable  documentary  evidence
         about the impossibility of banks in  Sri  Lanka,  as  a  result  of
         banking regulations, to provide letters in the required form.  This
         was not an 'inference' but a primary finding of fact, one that  was
         not challenged, countered or undermined by any evidence produced by
         the respondent or decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  Court  of
         Appeal. In these circumstances we find Judge  Black  erred  in  her
         reliance on VK.

     14. Judge Black  went  on  to  exercise  the  discretion  contained  in
         paragraph 245AA(d). this states,

             (d) If the applicant has submitted a specified document:

                  (i) in the wrong format; or

                  (ii) which is a copy and not an original document; or

                  (iii)  which  does  not  contain  all  of  the   specified
                  information, but the  missing  information  is  verifiable
                  from:

                      (1) other documents submitted with the application,

                      (2) the website of the organisation which issued  the
                      document, or

                      (3) the website of the appropriate regulatory body;

             the application may be granted  exceptionally,  providing  the
             Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or the  Secretary
             of State is satisfied that the specified documents are genuine
             and the applicant meets all the other requirements.

     15.  According  to  the  Reasons  For  Refusal  Letter  the  respondent
         requested the  appellant,  in  reconsidering  the  application,  to
         provide  the  financial  institutions  documents  in  the  required
         format. There is no indication that the respondent was aware of, or
         ever considered exercising, her discretion to grant the application
         exceptionally under 245AA(d)(iii). Dr Duffy accepted that the  RFRL
         did  not  indicate  that  consideration  had  been  given  to   the
         possibility of exercising  discretion  under  245AA(d).  Given  the
         potential applicability of paragraph 245AA(d)(iii) in light of  the
         letters written by the banks and the declarations produced  by  the
         two 3rd party financial sponsors, we are satisfied  the  respondent
         failed  to  consider  her  discretion.  Judge  Black  proceeded  to
         exercise this discretion (paragraphs 24 & 25)  and  concluded,  for
         reasons given at paragraph  24(a)  to  (c),  that  the  application
         should not be granted exceptionally.

     16. The difficulty with this approach  is  that  the  respondent  never
         considered exercising her  own  discretion  first  under  paragraph
         245AA(d). Headnote 2 of Ukus (discretion: when  reviewable)  [2012]
         UKUT 00307 (IAC) states,

             "Where the decision maker has failed to exercise a  discretion
             vested in  him,  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  on  appeal  is
             limited to a decision that the failure  renders  the  decision
             'not in accordance with the law'  (s  86(3)(a)).  Because  the
             discretion is vested in the Executive, the appropriate  course
             will be for the Tribunal to  require  the  decision  maker  to
             complete his  task  by  reaching  a  lawful  decision  on  the
             outstanding application, along the lines set  out  in  SSHD  v
             Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148."

    17.    This authority  was  followed  in  Bhimani  (Student:  Switching
         Institution:  Requirements)  [2014]  UKUT  00516  (IAC).   We   are
         satisfied, and it was not disputed by the parties, that Judge Black
         materially erred in law by proceeding to  consider  the  discretion
         under paragraph 245AA(d) without the respondent  first  considering
         whether to exercise her own  discretion.  We  therefore  remit  the
         matter back to the respondent to enable her  to  lawfully  exercise
         her discretion under paragraph 245AA(d).

Decision:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  We  remake  it  by
remitting the respondent's decision back  to  her  on  the  basis  that  the
procedure by which it was reached was not in accordance with  the  law.  The
appellant's application remains  outstanding  until  a  lawful  decision  in
made.



      08 June 2015

Signed:     Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

