
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
Ia/11307/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated        |
|On 17th March 2016                        |On 31st May 2016                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                              victor oluwaseyi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani, Counsel, instructed by Ilas
Immigrations
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Aujla) dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision
    taken on 18 February 2014 to refuse  the  appellant's  application  for
    leave to remain under Article 8 and to remove the  appellant  from  the
    UK.


Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in 1975. He is  the  husband
    of LA, a citizen of Nigeria with indefinite leave to remain in the  UK.
    They were married in the UK in September  2011.  The  appellant  states
    that he entered the UK in August 2005 in possession of a visitor's visa
    arranged by an agent in Nigeria. He overstayed and on 14 December  2010
    applied for a certificate of approval for marriage. That was refused on
    1 February  2011.  He  applied  again  on  25  February  2011  and  the
    respondent issued the certificate  on  20  April  2011.  The  appellant
    applied for leave to remain as the spouse of LA on 3 September 2012 but
    that was refused on 4  March  2013  without  a  right  of  appeal.  The
    appellant made further unsuccessful representations on  23  April  2013
    and then made the current application on 9 September 2013.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  appellant's   identity   and
    nationality and concluded that he did meet the eligibility requirements
    as a partner on the basis that he had lived  with  LA  since  at  least
    2010.  However, there were no insurmountable obstacles to  family  life
    with LA continuing outside the UK. There were adequate medical services
    in Nigeria, including IVF treatment. Another option was  to  apply  for
    entry  clearance  from  Nigeria.  The  appellant  did  not   meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and any  interference  in
    his right to private life was proportionate.


The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at  Hendon  on  17  August  2015.  He  was  represented  by  Ms
    Wawrzynczak  of  Counsel.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that   the
    appellant  had  been  in  the  UK  unlawfully  and  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph EX.1.(b) of Appendix FM.  LA  had  failed  to
    provide up to date medical evidence or a detailed medical report. There
    was no evidence  that  she  could  not  access  the  requisite  medical
    treatment in Nigeria. There were no insurmountable obstacles. Article 8
    was not engaged. The granting of a certificate of approval did not give
    the  appellant  a  legitimate  expectation  and  the  relationship  had
    commenced when the appellant was  in  the  UK  unlawfully.  Considering
    section 117B of the 2002 Act, the  judge  gave  little  weight  to  the
    relationship under Article 8.


The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law.  There  are  nine
    grounds of appeal.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Judge  Hollingsworth  on
    28 January 2015 on the basis that an arguable error of law  had  arisen
    in relation to construction of LA's medical records and it was  further
    arguable that the judge should have  explained  the  degree  of  weight
    which he attached  to  the  certificate  of  approval  granted  by  the
    respondent. Permission was not refused on any ground.

 8. In a rule 24 response dated 12 February 2016 the  respondent  submitted
    that the medical evidence did not establish a breach of  Article  3  or
    demonstrate insurmountable obstacles to the return of both parties. The
    judge was not obliged to detail all of the evidence. The respondent was
    obliged to issue the certificate of approval. The  judge  had  provided
    more than adequate reasoning.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me


Discussion

10. It is common ground between the parties that the judge  considered  the
    wrong version of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. The correct version was
    in force from 9 July 2012 to 27 July 2014 and was referred  to  in  the
    refusal  letter.  The  judge  found  that  there  would  not  be   very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into  Nigeria  but
    did not consider whether he had any ties to Nigeria. I find that  is  a
    material error of law because appellants can  reasonably  expect  their
    claims to be considered under the correct  legislation  and  the  judge
    might have reached a different conclusion if the correct test had  been
    applied.

11. Mr Kotas submitted that the medical evidence was dealt with  succinctly
    but the findings were open to the judge in the absence  of  an  updated
    medical  report.  Ms  Nnamani  submitted  that  the  extensive  medical
    evidence was not addressed by the judge. I find that the judge did  not
    give adequate consideration to the medical evidence in relation  to  LA
    which appears at AB2 (pages 1-28) of the appellant's bundle before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. That evidence is reasonably extensive and I  agree
    with Ms Nnamani's submission that the complexity  and  extent  of  LA's
    medical condition is not adequately  addressed  in  the  decision.  The
    medical evidence was plainly capable of impacting  upon  decision  both
    under Appendix FM and Article 8. That is a further  material  error  of
    law.

12. I have not found it necessary to decide the remaining grounds of appeal
    which all concern matters that can be fully argued at the rehearing.

13. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law and its  decision  cannot
    stand.


Decision

14. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

15. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.



Signed


[pic]


Judge Archer
Deputy         Judge         of         the          Upper          Tribunal
                   Date 17 March 2016


