
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/11835/2015
                                                IA/11836/2015, IA/11837/2015
                                                IA/11838/2015, IA/11842/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20th September 2016             |On 11th October 2016               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               AMINATA [E] (1)
                                JOHN [E] (2)
                                  [J E] (3)
                                  [A E] (4)
                                DAVID [E] (5)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson of Counsel, instructed by Portway
                    Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS



    Introduction

    1. The first claimant is a citizen of Sierra Leone born on 9th  January
       1975. The second claimant is her husband and a citizen  of  Nigeria.
       They married in Gambia  in  2003.  The  other  claimants  are  their
       children: the third and fifth claimants are citizens of Sierra Leone
       and the fourth claimant is a citizen of Nigeria. The first and fifth
       claimants left Sierra Leone in 1999 and went as refugees  to  Gambia
       where they lived until they came to the UK. The fifth  claimant  was
       born on 1st November 1995, and so is now 20 years old.

    2. The first claimant entered the UK on 16th June 2006  as  a  student.
       The third claimant was born in the UK on 5th February 2007  (and  so
       now is 9 years and eight months old). The second and fifth claimants
       entered the UK as dependents of the first claimant on 14th  December
       2007 and 1st December 2010 respectively.  The  fourth  claimant  was
       born in in the UK on 9th October 2009 (and so now is 7 years old).

    3. The claimants have all been continuously lawfully resident in the UK
       since their entry/ birth in this country  with  the  first  claimant
       being present with leave as a Tier 4 student migrant and then  as  a
       Tier 1 post study work migrant and the rest as  her  dependents.  On
       23rd January 2015 the claimants applied to remain in the UK  on  the
       basis of their family and private lives in the UK.

    4. This application was refused on the 10th March 2015.   Their  appeal
       against the decision was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal in
       a determination promulgated on the 9th December 2015: the appeals of
       the third and fifth claimants being allowed  under  the  Immigration
       Rules and those of the  other  claimants  on  human  rights  grounds
       outside of those Rules under Article 8 ECHR.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Brunnen on the basis that firstly it was arguable  that  the  First-
       tier Tribunal judge had erred in law. The matter came before  me  to
       determine whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law,  and  I
       found that it had and set aside the decision in full for the reasons
       set out in my decision of 21st June 2016 which is appended as  Annex
       A to this decision.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    6. The first, second and fifth appellants gave  oral  evidence  to  the
       Tribunal and adopted their statements in the bundles. I do  not  set
       out that evidence in full, but in summary it  is  as  follows.  That
       they  entered  on  the  dates  as  set  out  above,  and  hold   the
       citizenships as set out above. They have been lawfully present  ever
       since they entered the UK or were born here.

    7. The first appellant has only had been absent from the UK  for  about
       nine weeks on seven short trips from  the  UK  to  Gambia,  Nigeria,
       Sierra Leone and Amsterdam. Her passports were with  the  respondent
       so she had remembered her absences but was certain she had done this
       correctly. She studied in the UK and obtained a bachelor's degree in
       Business Administration from Heriot-Watt University  here.  She  has
       passed the life in the UK test. She has never applied late or had an
       application  rejected  by  the  respondent.  She  has  no   criminal
       convictions and has never broken the  immigration  laws.  She  is  a
       catering assistant with Guys and St Thomas's hospital. She does  not
       believe it would be right to require her two children who were  born
       in the UK to leave this country and  live  elsewhere  as  they  have
       lived in the UK for their entire lives, and never been in any  other
       country except for short holidays. They are well settled  in  school
       with nice friends and are not  familiar  with  life  or  culture  in
       Sierra Leone or Nigeria. The whole  family  attend  St  John  Divine
       Church of England services, and the  first  appellant  is  a  church
       usher. It would be devastating to have to take them abroad  to  live
       given their integration here.

    8. The first appellant left her country of nationality,  Sierra  Leone,
       in 1999 and lived in Gambia as a refugee until she came to  the  UK.
       Whilst in Gambia she met her husband, the second appellant, in  2000
       and they were married in 2003. She cannot return to  Gambia  as  she
       was only present there under UNHCR  auspices  and  is  no  longer  a
       refugee. The first appellant says that she cannot return  to  Sierra
       Leone where she has no relatives (her mother and  father  have  both
       died; she has one sister in the UK and one in Ghana; she has cousins
       in the UK and the USA), and where she believes that she would not be
       able to re-establish herself and her family as she has no  relatives
       or contacts there which are needed to obtain work and  accommodation
       in that society. She visited Sierra Leone when her  father  died  in
       2011. She says that she tried to investigate the possibilities of re-
       establishing the family in Sierra Leone when she returned for a  one
       week visit in 2013, but that she found it would not be possible.

    9. The second appellant gave evidence that he had only been out of  the
       country on two short trips of about two weeks to Nigeria alone,  and
       two short trips to Holland with his family. He has  never  travelled
       to Sierra Leone. His wife had been twice, the first time because her
       father died and the second, he  thought,  for  a  memorial  for  her
       father, but he had stayed in the UK and looked after  the  children.
       He had met his wife in Gambia because he had left Nigeria as he  had
       nothing to keep him there as his parents were both dead and  he  had
       no siblings or other family. He had been buying and selling cars  in
       Gambia. He no longer had a residence permit however as this  expired
       when he left in 2007 and would not be able  to  return  to  live  in
       Gambia now.

   10. The second appellant works  for  Guys  and  St  Thomas's  as  a  HPV
       technician, and has spent  a  lot  of  time  helping  bring  up  the
       children particularly when his wife was studying in the UK. He notes
       that the children do a lot of extra-curricular  activities  such  as
       drama, choir and extra lessons and are very well integrated socially
       in the UK. He did not believe it would be right to take the children
       to Nigeria or Sierra Leone, countries he and the first appellant  no
       longer felt they knew as a result of their period  of  absence,  and
       where the third and fourth appellants had never lived.

   11. The fifth appellant gave evidence that he is 20 years old and  lived
       in Sierra Leone only until he was three years  old,  when  he  moved
       with his mother to Gambia due to the civil war. His  natural  father
       was murdered by rebels in the civil war in Sierra Leone in 1999.  He
       has never been back to Sierra Leone since  he  left.  He  stayed  in
       Gambia under the auspices of UNHCR, and then  with  friends  of  his
       mother (after she left) until December 2010 when he travelled to the
       UK to join the family here. He completed his secondary education  in
       the  UK  and  started  a  degree  in  mechanical  and  manufacturing
       engineering at Derby University in September  2015,  which  he  will
       finish in June 2018. The first and second  appellants  pay  for  his
       fees, accommodation and maintenance costs. He lives at  home  during
       the holidays and college halls of residence in the term time. He has
       close relationships with his siblings. He has all of his friends  in
       the UK. He intends to return to live at  home  whilst  seeking  work
       with a company such as Rolls Royce when he finishes his  degree.  He
       would be devastated if he were forced to leave the UK and  his  life
       and family here.  He thought  his  maternal  grandmother  was  still
       alive in Sierra Leone, but thought she was  ill  in  2013  when  his
       mother had last visited the country. He knows no family or  any  one
       in Sierra Leone, and has had no contact with his grandmother on  the
       telephone.

   12. In the refusal letter  the  Secretary  of  State  submits  that  the
       claimants are not entitled to succeed in this  appeal.  She  submits
       that the third claimant cannot show that it would not be  reasonable
       for him to live in Sierra Leone, Nigeria or  Gambia;  and  that  the
       other adult claimants (the first, second and  fifth  claimant)  have
       not demonstrated on the balance of  probabilities  that  they  would
       face very significant obstacles to their integration if required  to
       leave the UK. There is no evidence of an inability to  integrate  in
       these countries, and language would not be a barrier. As  such  none
       of  the  appellant  can  succeed  under  paragraph  276ADE  of   the
       Immigration Rules.

   13. When considering the appeal outside of the Immigration  Rules  there
       is no evidence that the best interests of the  two  minor  claimants
       (three and four) would not be served  by  their  living  with  their
       parents in either Sierra Leone, Nigeria  or  Gambia.  All  of  these
       countries have functioning education systems. There is no reason why
       the  first  and  second  claimants  would  not  be  able  to  obtain
       employment, using their UK qualifications and  work  experience,  on
       return and no evidence that the safety and welfare of  the  children
       would be prejudiced by such a return  to  one  of  these  countries.
       There is no evidence they could not live together  as  a  family  in
       these countries. It was accepted that the fifth  claimant  continued
       to have family life with the other family members. There could be no
       expectation the family would be allowed to remain in the UK  as  the
       claimants were admitted to the UK on a route which did not  lead  to
       settlement. It  was  therefore  proportionate  to  require  all  the
       appellants including the minor ones to leave the UK.

   14. Mr Avery submitted that he accepted that the  first  claimant  could
       meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules at paragraph 276B bar
       the issue of whether she had unacceptable periods of  absence  under
       paragraph 276(i)(a). On this issue we just had the oral evidence  of
       the first claimant which was not  acceptable.  However  he  accepted
       that the first claimant's two passports were with the  Secretary  of
       State, and it was  agreed  that  he  would  obtain  these  and  make
       representations to me by email by Friday 7th  October  2016  if  the
       Secretary of State contended that there were  excessive  periods  of
       absence. If this was the case he would also send the  email  to  the
       appellant's solicitors along with complete copies of  the  passports
       and they would have until 14th October 2016 to make further  written
       representations on this issue. I received an  email  from  Mr  Avery
       dated 7th October 2016 in which he stated  that  he  could  find  no
       absences documented in the first claimant's  passports  which  meant
       that she failed under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules due to
       time spent outside of the UK.

   15. Mr Avery submitted that the evidence of the claimants differed  with
       respect to whether the first claimant had relatives in Sierra Leone.
       The evidence of the fifth claimant was that  he  thought  he  had  a
       maternal grandmother in that country.  The  evidence  of  the  first
       claimant about her trip in 2013 had been very vague and unconvincing
       and she had been trying to hide the fact she had visited her  mother
       in Sierra Leone on that occasion. There  was  no  reason  why  there
       would be very significant obstacles for the claimants to relocate to
       Sierra  Leone  or  Nigeria,  although  he  accepted  it   might   be
       complicated for them to go to Gambia given the history of  residence
       by virtue of protection by UNHCR in that country. No  legal  reasons
       or substantial other reasons had been given why  this  family  could
       not relocate to either of these countries. The best interests of the
       children were simply to be with their parents in  their  country  of
       nationality, and this was the case even if the  first  claimant  was
       entitled to ILR in the UK.

   16. Mr Richardson submitted that it was possible that  the  evidence  of
       the claimants was consistent on the issue as to  whether  the  first
       claimant's mother was still alive,  and  thus  whether  they  had  a
       relative in Sierra Leone. It was possible that she had died but  the
       fifth claimant had not been told of this as  he  had  no  connection
       with her.

   17. Mr Richardson submitted that the oral evidence of the first claimant
       together with the life in the UK test and degree certificate  should
       suffice  to  find  that  all  elements  of  paragraph  276B  of  the
       Immigration Rules were met by the first claimant, but he  agreed  to
       Mr Avery being able to make  the  checks  as  he  proposed  and  the
       timetable set out above.

   18. He submitted that it was appropriate to look at the  third  claimant
       next. He submitted that this claimant was entitled to succeed  under
       paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules as he had been  in
       the UK for seven years at the time of application  and  it  was  not
       reasonable to expect him to leave the UK. The reason  for  this  was
       that it was in his best interest to preserve the status quo and  for
       him to continue to live and study in the country where he  had  been
       born and lived for the past nine and a half  years  and  not  to  be
       relocated to a "strange"  African  country.  It  was  all  the  more
       reasonable given that his parents had  not  broken  any  Immigration
       Rules at any point or  done  anything  else  unlawful,  and  in  the
       context of his mother being entitled to indefinite leave to  remain,
       see R (on the application of) MA Pakistan &  Ors  v  Upper  Tribunal
       (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA   Civ   705,
       particularly at paragraph 46 to 49. Mr Richardson concluded that  in
       this case there were no powerful reasons why  leave  should  not  be
       granted.

   19. Mr Richardson then submitted that it was appropriate to consider the
       position of the fourth claimant. She could  not  succeed  under  the
       Immigration Rules as she had not been in the UK for seven  years  at
       the time of application. He submitted that  it  was  appropriate  to
       consider whether it was proportionate to remove  her  in  accordance
       with Article 8 ECHR principles outside of the Immigration  Rules  as
       her best interests were a compelling matter not otherwise considered
       under the Rules. He submitted that it could not be proportionate  to
       remove the fourth claimant if it were not  proportionate  to  remove
       her brother and particularly in the context of her mother having  an
       entitlement to indefinite leave to remain, and her having resided in
       the UK for six years and eleven months and having  lived  her  whole
       life in this country and her best interests being  to  continue  and
       live and study in this country.

   20. Mr Richardson then turned to the second claimant whom he argued  was
       entitled to remain when his position was considered outside  of  the
       Immigration Rules because of his relationship as  a  father  sharing
       parental responsibilities for the third  and  fourth  claimants.  In
       these circumstances it  was  not  proportionate  to  remove  him  in
       accordance with s.117B  (6)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002 and the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Treebhawon
       and others (s.117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 as it was not  disputed  that
       the second  claimant  had  a  subsisting  and  substantial  parental
       relationship with this children the third and fourth  claimants  and
       it was not reasonable to expect these  children  to  leave  for  the
       reasons set out above. As such the public interest did  not  require
       the second claimant's removal.

   21. Mr Richardson then submitted that the fifth claimant could  arguably
       show he was entitled to remain under paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi) of the
       Immigration Rules as he could show very significant obstacles to his
       integration in Sierra Leone given his teenage life had been in  this
       country and would be forced to  give  up  his  university  education
       midway through and return to a country he had not lived in since  he
       was three years old. However even if this was not  accepted  he  was
       entitled to succeed outside of the Immigration Rules as  his  family
       life relationship with his parents and siblings (which  is  accepted
       by the respondent and should not be seen as having  been  diminished
       by his starting university - see AP (India) v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ
       89 paragraphs 45 and 51 obiter comments about students at university
       remaining part of their original family)  was  a  compelling  matter
       which must be considered outside of the Immigration Rules. Given the
       rest of the family were entitled to remain in the UK it would  be  a
       disproportionate breach of Article  8  ECHR  to  require  the  fifth
       claimant to leave. Weight can properly be given to this family  life
       relationship as it was built whilst this claimant  was  precariously
       but not unlawfully present in the UK, and thus s.117B(4) and (5)  of
       the 2002 Act do not prescribe that little weight can be given to the
       relationship.

 Conclusions - Remaking

   22. I find that the adult claimants who gave evidence are for  the  most
       part credible witnesses. In general they answered questions  put  to
       them directly; were consist with their written statements  and  each
       other and the other documentation provided to the Tribunal.  In  the
       light of the oral evidence of the fifth claimant I  do  not  believe
       however that the first claimant's mother has died, and find that the
       first and second claimants did not give full honest testimony  about
       this on-going tie with the first claimant's country  of  origin  and
       the reasons for her visit to Sierra Leone in 2013 in an  attempt  to
       diminish the ties she has with that country.

   23. I must first look at this appeal under any relevant Article  8  ECHR
       or other Immigration Rules.

   24. The first issue to determine is whether the first claimant can  meet
       the Immigration Rules at paragraph 276B. As accepted by Mr Avery  on
       behalf of the respondent I find that the first claimant can  clearly
       meet the requirement that there are no public interest  reasons  why
       it would be undesirable why she should not  be  allowed  to  remain;
       that she does not fall to be refused under the  general  grounds  of
       refusal, that she has demonstrated through  her  degree  certificate
       and life in the UK certificate that she has sufficient knowledge  of
       the English language and about life in the UK and that she  has  not
       overstayed or been in breach of the immigration laws.  In  light  of
       the email evidence from Mr  Avery  and  the  first  claimants'  oral
       evidence I also accept that she has continuous lawful residence  for
       a period of ten years given her absences are only for  a  number  of
       weeks on a few short holidays.  I  therefore  find  that  the  first
       appellant is entitled to succeed on her appeal on this basis and  is
       entitled to indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

   25. The second issue to determine is whether the third claimant can meet
       the Immigration Rules at paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv).  Clearly  he  had
       lived in the UK for more than 7 years at the time of application and
       is under 18 years. The question then arises as to whether  it  would
       be reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.

   26. The third claimant is clearly a child who  has  a  full  social  and
       educational life in the UK, attending St John the Divine  Church  of
       England Primary School  in  year  4,  We  Care  Child  Care  Ltd  (a
       Bilingual Pre-School) and the Helen O'Grady Drama Academy. His  head
       teacher from St John the Divine has written to say that it would  be
       detrimental to the third claimant if he were removed from the school
       as they are working on understanding "certain barriers to  learning"
       which the third claimant experiences. It is her view that  he  needs
       to remain in his current school environment so that he  is  able  to
       reach his full potential. She is also of the view  that  the  family
       are all "well versed in British values".  It is also clear from  the
       many letters in support of the claimants  that  the  third  claimant
       lives in an integrated community of  relatives  and  family  friends
       from the church and outside, and that he regards himself as British.
       The Reverend Canon Mark Williams, vicar at St John the Divine Church
       of England church in Kennington, expresses the view that it would be
       unreasonable to uproot the third claimant from his life  in  the  UK
       given his integration into UK society given what  he  knows  of  the
       family over their four year period of acquaintance. He confirms that
       the third claimant lives in an extended family of cousins and  aunts
       in this country and that London is his home.

   27. I am satisfied  that  the  family  have  no  right  to  re-establish
       themselves in Gambia. None of them are Gambian citizens and I accept
       the  evidence  of  the  claimants  that  they  were  only  permitted
       residence in that country because of the situation of civil  war  in
       Sierra Leone which led to UNCHR protection, and prior  to  that  for
       the second claimant based on his trading business  which  no  longer
       exists. However I am satisfied (as no evidence has been  put  before
       me to the contrary) that the family could legally relocate to either
       Nigeria  or  Sierra  Leone.  I  am  satisfied  on  the  balance   of
       probabilities that they would not have significant family assistance
       in  either  of  these  countries,  although  I  find  it  is  likely
       (particularly on the evidence of the fifth claimant) that the  first
       claimant's elderly unwell mother is still alive in that  country.  I
       accept that the third claimant has never been to either country  and
       has no personal links himself, and that  the  links  the  first  and
       second claimants have are also now tenuous given  their  periods  of
       absence and focus on integration in this  country.  Thus  whilst  it
       would be no doubt stressful and somewhat difficult for  this  family
       to successfully relocate after their time in the UK I  do  not  find
       that this would be impossible for them in either country  given  the
       knowledge of local and lingua franca languages and  customs  by  the
       third claimant's parents,  and  his  parents'  qualifications,  work
       experience and evident social skills. I accept also that  the  third
       claimant would also have access to schooling and basic  health  care
       in either country.

   28. However when considering whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect
       the third claimant to leave I am guided by what is said by the Court
       of Appeal in MA (Pakistan). The Court of Appeal state  at  paragraph
       46 that there is a "very strong expectation"  that  a  child's  best
       interest who has lived in the UK for seven years or more will be  to
       remain in this country with his parents as a family unit due to  the
       roots and developed social, cultural and educational links  he  will
       have made with the UK. I find that it is in the  best  interests  of
       the third claimant to remain here given the evidence I set out above
       at paragraph 26 in the context of this guidance.

   29. The Court of Appeal then state  that  the  conduct  and  immigration
       history of the parents and the links  to  any  proposed  country  of
       return are also relevant to the issue of the reasonableness  of  any
       claimant having to leave the UK: the best interest are not the  sole
       issue, although it is  noted  that  that  a  seven  plus  period  of
       residence "establishes as a starting  point  that  leave  should  be
       granted unless there are powerful reasons to  the  contrary".  As  I
       have said I do not find the third claimant has  any  personal  links
       beyond his passport nationality to Sierra Leone, and has none at all
       with Nigeria. He has not been to either country, and I find he  does
       not live in a Diaspora community of either country in the UK. He has
       some educational issues which favour continuity of education at  his
       current school in the UK and has lived in this country  all  of  his
       life, has friends and family here and feels himself to  be  British.
       His parents, the first and second claimants,  are  not  overstayers,
       have never broken immigration laws, indeed I have found  his  mother
       to be entitled to indefinite leave to remain under  the  Immigration
       Rules, they have no criminal records and there is no  other  adverse
       matters raised in relation to either of them. Indeed they  are  seen
       by  their  friends,  the  claimant's  school  and  their  vicar   as
       upstanding contributing members of the community.

   30. In consideration of  all  of  the  circumstances  outlined  above  I
       conclude that it is not reasonable to expect the third  claimant  to
       leave the UK.

   31. The third issue  to  determine  is  whether  the  second  and  fifth
       claimants can show that they  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
       276ADE (1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules to remain in the UK  on  the
       basis of their private lives. They have lived in the UK for 8  years
       and ten months (second claimant) and 5 years and ten  months  (fifth
       claimant). They would have to demonstrate very significant obstacles
       to integration in Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Gambia. For the  reasons
       set out above at paragraph 27 I am satisfied  that  there  would  be
       very significant obstacles to integration  in  Gambia  for  both  of
       these   claimants.   However   given   the   language   skills   and
       qualifications/ work experience of both  claimants  and  their  good
       health I do not find that  they  can  meet  the  demanding  test  of
       showing they would have very significant  obstacles  to  integration
       with respect to their private lives in  Sierra  Leone  and  Nigeria.
       Although it would be difficult for the second claimant to return  to
       Nigeria after a very long absence without family assistance and  re-
       establish his private life in that  country  he  has  shown  he  has
       initiative to do so in two other "foreign" countries (Gambia and the
       UK). The fifth claimant again would no doubt face some difficulty in
       establishing his private life Sierra  Leone,  and  might  have  some
       difficulties completing a degree started in  the  UK.  He  would  be
       hampered by his long absence but his evidence  is  that  he  has  an
       elderly grandmother there and I  find  a  mother  who  has  cultural
       understanding to whom he could turn for some initial help and  is  a
       healthy and relatively well qualified young man.

   32. I find that there  are  however  compelling  matters  that  must  be
       considered outside of the Immigration Rules.

   33. Firstly I must look at the position of the fourth claimant  who  has
       both family and private life in the UK, having  been  born  in  this
       country and whom at the point of determination of  this  appeal  has
       lived in the UK for a continuous period of seven years (paragraph 13
       of MA (Pakistan) is clear that this is the key date  for  s.117B  of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002). Like her brother,
       the third claimant, she has been lawfully present in the UK for  her
       entire stay: she has only left this country for very short  holidays
       to the Netherlands; she is in full time schooling and doing well  at
       the St John the Divine Church of England Primary School in  year  2,
       We Care Child Care  Ltd  (a  Bilingual  Pre-School)  and  the  Helen
       O'Grady Drama Academy. Again as with the third claimant, the  fourth
       claimant lives in an integrated community of  relatives  and  family
       friends from the Church of  England  church  she  attends  with  her
       family and outside, and regards herself as British. I  find  if  she
       were removed from the UK this would interfere with her  private  and
       family life, but that as she does  not  qualify  under  any  of  the
       Immigration Rules this would be in accordance with the law.

   34. Following the guidance in MA Pakistan given her period of  residence
       I find that her best interests are to remain  in  the  UK  with  her
       family because she has put down and developed social,  cultural  and
       educational links to the UK which would make  it  highly  disruptive
       for her to be required to leave given her lack of  any  relationship
       to her country of nationality, Nigeria. Again in accordance with  MA
       Pakistan and s117D and s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
       Asylum Act 2002 I find that it would not be reasonable to expect her
       to leave for very similar reasons to those given  for  her  brother,
       the third claimant. Her parents conduct gives no powerful reasons to
       the contrary given they have been law abiding and  have  contributed
       positively to the community in the UK and she has no actual links to
       Nigeria or Nigerian society which would make it reasonable  for  her
       to go there. In these circumstances I find  that  it  would  not  be
       proportionate for the fourth claimant to be required to leave.

   35. The findings in relation to the third and fourth claimants  lead  to
       the conclusion that the second claimant is  entitled  to  remain  in
       accordance with s.117B  (6)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002. I find that the second claimant has a  genuine  and
       subsisting parental relationship with both of  these  children,  who
       are both  qualifying  children  under  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 having lived  continuously  in  this
       country for more than seven years. The second  claimant  clearly  is
       their biological father named on their birth certificates, he  lives
       with them, and is actively involved with their upbringing.  For  the
       reasons set  out  above  (which  include  reference  to  the  second
       claimant's conduct)  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
       children to leave the UK.

   36. Lastly I must turn to the situation  of  the  fifth  claimant  on  a
       consideration outside of the Immigration Rules. I find that there is
       a compelling matter to consider in this way as it is argued that the
       fifth claimant, whilst  being  20  years  old,  has  a  family  life
       relationship with the other claimants who I have  found  qualify  to
       remain in the UK. It was accepted by the Secretary of State on  page
       2 of 3 of his refusal letter at page 29 of the bundle  that  he  had
       such a  relationship  with  his  siblings  and  parents  (the  other
       claimants) in March 2015. Mr Avery has suggested  that  this  is  no
       longer be the case as the fifth claimant has started university, and
       lives in university halls during term time now. However I find  that
       he remains emotionally and financially dependent on  the  first  and
       second claimants who continue to pay for  his  education  and  other
       expenses.  The  fifth  claimant  returns  to  the  family  home   in
       university holidays and I  find  has  continuing  intense  dependent
       emotional family life relationships with  his  parents  and  younger
       siblings. He intends to return to that home  when  he  finishes  his
       degree and I find that he remains an integral part of  this  family.
       Drawing on the comments in AP (India) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  89  at
       paragraph 45 and 51 I have no hesitation in finding  he  has  family
       life with the other claimants. Clearly if he were to have  to  leave
       the UK this family life  would  be  interfered  with  as  the  other
       claimants will remain in this country, as it is  not  reasonable  to
       expect  them  to  leave.  This  interference  would  however  be  in
       accordance with the law as he is not entitled to  remain  under  the
       Immigration Rules.

   37. When considering the  proportionality  of  this  interference  I  am
       guided by s.117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
       2002. The fifth claimant speaks fluent  English,  is  not  currently
       financially independent but has good prospect of being  so  when  he
       finishes his degree as he is doing a vocationally orientated  course
       in manufacturing engineering and is in no way financially reliant on
       the British state.  I can give little weight to his private life  as
       it has been formed whilst he has been precariously present, but I am
       not prohibited from giving significant weight  to  his  family  life
       relationships as they were not formed whilst he  was  unlawfully  in
       the UK. I must give significant weight as a primary consideration to
       the best interests of his brother and sister, the third  and  fourth
       claimants, who have close sibling relationships  with  him  and  who
       would therefore naturally be upset if he were not able to live  with
       them. I also give consideration to the family history of this  young
       man. He lost his natural father in the civil war in Sierra Leone; he
       then lived with his mother as a refugee in Gambia  and  with  family
       friends before being able to join the family in the UK. He  has  not
       had an easy family life until coming to the UK. Whilst giving weight
       to the need for effective immigration control and acknowledging  the
       important public interest in that regard I find  that  it  would  be
       disproportionate to remove the fifth claimant.

Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision with no findings of fact preserved.

   3. The appeal is remade allowing the  appeals  of  the  first  and  third
      claimants under the Immigration Rules,  and  the  second,  fourth  and
      fifth claimants on human rights grounds.


Signed: Fiona Lindsley                       Date: 10th October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


Annex A: Error of Law Decision



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

    1. The first claimant is a citizen of Sierra Leone born on  9th  January
       1975. The second claimant is her husband and a  citizen  of  Nigeria.
       They married in  Gambia  in  2003.  The  other  claimants  are  their
       children: the third and fifth claimants are citizens of Sierra  Leone
       and the fourth claimant is a citizen of Nigeria. The first and  fifth
       claimants left Sierra Leone in 1999 and went as refugees  to  Gambia.
       The fifth claimant was born on 1st November 1995, and so  is  now  20
       years old.

    2. The first claimant entered the UK on 16th June 2006 as a student. The
       third claimant was born in the UK on 5th February 2007 (and so now is
       9 years old). The second and fifth claimants entered as dependents of
       the first claimant on 14th December 2007.  The  fourth  claimant  was
       born in in the UK on 9th October 2009 (and so now is 6 years old).

    3. The claimants have all been continuously lawfully resident in the  UK
       with the first claimant being present with leave as a Tier 4  student
       migrant and then as a Tier 1 post study work migrant and the rest  as
       her dependents. On 23rd January 2015 the claimants applied to  remain
       in the UK on the basis of their family and private lives in the UK.

    4. This application was refused on the 10th March  2015.   Their  appeal
       against the decision was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal  in
       a determination promulgated on the 9th December 2015: the appeals  of
       the third and fifth claimants being  allowed  under  the  Immigration
       Rules and those of  the  other  claimants  on  human  rights  grounds
       outside of those Rules under Article 8 ECHR.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Brunnen on the basis that firstly it was arguable that the First-tier
       Tribunal judge had erred in law in determining the appeals under  the
       Immigration Rules as insufficient reasons were given  why  the  third
       claimant could not be reasonably expected to leave the UK and why the
       fifth claimant would face very significant obstacles to  integration.
       Secondly it was said to be arguable that no  compelling  reasons  had
       been identified for allowing  the  appeals  of  the  other  claimants
       outside of the Immigration Rules and in finding that the  immigration
       status of the claimants had not been precarious.

    6. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.



Submissions

    7. Mr Richardson accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
       in stating that  the  claimant's  immigration  status  had  not  been
       precarious during their stay in the UK,  however  this  was  only  an
       error in relation to decisions regarding the adult claimants  outside
       of the Immigration Rules, and, he argued, was ultimately not material
       as if the decisions made in  respect  of  the  child  claimants  were
       correct there would be no public interest in removing the parents. He
       did not therefore  concede  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  any
       material errors of law.

    8. Mr Richardson did not accept that the decision  in  relation  to  the
       child claimants was defective. He maintained that it was  proper  for
       the First-tier Tribunal to have placed reliance on what was  said  by
       the head teacher of St John Divine Primary School in relation  to  it
       not being reasonable to expect the third claimant to  leave  the  UK.
       The  decision  in  relation  to  the  fifth  claimant   having   very
       significant obstacles to integration was also  sufficient  argued  at
       paragraph 25 and elsewhere.

    9. Mr Richardson also brought to the attention of the Tribunal the  fact
       that the first claimant had now been lawfully present in the  UK  for
       more than 10 years. It was clear from the immigration history summary
       provided by the Secretary of State  in  her  bundle  that  the  first
       claimant entered the UK with entry clearance as  a  student  on  16th
       June 2006, and this is reflected on the passport copies at  pages  B1
       and B2 of the Secretary of State's bundle.

   10. Mr Richardson and Mr Tarlow  were  in  agreement  that  it  would  be
       appropriate for the case to be adjourned if a material error  of  law
       were found for reconsidered by the Secretary of State  of  the  first
       claimant's case to remain in the  UK  under  paragraph  276B  of  the
       Immigration Rules. It was agreed that if the matter were relisted  at
       an available date from September  2016  this  would  give  sufficient
       opportunity for this to take place.

   11. Mr Tarlow relied upon the grounds of appeal. In these  it  is  argued
       that the third claimant's appeal  was  allowed  on  insufficient  and
       subjective evidence provided by the head teacher regarding the impact
       of the removal on this claimant and giving  improper  weight  to  his
       education in the UK in the light of what was said in EV (Philippines)
       & Ors v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

   12. It is also argued that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  errs
       at paragraph 25 as it asserts that the fifth claimant had no links to
       Sierra Leone because he had left at 2/3 years old,  and  ignores  the
       fact that this claimant lived in Gambia between 1999 and 2010, as set
       out in the refusal letter, and would therefore  have  links  to  that
       country.

   13. It is argued that there were no compelling reasons  to  consider  the
       appeal outside of the Immigration Rules for the other claimants,  and
       in any case the decision is flawed as it treats  them  as  not  being
       precariously resident and their  ability  to  speak  English  and  be
       financially independent as determinative factors (at paragraph 30  of
       the decision) contrary to the ratio in AM (S.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT
       0260.

Conclusions

   14. I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  materially  in  law  in
       determining the appeal for the following reasons.

   15. Adequate reasons are not given in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  for  finding  that  the  third  claimant  qualified   under
       paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules  on  the  basis  it
       would not be reasonable for the third claimant to leave the  UK,  and
       for  the  finding  that  the  fifth  claimant  qualified  under   the
       Immigration Rules with reference to paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi)  on  the
       basis that  there  would  have  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
       integration in the country to which he would be removed.

   16. There is no decision as to whether the claimants have  any  remaining
       rights to live in Gambia, a country in which the  first,  second  and
       fifth claimant lived historically for a considerable period of  time.
       It is not clear whether the claimants could all live as a  family  in
       Sierra Leone or in Nigeria given three  hold  citizenship  of  Sierra
       Leone and two of Nigeria. There needed to  be  reasoned  findings  on
       these issues, and then for the First-tier Tribunal  to  consider  the
       circumstances the third  and  fifth  claimants  would  face  in  each
       country to which they would be entitled  to  go,  with  reference  to
       which other claimants would be admitted to each country with them.

   17. So whilst information about the third claimant's integration  in  the
       UK and regarding any need to remain at his current particular  school
       is relevant to whether it would be reasonable to expect him to  leave
       the UK this is only one aspect of the  equation.  Consideration  must
       also be given to  the  circumstances  he  would  face  in  the  other
       countries where he would be entitled to go with  his  family.  Whilst
       weight can properly be given to the opinion of a primary school  head
       teacher, who will in all probability know a child in his school well,
       the letter in this particular case also failed to provide a  reasoned
       or detailed explanation as to why  continuity  of  education  was  so
       important to the third claimant's social development and his reaching
       his potential. If there have been problems in this respect then these
       needed to be set out.

   18. The evidence relied upon in relation to the fifth  claimant  is  even
       more sparse. The test under the Immigration Rules in his case focuses
       solely on integration abroad. Whilst not having been in Sierra  Leone
       since the age of three years might make  such  integration  difficult
       without some analysis of the situation with  family,  friends,  work,
       studies and other factors relating to circumstances in the country of
       destination a lawful and sufficiently reasoned decision that  he  met
       the test under the Rules simply cannot be made.  As  indicated  above
       the issue of whether this claimant could also be removed to and  live
       in Gambia, and which family members might be permitted  to  be  there
       with him, is also unanswered. It is also unclear whether it was found
       that this claimant has an Article 8  ECHR  family  life  relationship
       with  his  parents  and  siblings  (as  opposed   to   private   life
       relationships). This in turn might have a bearing on whether he would
       face such issues with integration aboard and needed to be considered.



   19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal regarding the  first,  second
       and fourth claimants was clearly predicated on the success under  the
       Immigration Rules of the third and fifth claimants which I have found
       to be unlawful by virtue of insufficient reasoning. The decision also
       erroneously states, as accepted by all parties, that  the  status  of
       the claimants has not been precarious, when considering  the  appeals
       outside of the Immigration Rules  at  paragraph  28  and  30  of  the
       decision, when clearly their immigration  status  whilst  lawful  has
       been precarious in  accordance  with  the  decision  in  AM  (S.117B)
       Malawi.

   20. I accept the parties' proposal that having found material  errors  of
       law it  is  appropriate  to  adjourn  the  remaking  hearing  so  the
       Secretary of State can provide a decision in relation  to  the  first
       claimant under paragraph 276B of  the  Immigration  Rules  given  her
       period of lawful residence in the UK.

   21. The claimants should now immediately consider with  their  solicitors
       whether there are any additional documents that need to  be  provided
       to the Secretary of State for  this  consideration  by  reference  to
       these Rules as the application was made 18 months  ago  and  may  not
       provide all of the documents  needed  for  instance  in  relation  to
       demonstrating knowledge of the English language and life in  the  UK,
       and to the other requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  Appendix  FM-SE
       (particularly with respect  of  funds)  with  respect  to  the  other
       claimants who may wish to be considered as dependents  if  the  first
       claimant were granted indefinite leave to remain.



Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision with no findings of fact preserved.

   3. The remaking hearing is adjourned.




  Directions

   1. The Secretary of State is to make a decision as to whether  the  first
      claimant qualifies for leave to remain under  paragraph  276B  of  the
      Immigration Rules, and if so whether the other  claimants  qualify  to
      remain as her dependents under Appendix FM or other provisions of  the
      Immigration Rules by the 1st September 2016.

   2. Seven days prior to the remaking hearing date  the  claimants  are  to
      file on the Tribunal and serve on the Secretary of State a  bundle  of
      relevant materials relating to the legal tests that need to be met  at
      the next hearing and to exclude  extraneous  and  duplicate  materials
      from their bundle.

   3. The remaking hearing is adjourned to the first  available  date  after
      12th September 2016.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date: 21st June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley












