
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/11676/2015
                                                               IA/11677/2015
                                                               IA/11678/2015
                                                               IA/11679/2015
                                                               IA/11680/2015
                                                               IA/11681/2015
                                                               IA/11682/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 2nd August 2016                     |on 16th August 2016                 |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               MMAM and OTHERS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellants:    Mr M Shoaib, of Shoaib Associates
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants appeal against a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Farrelly, promulgated on 3rd November 2015.

 2. The grounds  state  that  "the  first  and  perhaps  one  of  the  more
    significant material errors of law" is the  fact  that  throughout  the
    determination the  judge  refers  to  the  appellant  rather  than  the
    appellants which suggests a primary focus on the first appellant, which
    "must be an error where one of the minor children potentially qualifies
    for leave ... under paragraph  276ADE  [of  the  Immigration  Rules]  /
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act".

 3. This is nitpicking.  The judge notes in his first  paragraph  that  the
    appellants are husband, wife and their five children, and says that for
    convenience he will refer to the first appellant as the appellant.   He
    directs himself on the law regarding the best interests of children  at
    paragraphs 31 to 34, and  on  section  117  and  further  case  law  at
    paragraphs 35 to 39.  His determination is very much concerned with the
    children's position and with the seven year yardstick.  The grounds  on
    this point are not well-founded.

 4. The grounds assert at paragraph 5 the judge speculated at paragraph 19,
    where he thought that the first appellant's reluctance to claim  asylum
    was because it would affect his ability to work.


 5. It had been put to the appellant in  cross-examination  that  he  would
    claim asylum if the present proceedings were unsuccessful.


 6. The grounds say that the judge's comment is speculative and unsupported
    by evidence or reasons.  However, the appellants elected not to make  a
    direct protection claim but to  submit  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain, outside the Immigration Rules, on the grounds that  there  were
    no flights to Libya, and that they should be allowed to  remain  "until
    the circumstances of their home country are improved and  safe".   They
    based their arguments in the First-tier Tribunal on Articles 3 and 8 of
    the ECHR.  The case was poorly focused  but  largely  based  on  travel
    difficulties, general risk, and the interests  of  the  children.   The
    grounds show no legal error in the judge's comment that a factor in the
    first appellant's reluctance to claim asylum was that it  would  affect
    his ability to work.  The point is so obvious that it would  have  been
    naive to reach any other conclusion.


 7. The grounds found on Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office  advice  against
    travel to Libya.  However, travel advice to British citizens is a  long
    way from a statement that all Libyans are entitled to refugee status in
    the UK; a primary case which the appellants did not elect to make.


 8. Mr Shoaib's final submission was that the appellant  could  not  return
    because having once lectured in a university in Libya on  the  ideology
    of the former regime, he would be at risk.  That is precisely an asylum
    claim, which he has so far declined to advance in the prescribed  form.
    The reason his case is  difficult  to  disentangle  is  because  he  is
    playing it as a tactical and procedural game, at least verging on abuse
    of a system designed to give international protection to those who need
    it.

 9. The children in this family are being brought up in a  highly  educated
    and caring background.  The submissions on their behalf,  both  in  the
    FtT and in the UT, amount  to  the  proposition  that  no  family  with
    children may be expected to return to Libya,  because  of  the  general
    difficulties there.  There is nothing in the grounds which  amounts  to
    more than a generalised disagreement with the judge's final assessment,
    which took full account of the best  interests  of  all  the  children,
    including the one who meets the seven year yardstick.


10. If any Libyan family may reasonably be expected  to  return,  this  one
    can.

11. The appellants do not show that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge materially errs in any point of law.  That decision shall stand.

12. Anonymity was granted in the FtT.  The point was not addressed  in  the
    UT.  The order is maintained.  Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
    member of their family.  This direction applies both to  the  appellant
    and to the respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.


            [pic]


            15 August 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




