
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11481/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 August 2013                             |On 3 September 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                    V K d
                           (anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal issued on 26 June 2013 dismissing his appeal against  the
    respondent's decision made on 27 March 2013 refusing him further  leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 Student and making a decision to remove him under
    s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Tanzania, born on 7 May 1989.   He  first
    arrived in the UK on 28 August 2007 with leave to enter  as  a  student
    until 30 September 2011.  He was subsequently granted further leave  to
    remain in the same capacity until 5  January  2013.   He  then  made  a
    further application for leave to remain as a Tier 4  Student.  However,
    his application was refused because he failed to meet the  requirements
    of Appendix A (Attributes) as he provided no evidence to show  that  he
    had been assigned a CAS and no valid CAS was found.   Further,  he  did
    not provide any evidence that he had reached the required  standard  of
    English.  As he could not meet the requirements of Appendix A,  he  was
    unable to meet the requirements of Appendix C.  For these  reasons  his
    application was dismissed.

3.   The appellant appealed against this decision and asked for  his  appeal
    to be determined without a hearing.  The judge found that the appellant
    had failed to submit a valid CAS  letter  or  evidence  permitting  the
    respondent to access the Pearson website data for verification  of  his
    test scores in relation to the English language criteria.  She rejected
    an argument that the respondent  should  have  applied  her  policy  on
    evidential flexibility, commenting that it was up to the  appellant  to
    ascertain the steps he had to take to meet the  specified  criteria  in
    the rules.  He had said that his college would submit a CAS letter  but
    a later explanation showed that his college could never have issued one
    to him.  The judge went on to consider article 8  but  found  that  the
    appellant had not shown that his human rights were engaged or  that  he
    had any right to remain in the UK to take any  further  courses.  There
    was no evidence that his proposed course was part  of  a  qualification
    which he was close to completing.  She dismissed  the  appeal  on  both
    immigration and human rights grounds.

The Grounds and Submissions

4.   In his grounds of appeal the appellant argued that the judge failed  to
    consider his private life as he had  invested  money  to  complete  his
    studies in the UK and that the decision was not in accordance with  the
    law.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had
    failed to deal with the removal decision under the 2006  Act  and  that
    although the grounds submitted in support by the appellant on the other
    issues were brief, they could be argued in addition to the issue  about
    the lawfulness of the removal decision.

6.   There has been  no appearance  by or on  behalf  of  the  appellant  at
    this hearing.  He wrote to the Tribunal on 21 August 2013 asking for an
    adjournment due to his health problems but adding that if  the  hearing
    was not adjourned, the appeal should be decided  on  the  papers.   His
    application was refused as there were no details of the nature  of  his
    claimed ill-health and it was not supported by a medical certificate or
    other evidence.  In any event, the appellant appeared  to  accept  that
    the appeal could properly be dealt with in his absence.

7.   We are satisfied that there is no reason why the  appellant  could  not
    have attended this hearing if he had wished  to  do  so  and  that  the
    proper course is for us to proceed with the hearing.

8.   Ms Kiss conceded that the judge had erred in law  by  failing  to  deal
    with the removal decision and in the light of the judgment of the Court
    of Appeal in the Secretary of State v Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ  512  that
    decision was not in accordance with the law.   However,  she  submitted
    that the judge had not  erred  in  law  in  respect  of  the  variation
    decision.  The judge had dealt with the appellant's  private  life  and
    reached a decision properly open to her.

The Error of Law

9.   We are satisfied that the judge erred in law by failing  to  deal  with
    the removal decision.  In the light of Secretary of State v Ahmadi that
    decision was not in accordance with the law and is  unaffected  by  the
    change in the law amending the provisions of s.47  in  the  Crimes  and
    Courts Act 2013, which only has prospective effect.

10.  The appellant also sought to challenge the judge's decision  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision to refuse him further leave to  remain.
    We are not satisfied that there is  any  substance  in  these  grounds.
    Further leave was properly refused under the Rules. The  appellant  did
    not supply a CAS and no CAS reference number  was  submitted  with  the
    application.  In addition there was no evidence to  establish  that  he
    met the required standard of English.  The judge was right to find that
    this was not a case where the policy on evidential flexibility had  any
    application and that the appellant knew that he could  never  meet  the
    criteria of the application he had made.

11.  The grounds assert that the judge failed to consider his  private  life
    as he had spent a considerable sum of money to complete his studies but
    these issues were dealt with in [21]-[24] of the judge's decision.  She
    was entitled to comment that the appellant had entered as a student  in
    the knowledge that his leave to remain was temporary and  dependent  on
    him being a student of a recognised institution taking a valid  course.
    In the light of the judge's findings of fact, an appeal had no prospect
    of success on article 8 grounds.

12.  In summary, although the judge erred in law by  failing  to  find  that
    the removal decision was not in accordance with the law,  her  findings
    on the variation decision were properly open to her for the reasons she
    gave.



Decision

13.  The First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  relation  to  the  removal
    decision and we set aside her decision in that respect  only.   We  re-
    make that decision by finding that it was not in  accordance  with  the
    law and therefore  remains  to  be  re-made  by  the  respondent.   The
    decision dismissing the variation appeal stands.

14.  No application has been made to vary or discharge the  anonymity  order
    made by the First-tier Tribunal and that order stands.





Signed                                  Date: 3 September 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

