
IAC-HW-MP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11363/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 April 2015                     | On 21 April 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               MR AHMED OUHIDA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although the Secretary of State  is  strictly  the  appellant  to  this
    appeal I have, for the sake  of  consistency,  continued  to  call  the
    parties by their original designations in the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    Secretary of State thus continues to be called the respondent.

2.   The Secretary of State  has  appealed,  with  permission,  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal promulgated  on  23  December
    2014 wherein he allowed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's
    refusal to grant him a residence card as the spouse of an EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in  the  UK.   The  appellant's  wife  is  his
    sponsor, Ugne Jakiene, who is a Lithuanian national and it would appear
    that they went through a marriage ceremony, by proxy, in  Lithuania  on
    16 April 2012.

3.   At the  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lal  heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant and from Ms Jakiene,  as  well  as  from  a
    friend who knew them both.  The judge at [15] "found their evidence  to
    be clear, consistent and  given  without  hesitation  and  overall  the
    Tribunal found them to be credible and compelling  as  witnesses".   At
    [17] he found the relationship to be a  durable  one  and  allowed  the
    appeal.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 9 February 2015  primarily  on  the
    basis that the judge had failed to consider, in relation to  the  proxy
    marriage, the Tribunal decisions in Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU  law)
    [2014] UKUT 24 and TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana  [2014]  UKUT
    00316 which has held that the recognition of  a  proxy  marriage  rests
    upon recognition of  the  marriage  by  the  Member  State  of  the  EU
    national, in this case Lithuania.  No evidence of  Lithuanian  law  had
    been produced in the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   In his submissions before me,  Mr  Tarlow  referred  to  the  cases  of
    Kareem and TA.  The judge should have taken account of them.  There  is
    no reference in his decision to  Lithuanian  law,  nor  was  there  any
    evidence of Lithuanian law before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Although
    the appellant, in his Rule 24 reply, claimed that  the  proxy  marriage
    issue was raised too late by the respondent, the Tribunal was bound  to
    take account of established law in making its decision.

6.   Mr  Tarlow,  however,  made  it  clear  that  the  respondent  made  no
    challenge to the judge's finding that the appellant and Ms Jakiene were
    in a durable relationship.  That is not in issue.

7.   In reply Mr Nicholson argued  that  Kareem  and  TA  does  not  require
    expert evidence to be produced as to the law  of  the  EU  country.   I
    asked whether  there  was  any  expert  report  today  in  relation  to
    Lithuanian law and he told me that there was none.  I was referred to a
    document in the appellant's bundle (page A11) which was  a  translation
    of the Moroccan marriage certificate which had  been  endorsed  by  the
    Lithuanian Embassy in London  stating  that  "this  document  has  been
    legalised".  Precisely what that expression means was not explained but
    Mr Nicholson submitted that it was an indication  that  the  Lithuanian
    Embassy accepted the existence of the marriage.

8.   Having reserved my decision and having reviewed all the  documents  and
    submissions I  have  formed  the  view  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did contain an error of law such that its conclusion  must  be
    set aside.

9.   I cannot accept the submission of Mr Nicholson  that  Kareem  does  not
    require production of expert evidence as  to  the  law  of  the  Member
    State.  Paragraph 68(g) of the decision in Kareem provides as follows:

         "It should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
         the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
         the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
         evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof.   Mere
         production of legal materials from the EEA country or country where
         the marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because  they
         will rarely show how such law is understood  or  applied  in  those
         countries.  Mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will, for
         similar reasons, carry no weight."

10.  In my judgment, the mere fact that the copy  marriage  certificate  has
    been "legalised" by the London Embassy of Lithuania does not  begin  to
    approach the standard of evidence required by Kareem.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal decision must accordingly be set aside in  its  entirety  with
    but one exception.

11.  That exception is the finding by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at  [15]
    and [17] that the relationship between the appellant and Ms Jakiene  is
    a durable one and that  the  evidence  that  they  gave  in  the  first
    Tribunal  was  consistent,  clear  and  credible.   That  evidence   is
    preserved.  These findings were accepted by the respondent.

12.  In light of the above I must re-make the decision on the  evidence,  by
    holding that the appellant's appeal against the decision to  refuse  to
    recognise him as a  family  member  under  Regulation  7  of  the  2006
    Regulations must be dismissed.

13.  Regrettably the Secretary of State in her Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    did not consider whether or not the appellant qualified as an  extended
    family member under Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.  There  is
    now a finding that the appellant  and  Ms  Jakiene  are  in  a  durable
    relationship but  there  remains  a  discretion  on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  under  Regulation  8  and  the  application  must
    therefore be remitted to the Secretary of State for a  lawful  decision
    under Regulation 8.

Notice of Decision

14.  The First-tier Tribunal decision contained an error of law and  is  set
    aside in its entirety (save as to paragraph 11 above).  I  re-make  the
    decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal in relation to Regulation
    7 but the application is remitted to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  a
    lawful decision to be made in relation to Regulation 8(5).

15.  No anonymity direction has been requested and none is made.



Designated Judge David Taylor
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
20 April 2015

