
IAC-AH-SAR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11833/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 23rd January 2015                          |On 29th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                             MS KASHAF KHALIQUE
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Layoo, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 22nd November 1989.  The
    Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom on 30th January  2011  with
    leave to remain until 2nd November 2011.  She was subsequently  granted
    an extension of stay until 31st  January  2014,  such  extension  being
    granted on 6th September 2012.  The Appellant's original leave was as a
    Tier 4 Student and her application for further leave to remain  was  to
    enable her to complete her current course of study, fashion  design  at
    Williams College, Holborn.  On 24th December 2013 the Appellant applied
    for  variation  of  her  leave.   Her   leave   previously   had   been
    discretionary to allow her to remain to complete an educational  course
    which was due to end on 31st January.

 2. On 24th February 2014 the Appellant's application for an  extension  of
    leave was refused and in refusing  the  application  the  Secretary  of
    State gave consideration to the Appellant's family life under Article 8
    which it was noted from 9th July 2012 fell under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Wellesley-Cole sitting at Taylor House  on  15th  October
    2014.   In  a  determination  promulgated  on  27th  October  2014  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed.

 4. On 4th November 2014  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 12th December 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge J  M  Holmes
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Holmes  noted  that  international
    protection had been raised before the Immigration Judge and that it was
    arguable that the judge's approach to this issue was flawed.  He  noted
    that the only reference to  be  found  to  the  applicable  burden  and
    standard of proof was to be found in paragraph 3 of  the  determination
    and again in paragraph 13 where the judge had directed herself to apply
    the balance of probabilities.  Moreover the judge  considered  that  it
    was not  entirely  clear  from  paragraph  12  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was accepting the obligation to engage with that  Ground
    of Appeal or reject it.  He considered that arguably the whole approach
    to this ground was flawed.  In such  circumstances  he  considered  the
    other grounds could also be argued although the Appellant would need to
    clarify precisely how they are put as it was not clear from the grounds
    as  drafted  whether  it  was  proposed  to  advance  an  irrationality
    challenge with  the  appropriate  high  threshold  in  addition  to  an
    argument that relevant evidence was overlooked.

 5. On 18th December 2014 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  Those grounds contended  that  it  was  clear
    when the determination was read as a whole that the judge had correctly
    self-directed herself on the standard of proof in  the  appeal  against
    the refusal of further leave.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant appears by her instructed solicitor
    Ms Layoo.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting
    Officer Mr Kandola.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. The submissions are substantially  curtailed  by  an  admission  by  Mr
    Kandola that the determination fails to make proper  reference  to  the
    standard of proof and that as such the Secretary of State  is  prepared
    to accept that the determination is unsafe.  Further, he indicates that
    it is agreed that it is highly probable that prior to the matter coming
    back before the First-tier on the basis that I  remit  it,  that  there
    will be a claim made by the Appellant for asylum and  that  that  would
    cut down considerably the evidence that is required to be heard on this
    issue in the First-tier.  Ms Layoo indicates that she is  anxious  that
    this matter proceeds but fully understands the constraints  of  listing
    indicates that she is prepared for the matter to be remitted.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

10. Having given due consideration to this matter and considered fully  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, I am prepared to accept
    and endorse the view that there has been a failure to  engage  properly
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge with the correct and proper burden  of
    proof.  It may be a bland statement at paragraph 3 that the  judge  has
    failed to address the issues in this particular case.  To such extent I
    am satisfied that there is a material error of law and I set aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  None of the findings of fact  are
    to stand and I remit the matter to be heard  at  Taylor  House  on  the
    first available date.  I am advised that that date is 3rd July 2015 and
    an appropriate listing has been given accordingly.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  None of the findings of fact are to  stand.   The  matter
is remitted for hearing  on  3rd  July  2015  at  Taylor  House  before  any
Immigration Judge  other  than  Immigration  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  with  an
estimated length of two hours.  No interpreter is required.

Leave is granted to both parties to file and  serve  up-to-date  bundles  of
evidence upon which they seek to rely at least seven days pre-hearing.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 23rd January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed        Date 23rd January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


