
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11694/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 October 2015                    |On 12 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                         Miniru Israel Newton Adiss
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke - Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born 15 August 1980. He appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 16
    November 2010 that section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applies  to
    him. That appeal was dismissed by a panel of the FtT (Judge Jhirad  and
    Mr Baines  J.P.)  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  2  June  2011.
    Subsequently, in a decision made on, or around, 16  December  2011  UTJ
    Allen set aside the FtT's determination and directed  that  the  appeal
    would be  re-heard  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  That  process  has  been
    significantly delay,  primarily  as  a  consequence  of  the  appellant
    undertaking a course of further criminal offending, for  which  he  was
    eventually sentenced to a 15-year term of imprisonment  at  Snaresbrook
    Crown Court earlier this year. As a consequence the  appellant  is  not
    due to be released from criminal detention until 2028.

 2. The upshot of the appellant's recent lengthy criminal sentence is  that
    the current proceedings have become somewhat academic. For this  reason
    I was informed at  the  hearing  that  the  respondent  had  taken  the
    sensible approach of withdrawing her decision of 16  November  2010.  I
    have no doubt that she  will  revisit  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
    deportation when time is approaching for the appellant to  be  released
    from custody, or earlier if there are changes in the law requiring  her
    do so, but at this time - given that the appellant  still  has  a  very
    lengthy period of his prison sentence to serve - there is little to  be
    gained from accumulating the costs of ventilating such matters now.

 3. The Secretary of State does not require the  permission  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal to withdraw a decision she has made, even if such decision  is
    the subject of the appeal before the Tribunal. The  withdrawal  of  the
    decision underlying  the  appeal  does  not,  however,  extinguish  the
    jurisdiction of the Upper Tribunal under section  12(2)(b)(ii)  of  the
    2007 Act to re-make the decision in the appeal brought under  the  2002
    Act: See SM (Withdrawal of appeal decision effect) Pakistan [2014] UKUT
    64 (IAC).

 4. The SSHD does, however, require consent to withdraw her case before the
    Upper Tribunal, which Mr Clarke also sought. Having had  regard,  inter
    alia, to  the  matters  identified  in  paragraph  72  of  SM,  and  in
    particular  observing  that  (i)  the  appellant's  circumstances  have
    significantly changed since the last time the Secretary of  State  gave
    substantive consideration to his case (ii) that the respondent  should,
    ordinarily, be the primary decision maker in the immigration field  and
    (iii) there are no matters of general legal or procedural  guidance  to
    be addressed in this appeal, I conclude,  having  also  considered  the
    overriding objective in the 2008 Rules, that consent  should  be  given
    the Secretary of State to withdraw her case.

 5. Following the reasoning of the Tribunal in SM, I must formally  dispose
    of this appeal. The normal course in such  circumstances  would  be  to
    dismiss the appeal, unless there are matters which points  towards  not
    doing so (SM - paragraph 72). In all the circumstances  of  this  case,
    and having taken into account the reasons provided  by  the  respondent
    for withdrawing her decision, I conclude  that  it  is  appropriate  to
    formally dismiss the appellant's appeal.  I  make  clear  however  that
    this is no reflection on the merits of the case of either party and  is
    no more than a formality to bring these proceedings to an end.

 6.  Given  the  terms  of  Judge  Allen's  decision  setting   the   FtT's
    determination aside, it is prudent for me to emphasise that none of the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal are  to  remain  standing  and  the
    findings of that Tribunal should not be relied upon by either party  in
    the future.

 7. I carefully explained all of the above matters to the appellant at  the
    hearing. He indicated that he took no objection to the Tribunal  taking
    the course identified above.



Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  for  the  reasons
given by Judge Allen.

The appellant's appeal is formally dismissed, such  conclusion  having  been
reached without the Upper Tribunal having  given  substantive  consideration
to the merits of the appeal.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 9 October 2015

