



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11536/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31 March 2015                     |On 16 April 2015                      |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MRS SARITA TELLEZ MERUBIA
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms V Hutton of Counsel instructed by  Farani,  Javid,
                    Taylor Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  hereinafter
    referred to as the appellant in this determination against the decision
    of Judge Owens, a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, allowing the appeal
    of the respondent, a Bolivian national whose application for  issue  of
    residence card pursuant to Regulation 18A of the 2006 Regulations as  a
    third country national who has a derivative right  of  residence  under
    Regulation 15 A had been refused by the appellant.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge Coates,
    a Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal for reasons given in  his
    written decision dated 2 January 2015. The grounds of appeal challenged
    the decision of Judge Owens to allow the appeal of  Mrs  Sarita  Tellez
    Merubia under Article 8 finding on the basis of  the  evidence  adduced
    that the removal of respondent from the UK would be a  disproportionate
    interference with her private and family  life.  The  appellant,  Judge
    Owens found, was correct  in  refusing  the  application  made  by  the
    respondent under EEA Regulations. The reasons for that finding  are  in
    paragraph 33 of the determination. That finding has not been challenged
    by the respondent.

 3. The Secretary of State (Appellant in this appeal)  in  her  grounds  of
    appeal dated 17 November 2014 contends  that  in  allowing  the  appeal
    under Article 8 grounds the Judge erred  in  law  in  that  only  "part
    consideration" was given to the new Immigration Act 2014 when assessing
    proportionality, and the Judge did not as he should have  given  little
    weight  to  the  family  and  private  life  that  the  respondent  had
    established in the United Kingdom when she was here in  breach  of  her
    conditions. The grounds relied on the decisions in  Gulshan  [2013]UKUT
    00640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 Admin and contended that  Article
    8 assessment could only  be  carried  out  when  there  are  compelling
    circumstances not recognised by the Immigration  Rules.  The  appellant
    asserted that such compelling circumstances did not exist in this case.

 4. At the hearing before me, Ms Fijiwala representing the appellant  asked
    that she be permitted to amend the grounds  upon  which  she  had  been
    granted permission to appeal. When asked why such application  had  not
    been made in advance of the hearing, she was not able  to  provide  any
    explanation. When asked what amendment she  was  seeking  to  make,  it
    became clear that  her  amendments  to  the  grounds  went  far  beyond
    "amendment" and in effect meant  "substitution"  of  the  grounds  upon
    which permission had  been  granted.  Bearing  in  mind  that  if  that
    proposed substitution were allowed, it would necessitate an adjournment
    of the hearing to enable me to first consider whether  the  substituted
    grounds merited permission and second, if permission were granted,  the
    respondent would  need  to  prepare  her  case  in  the  light  of  the
    "substituted grounds". In the  interests  of  justice  and  fairness  I
    refused the request from Miss Fijiwala first because no reason had been
    advanced  for  the  last  minute  request  and  further  delay  in  the
    resolution of this appeal was unjustified.

 5. I then invited Miss Fijiwala to address me on the  grounds  upon  which
    she had been granted permission to appeal drawing her attention to  the
    grounds submitted by D Neal of the Home Office and  the  decision  made
    thereupon by Judge Coates on 2 January  2015.  Miss  Fijiwala  drew  my
    attention to paragraphs 41 and 54 of the determination and argued  that
    the contents thereof showed  that  the  Judge  had  given  insufficient
    consideration to the status of the appellant as an over stayer. I  read
    out paragraph 54 of the determination, which says, "In  this  case  the
    main countervailing factor is that the appellant  remained  in  the  UK
    unlawfully after her leave to remain  expired  in  2006  and  that  she
    entered into her  relationship  at  a  time  when  she  knew  that  her
    immigration status was precarious. There is no suggestion that she  has
    an appalling immigration history, has made spurious applications,  used
    deception  or  absconded.  Neither   does   she   have   any   criminal
    convictions." and sought her comment. I also drew her attention to  the
    contents of paragraph 55, which says, "I have also taken  into  account
    the wording of section 117B (6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. This states that in the case of a person not liable to
    deportation (such as the appellant) that the public interest  does  not
    require the person's  removal  where  the  person  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child and  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United  Kingdom."  I
    also pointed out that in the next paragraph the Judge had said, "I find
    that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  her
    son who I find is  a  qualifying  child  because  he  is  British".  Ms
    Fijiwala said she did not wish to  advance  any  further  arguments  to
    support her grounds. She agreed that the authorities relied upon in the
    grounds did not necessarily reflect the  latest  understanding  of  the
    jurisprudence and/or their relevance to the facts  of  this  particular
    case where a young British child was involved.

 6. Ms Hutton representing the respondent described  the  determination  of
    Judge Owens as impeccable.  She  drew  my  attention  to  her  skeleton
    argument and argued that the Judge had taken full and proper account of
    all the relevant factor and had made clear  and  reasoned  findings  of
    fact. She prayed in aid the principles set out by the decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Dube (ss 117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC).  It  states
    inter alia sections 117A -117 D do not represent any  kind  of  radical
    departure from or "override" of previous case law on Article 8  so  far
    as concerns the need for a structured approach. In particular, they  do
    not disturb the need for judges to ask themselves  the  five  questions
    set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. Sections 117A - 117 D are essentially
    a further elaboration of Razgar's question 5 which is essentially about
    proportionality and justifiability."Ms Hutton after taking me through a
    number of paragraphs in the determination namely 52, 53, 54, 55, 56 and
    57 said that the grounds relied upon by the appellant were no more than
    a disagreement with the Judge on the  facts  found.  She  urged  me  to
    consider and accept the points made in  paragraph  40  of  her  written
    skeleton argument dated 30 March 2015. Ms Fijiwala had nothing more  to
    say.

 7. I announced at the hearing that I do not find any error of law  in  the
    determination of Judge Owens. I accept Ms Hutton's' description of  the
    determination as being "impeccable". Judge  Owens  has  given  due  and
    proper consideration to all the relevant  factors  including  the  best
    interests of a British citizen child and has taken full account of  all
    the relevant jurisprudence as is  evident  from  paragraph  38  of  the
    determination.

 8. This appeal by the Secretary of State  is  accordingly  dismissed.  The
    decision of Judge Owen to allow the appeal must therefore stand.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Date:    13 April 2015


Anonymity Direction:
Such direction is not necessary or appropriate in this case.


The decision of Judge Owen regarding fee must stand.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

