
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/11300/2014
                                                               IA/11309/2014
                                                               IA/11315/2014
                                                               IA/11319/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 September 2014                          |On 3 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                               AHTASHAM AZHAR
                               SADAF AHTASHAM
                               MUHAMMAD TALHA
                               FATIMA AHTASHAM
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Azhar - the first appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The  appellants,  nationals  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
  Tribunal against the decision of  the  respondent  to  refuse  the  first
  appellant's application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student
  migrant and the applications of the second, third and  fourth  appellants
  (his wife and two children) for leave to remain as his dependants. First-
  tier Tribunal Judge Ford dismissed the  appeal  and  the  appellants  now
  appeal with permission to this Tribunal.

2. The background to this appeal as  accepted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
  Judge is that the first appellant applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  21
  February 2013 and the respondent wrote to him on 9 June 2013 to tell  him
  that his College's  licence  had  been  revoked  and  that  the  CAS  was
  therefore no longer valid. He was given a period of 60 days to  submit  a
  fresh CAS in line with the Respondent's policy. Within the  60  days  the
  appellant submitted a fresh CAS but on 9  December  2013  the  respondent
  wrote to the appellant informing him that the new sponsor  also  had  its
  licence revoked and giving him a  further  60  days  to  find  a  another
  sponsor. The Judge accepted that this letter was sent by  the  respondent
  to the appellant's previous address which had been  vacated  on  31  July
  2013. The Judge accepted that the appellant had informed  the  respondent
  of this new  address  in  the  application  form  dated  24  August  2013
  submitted  with  the  second  CAS.  However  the  Judge  found  that  the
  respondent also sent this letter to the appellant's then  representatives
  who did not pass it on to the appellants until 3 February 2014 after  the
  appellants had paid their outstanding fees.  The  Judge  considered  that
  this was unprofessional on the part of the  solicitors  who  should  have
  informed the appellants about the respondent's correspondence. The effect
  was that the appellants only had four days in which  to  identify  a  new
  sponsor and secure a new CAS. The first appellant managed to  do  so  but
  did not submit an up-to-date  bank  statement  and  the  application  was
  refused because the bank statement previously submitted was, by then, out-
  of-date by more than the requisite 28 days.

3. The Judge dismissed the appeal because she was prevented (by section  85A
  of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002) from taking  account
  of the up-to-date bank statements submitted  at  the  appeal.  The  Judge
  decided that  Article  8  was  not  engaged  as  the  appellant  had  not
  demonstrated  that  there   were   any   exceptional   or   compassionate
  circumstances in the case.

4. The grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  contend  that  the  Judge
  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that   there   were
  exceptional circumstances in this case. Permission  was  granted  on  the
  basis that those grounds of appeal were arguable.

5. The appellant submitted a witness statement in  advance  of  the  hearing
  before me. In that he raised the issue of fairness given that the  letter
  of 9 December 2013 was not served on his correct  address  and  that  the
  representatives to whom the letter was sent were no longer acting for him
  at that time. As this issue had not been raised in the grounds of  appeal
  and the appellant was unrepresented before me I gave him the  opportunity
  to amend the grounds of appeal and he sought  permission  to  do  so.  Ms
  Everett had no objection and I granted permission to amend the grounds of
  appeal accordingly.

6. I was satisfied on the basis of the  appellant's  witness  statement  and
  the copy application form before me that the respondent had been informed
  of the appellant's new address with the fresh application in August 2013.
  Contrary to the appellant's witness statement it seems that at that  time
  he was represented by his then representatives although I accept that the
  relationship subsequently broke down. The failure of  the  respondent  to
  serve the 9 December 2013 letter on the appellant at the address  he  had
  put on the application form therefore resulted in unfairness to  him.  In
  failing to serve the notification to the appellant at his correct address
  the respondent failed to follow her own policy designed  to  address  the
  unfairness of the situation where a sponsor's  licence  is  revoked.  The
  failure to properly apply her policy rendered the  respondent's  decision
  not in accordance with the law. The Judge erred in  failing  to  consider
  this ground of  appeal.  Whilst  the  appellant  may  not  have  properly
  articulated this in this way, he  was  unrepresented  in  the  First-tier
  Tribunal and I am satisfied that the Judge was on notice  of  this  issue
  and that it was an obvious point.

7. In these circumstances I therefore set the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
  decision aside and remake it by  allowing  it  to  the  extent  that  the
  decision is not in accordance with  the  law  and  the  decision  remains
  outstanding before the Secretary of State.



Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

      I re-make the decision in the appeal by  allowing  it  to  the  extent
that it remains outstanding before the Secretary of State.



Signed
                       Date: 31 October 2014



A Grimes


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




