
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11634/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport      |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 25th February 2015                 |On 11th March 2015                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                             MISS FATOU NABANEH
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a female citizen of Gambia, born 11 March 1982.

   2. The appellant had sought further  leave  to  remain  by  reference  to
      Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.  That application was refused on
      14th February 2014 and at the same time a decision was made to  remove
      the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is  noted  that  the
      appellant's child (YB) made an application to remain at the same  time
      as the appellant.  That application was refused by the  respondent  at
      the same time as  the  decision  in  respect  of  the  appellant.   YB
      appealed to the First-Tier Tribunal, but a  judge  of  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal adjudged that the child had no valid appeal as the child  had
      no extant leave at the time of the application.

   3. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision and that appeal  came
      before Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Burnett sitting at Newport  in
      September 2014.  The  appellant  attended  and  gave  evidence.   Both
      parties were represented.   During  the  course  of  the  hearing  the
      appellant's representative conceded that the appellant could not  meet
      the requirements of the rules and the appeal proceeded upon the  basis
      that the appellant contended that she was entitled to succeed  on  the
      appeal upon the basis of Article 8 ECHR.

   4. In a determination  promulgated  on  6  October  2014,  Judge  Burnett
      dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

   5. The appellant then sought leave to appeal that decision.  Paragraph  6
      of the grounds suggests that the reasoning of Judge Burnett  were  not
      "sufficiently robust" to justify reaching the conclusion that  he  did
      on Article 8 ECHR.  It was submitted that  another  immigration  judge
      might have arrived at a different conclusion!

   6. There then followed five grounds seeking to challenge the decision  of
      Judge Burnett.  Ground 1 - alleged a material error in failing to give
      adequate reasons for not accepting that family life existed between YB
      and his grandmother.  Ground 2 - there was misdirection on  Article  8
      Case Law, in particular with regard to EV (Philippines).  Ground  3  -
      indicated a  decision  based  on  speculation  rather  than  evidence.
      Ground 4 - a failure to provide adequate reasons for the decision  (by
      reference to paragraphs 59 and 62 of the  determination)  and  finally
      Ground 5 - a failure  to  treat  YB's  best  interests  as  a  primary
      consideration.

   7. This application came before Judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal  Grant-
      Hutchinson who  granted  leave  to  appeal,  indicating  that  it  was
      arguable that Judge Burnett had made perverse or irrational findings.

   8. The respondent submitted a Rule 24 response arguing that the judge had
      directed himself appropriately and that he had carried out  a  careful
      assessment  of  all  material  issues,  and  had  concluded  that  the
      appellant and her child could  return  to  Gambia,  and  that  such  a
      finding was open to the judge.

   9. Hence the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

  10. In her submission Ms McCarthy relied upon the  grounds.   Firstly  the
      judge had failed to consider the depth of  evidence  relating  to  the
      relationship between YB and his grandmother, including the  amount  of
      time they spent together.  The grandmother had received child  benefit
      in respect of the child that was indicative  of  the  time  the  child
      spent  with  her.   The  findings  of  the  judge  were  against   the
      overwhelming evidence and his decisions were not reasoned.

  11. As to Ground 2, the judge had misdirected himself with  regard  to  MF
      (Nigeria).  That case was more akin to deportation  cases  than  cases
      such as the appellants.   His  conclusions  in  paragraph  60  of  the
      determination are flawed.  Family life with the grandmother could  and
      should continue.  All the evidence is that the appellant came  from  a
      traditional family and she would be stigmatised because  of  the  fact
      she had a child outside marriage.  The judge was  criticised  for  his
      comments in paragraph 56.

  12. As to Ground 4, the judge needed to consider the best interests of the
      child and should have noted that  he  appellant  was  not  an  illegal
      entrant.  The precarious nature of leave to remain should not apply to
      those with valid leave and  that  the  judge  had  given  insufficient
      weight to the evidence before him.

  13. As to Ground 5, Ms McCarthy again referred to errors in the evaluation
      of the best interests of the child.  The family in  Gambia  would  not
      accept him.  He is very young and could  not  maintain  communications
      with his grandmother.

  14. Ms Richards in his submission submitted that I should find no merit in
      the grounds.  The judge had taken full account of all the evidence and
      had  made  clear  findings  with  regard  to  grandmother's   evidence
      (paragraph 24).  He had clearly considered the grandmother's  position
      at paragraph 46 and was obliged to taken into account  the  effect  of
      Section 117 of the  2002  Act.   The  judge  had  reached  a  rational
      conclusion.

  15. The judge at paragraph 55 had considered the situation in  Gambia  and
      as to the best interests  of  the  child  the  determination  contains
      widespread consideration of those interests and Mr  Richards  referred
      me to paragraph 49.

  16. In a final response Ms McCarthy referred me to  paragraph  46  of  the
      determination  which  understated  the  evidence.   She   agreed   the
      determination did talk about the best interests of the child,  but  it
      is based more on speculation than on the evidence.

  17. At the end of the hearing I indicated I was reserving my determination
      which I now give with reasons.

  18. I find no material error  of  law  contained  within  Judge  Burnett's
      determination.  As in all cases the determination has to be read as  a
      whole and in doing so  it  is  clear  that  the  judge  reached  clear
      findings and the determination contained explanation as to  how  those
      findings were reached.

  19.  It  is  firstly  alleged  that  the  judge  did  not  give   adequate
      consideration (anxious scrutiny) of the evidence.  That is clearly not
      the case.  The main thrust  of  the  grounds  seeking  leave  (and  Ms
      McCarthy's submission) is that the judge disregarded the  evidence  of
      the grandmother.  However paragraphs 24 to 28 set out a discussion  on
      the evidence of the grandmother (and Mr  Lamin).   The  judge  details
      some of the evidence, but adds that the oral evidence was set  out  in
      the record of proceedings and had  been  taken  into  account  by  the
      judge.  When he says that I have no reason whatsoever to doubt that he
      did take it into account.

  20. The second ground alleges misdirection in respect of  Article  8  Case
      Law.  Again I disagree.  Paragraphs 44, 57, 58, 59, 60 and 61 all  set
      out the  relevant  case  law.   Whilst  MF  (Nigeria)  did  relate  to
      deportation cases, this fact is set  out  in  paragraph  60  by  Judge
      Burnett and the  final  two  sentences  of  that  paragraph  make  his
      conclusions very clear.  Despite having noted the concession that  the
      appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules the judge  did
      consider Article 8, but for the reasons given rejected the appellant's
      claim.  Despite the "complete code" point there was  consideration  of
      the appellant's case, but she did not succeed.

  21. As to Ground 3 alleging that the decision was based  upon  speculation
      rather than evidence, it is clear that the judge  did  not  speculate,
      but came to conclusions based upon the evidence and in particular  the
      evidence of the grandmother.  These comments also apply  to  Ground  4
      and given the judge's findings on other aspects of  the  case,  it  is
      hard to consider that the two jobs and  tax  paying  position  of  the
      appellant could have had any different effect on the outcome  of  this
      case.

  22. Finally with regard to the best interests of the child.  It  is  quite
      clear from the determination that the judge properly directed  himself
      with regard  to  that  issue.   Paragraph  49  sets  out  the  general
      statement and Mr Richards is correct that when read  as  a  whole  the
      determination is dominated by consideration with regard to  the  child
      YB.

  23. In short the judge properly directed himself with regard to the law by
      reference to the appropriate statute and to the relevant case law.  He
      fully acted with the evidence that was before him and he reached clear
      conclusions with adequate explanation.  The majority  of  the  grounds
      are merely expressions of disagreement with the findings made.

  24. As indicated above I find no material error of law and the appellant's
      appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


