
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11690/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 8 November 2016                  |On: 9 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               prahina pradhan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, born on 27 May 1989. She has been
      given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Pullig, dismissing her appeal against the respondent's  decision
      to refuse her application for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  on  human
      rights grounds.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  13  February  2010  with
      leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant until 29 February
      2012 and was granted further leave to remain on the same  basis  until
      31 December 2013 and again until 18 December 2014. On 17 December 2014
      she applied for further leave to remain on the basis  of  her  private
      life in the UK. Her application was refused by  the  respondent  on  5
      March 2015, on the basis that she  could  not  meet  the  criteria  in
      paragraph 276ADE(1) and that there were no  exceptional  circumstances
      justifying a grant of leave outside the immigration rules.

   3. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was  heard
      on 21 March 2016 in the First-tier Tribunal by Judge Pullig. The judge
      had regard to a letter from the appellant's  previous  representatives
      setting out the circumstances in which she had been badly let down  by
      three colleges with the result that she had spent a significant amount
      of money on college fees but had ended up with no qualifications.  The
      judge noted that it was not argued by or on behalf  of  the  appellant
      that she could meet the requirements of the immigration rules and that
      the application was therefore in effect under Article  8  outside  the
      rules. He found that there were compelling circumstances which  needed
      to be considered outside the immigration rules,  since  the  appellant
      had been the victim of the defaults of colleges, but he concluded that
      ultimately the respondent's decision was not disproportionate and that
      there was no breach of Article 8.

   4. The appellant then sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
      on the grounds that the judge had  failed  properly  to  consider  the
      issue of fairness and had failed to consider  that  discretion  should
      have been exercised in her favour for the purposes of section 86(3)(b)
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

   5. Permission to appeal was granted on 29 September 2016 on  the  grounds
      that the judge's conclusions, that there were compelling circumstances
      and that the grant of  further  leave  would  not  damage  immigration
      control,  were  arguably  inconsistent  with  his  finding  that   the
      respondent's decision was proportionate.

   6. There was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  at  the
      hearing before me. Mr Clarke made submissions, relying on the cases of
      AG and others (Policies;  executive  discretions;  Tribunal's  powers)
      Kosovo [2007] UKAIT 00082, Patel & Ors v Secretary of  State  for  the
      Home Department [2013] UKSC 72, Nasim and others (Article 8)  Pakistan
      [2014] UKUT 25 and EK (Ivory Coast) v The Secretary of State  for  the
      Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1517. He submitted that  the  Tribunal
      had no jurisdiction to consider the  exercise  of  discretion  by  the
      respondent in the circumstances and  that  the  judge  properly  found
      there to be no breach of Article 8.

Consideration and Findings

   7. The grounds assert at [15] that the judge erred by failing to consider
      that discretion should have been exercised in the appellant's  failure
      and rely on a statutory provision which  in  fact  no  longer  exists,
      having been repealed  by  the  Immigration  Act  2014.  As  Mr  Clarke
      submitted, the grounds do not, in any event, identify  any  particular
      policy under which discretion should have been  exercised  differently
      but merely refer to  a  vague  notion  of  discretion  and  completely
      misunderstand the judge's observation at [43]. The judge's observation
      at [43] was merely an expression of sympathy for the appellant  and  a
      hope that the respondent would also acknowledge the situation in which
      the appellant found herself, but goes no further than that. The  judge
      properly recognised that such circumstances did not give rise  to  any
      basis for granting leave, either within  or  outside  the  immigration
      rules.

   8. Contrary to the suggestion in the grant of permission,  the  reference
      by the judge at  [29]  to  compelling  circumstances  was  in  no  way
      consistent  with  a  finding  that  the  respondent's   decision   was
      disproportionate  or  that  there  were  compelling   or   exceptional
      circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the  rules.  Rather,
      his  reference  at   [29]   to   compelling   circumstances   was   an
      acknowledgment of the unfortunate circumstances in which the appellant
      found herself, such circumstances not being covered in any way by  the
      immigration rules, and it was on that basis that he then  went  on  to
      consider her  claim  outside  the  rules.  In  so  doing  he  properly
      considered  the  public  interest  factors  in  section  117B  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  accorded  them  the
      appropriate weight. At [36] he specifically considered the appellant's
      unfortunate situation as a result of the suspension  of  the  licences
      and problems faced by the  various  colleges  she  had  attended,  but
      properly found that that could not benefit her in the  proportionality
      consideration given in particular that that was not through any  fault
      of the respondent. The grounds assert at [9] that the judge  erred  in
      law in finding that the respondent was  not  at  fault,  but  such  an
      assertion  is  plainly  misconceived,  particularly  considering   the
      circumstances under which the appellant's studies  were  disrupted  by
      the various colleges, including a failed merger and financial  crisis,
      as set out in the Appendix to the judge's  decision  at  [4]  to  [9].
      There was clearly no unfairness on the part of the respondent and that
      is consistent with the decision in  EK  (Ivory  Coast)  in  which  the
      question of fairness was considered, albeit in different circumstances
      to the appellant's, but nevertheless where the respondent was  not  at
      fault.

   9. In so far as the grounds rely on the cases of Nasim  and  Patel,  they
      are also misconceived since both cases made it clear  that  Article  8
      was not a general dispensing power and the opportunity for  a  student
      to complete a course of study in the UK was  not  in  itself  a  right
      protected under Article  8.  Despite  the  fact  that,  as  the  judge
      accepted,  this  was  a  case  which  invoked  sympathy,   given   the
      appellant's financial outlay and inability to  continue  and  conclude
      her studies and achieve a qualification,  there  was  clearly  nothing
      particularly   compelling   or   exceptional   in   the    appellant's
      circumstances to justify a grant  of  leave  outside  the  immigration
      rules. The judge properly found that to be the case and,  contrary  to
      the suggestion in the grant of permission,  gave  clear  and  adequate
      reasons for so concluding. As the judge  properly  observed  at  [41],
      this was a case with minimal chance of success. The conclusion that he
      reached was entirely open to him on the evidence before  him  and  his
      decision to dismiss the appeal was lawfully and properly made.



DECISION

  10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law requiring it to be set aside. I do not  set
      aside the decision. The decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated:
