
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/11050/2013
                                                               IA/11044/2013
                                                               IA/11057/2013
                                                               IA/11369/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1 March 2016                          |On 18 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                   [m h b]
                                   [p s n]
                                    [n b]
                                   [m z b]
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr. P. Skinner, Counsel instructed by ATM Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. G. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  Designated
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Garratt,  promulgated  on  15  August
    2013, in which he dismissed [MHB]'s  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse to grant leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant.  The appeals of his wife, [PSN] and their children,  [NB]  and
    [MB], were dependent on his appeal.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted following the  decision  of  the  High
    Court to quash the decision of the Upper Tribunal  refusing  permission
    to appeal.  The grounds of appeal submit that the judge  erred  in  his
    approach to the documents from the bank.


 3. The first Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  oral  submissions
    from both representatives, following  which  I  reserved  my  decision,
    which I set out below with reasons.


Submissions


 4. Mr. Skinner submitted that there was no dispute  that  the  first  bank
    letter dated 7 September 2012 was defective.  The issue  was  what  was
    required of the Respondent in a case where such a letter did not comply
    with the  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules.   The  policy,  as
    codified by the Respondent in paragraph 245AA of the immigration rules,
    was that the Respondent could request a further letter,  and  the  time
    period given for this would be seven days.  In  the  Appellant's  case,
    the Respondent had only given the Appellant a period of three  days  in
    her letter of 4 March 2013.  The Respondent had failed  to  follow  her
    own policy as set out in the immigration rules.


 5. As a result of this failure to follow her own policy, the judge  should
    have found that the decision was not in accordance with  the  law,  and
    should have remitted it to the Respondent for  reconsideration  of  the
    documentary evidence.  It did not matter that the failure to follow the
    policy would not have made a difference.  The fact that the  Respondent
    had failed to follow her policy made her  decision  not  in  accordance
    with the law.


 6. The third letter from the bank dated 12 March 2013 did  not  reach  the
    Respondent until after the decision had been  made  and  could  not  be
    taken into account at that stage.  However, it could  have  been  taken
    into account by the Respondent had the application been remitted to the
    Respondent for reconsideration.  The judge therefore was  not  entitled
    to find that the failure of the Respondent to  follow  her  own  policy
    would not have made a difference.  He was not  entitled  under  section
    85A of the 2002 Act to take into account evidence which the  Respondent
    could have taken into account  had  he  remitted  the  application  for
    reconsideration.


 7. Mr. Skinner submitted that the judge was wrong to find that the  letter
    from the Respondent dated 4  March  2013  was  sent  by  email  to  the
    Appellant rather than by post.  I was referred to the letter  (page  31
    of the Appellant's bundle).  No email had  ever  been  adduced  by  the
    Respondent.  The only reference to an email was at the  bottom  of  the
    first page of the letter.  The Appellant had adduced  in  evidence  the
    envelope in which the letter had been sent and copies  of  the  sticker
    which indicated when the envelope had been signed for (pages 33  to  35
    of the Appellant's bundle).  The judge had not taken  account  of  this
    evidence.  The judge had not accepted that the  Respondent  would  have
    sent this letter by post, but this was a speculative finding not  based
    on the evidence which was before him.


 8. The period of time allowed by the Respondent in the letter  had  to  be
    sufficient to enable the Appellant to comply, but the letter  had  been
    received by the Appellant after the expiry of the  three  day  deadline
    set out in the letter.  The judge had found that the letter arrived  on
    8 March 2013.


 9. He submitted that, although it might be said by the Respondent that the
    Appellant had been given an opportunity to provide a further letter and
    that he had not done  so,  the  opportunity  had  to  be  fair  and  in
    accordance with the Respondent's own policy.


10. He further made submissions, and there was a discussion at the  hearing
    relating to paragraph [22] of the decision, which is  where  the  judge
    made  findings  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  documents  provided.
    However, I stated that I could see no reason why the judge had made the
    findings in paragraph [22], given that he was not  able  by  virtue  of
    section 85A of the 2002 Act to take into account the letter of 12 March
    2013.  Any findings as to the genuineness of the document were  otiose.
    Mr. Harrison agreed that he could see no reason for  the  judge  having
    made the findings in paragraph [22].  Mr. Skinner  submitted  that  the
    Tanveer Ahmed principles applied only to human rights and asylum cases,
    and the judge was wrong to apply them here.  He submitted that,  should
    I be  with  him  in  relation  to  the  first  ground,  and  remit  the
    application for reconsideration by the Respondent, it should be  stated
    that paragraph [22] should not be taken into account.  Mr. Harrison was
    in agreement that the findings in paragraph [22] should  not  be  taken
    into account by the Respondent, should  I  remit  the  application  for
    reconsideration.


11. In conclusion, Mr. Skinner submitted that the appropriate relief was to
    set the decision aside, and remake it, allowing it to the  extent  that
    the Respondent's decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law,  and
    remitting it to the Respondent for reconsideration.  He submitted that,
    had the First-tier Tribunal done this, a  fee  award  would  have  been
    made, and he asked that I make a fee award.


12. Mr. Harrison relied on the Rule 24 response.  He submitted that however
    the letter of 4 March 2013 had been despatched,  whether  by  email  or
    post, there were 18 days between the date of the letter and the date of
    the decision, 22 March 2013.  Whilst he appreciated the niceties of the
    policy, when given 18 days in which to provide further  documents,  not
    three or seven, it was churlish for the Appellant now to argue that the
    Respondent had not followed the requirements of the immigration  rules.
    The judge had considered all he needed to consider.  The Appellant  had
    not  provided  the  evidence  necessary  and  so  did  not   meet   the
    requirements of the rules.  The discussion as to whether the policy had
    been followed or not was immaterial as more than enough time  had  been
    granted.


13. If I was not with him, Mr. Harrison agreed that the remedy was to remit
    the application for reconsideration by the Respondent.


14. In response Mr. Skinner submitted that procedural fairness  should  not
    be characterised as a "nicety".  There was a bank letter which met  the
    requirements of the immigration rules dated 12 March 2013.  It had  not
    been received by the Respondent  prior  to  the  decision  having  been
    taken, but it was clearly material that  the  Appellant  had  a  letter
    which met the requirements of the immigration rules.  He submitted that
    had seven days been given to the Appellant instead of  only  three,  it
    was more likely that the letter would have reached the Respondent.


Error of law


15. It is accepted by the Appellant that the bank letter provided with  the
    application dated 7 September 2012 did not meet the requirements of the
    immigration rules.


16. The Respondent wrote to the Appellant by way of a letter dated 4  March
    2013.  I find that this letter does not comply  with  the  Respondent's
    own policy, as set out in the immigration rules themselves, to allow an
    applicant in the Appellant's position a period of seven days  in  which
    to provide evidence which meets the  requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules.  This letter states "Please note we are only able to accept  the
    documents received within UK Border Agency within  3  working  days  of
    this email."  Later it states "No further extension will  be  given  if
    the requested information is not provided within the three days".


17. Paragraph 245AA(b) provides:


    "(b) If the applicant has submitted specified documents in which:
           (i) Some of the documents in a sequence have been omitted (for
           example, if one bank statement from a series is missing);
           (ii) A document is in the wrong format (for example, if a letter
           is not on letterhead paper as specified); or
           (iii) A document is a copy and not an original document; or
           (iv) A document does not contain all of the specified
           information;
    the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or the Secretary of
    State may contact the applicant or his representative in writing, and
    request the correct documents. The requested documents must be received
    at the address specified in the request within 7 working days of the
    date of the request."


18. I find it is clear that the letter sent by the  Respondent  is  not  in
    accordance with paragraph 245AA of the immigration rules, but  this  is
    not acknowledged by the judge.  He finds that whether the  letter  said
    three or seven days is "irrelevant" (paragraph [21]).  However, I  find
    that the Respondent's failure to comply with the immigration rules  and
    her own policy cannot be described as "irrelevant".  I  find  that  the
    judge has erred by failing to find that the letter of 4 March 2013  did
    not comply  with  the  Respondent's  policy,  and  therefore  that  the
    Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.


19. The judge found that the Respondent would not have sent this letter out
    by post, given the evidence before him.  I find that this  finding  was
    not open to him  on  the  evidence  before  him.   He  failed  to  give
    consideration to the evidence put forward by the  Appellant  consisting
    of the envelope in which he had received the letter, and  the  evidence
    that it had been sent by recorded delivery and signed for.  He gave  no
    reasons for not finding this evidence reliable.   He  had  no  evidence
    before him to show that the letter had  been  emailed.   No  email  was
    provided by the Respondent to show that  the  letter  was  sent  as  an
    attachment to an email.  The only mention of "email" is in  the  letter
    itself, where  it  states  that  documents  must  be  received  by  the
    Respondent "within 3 working days of this email".


20. I find that the judge has failed to refer to the evidence  provided  by
    the Appellant which showed that the letter of 4  March  2013  had  been
    sent to him by post.  He states that he is "not satisfied that  a  UKBA
    official would send out such a letter by post", but this  runs  counter
    to the evidence which was before him, and which he failed to take  into
    account.


21. Consequently, having not accepted that the letter was sent by post, the
    judge found that the letter of 4 March 2013, which I have already found
    did not  comply  with  the  immigration  rules,  was  received  by  the
    Appellant before the expiry of the three day  deadline.   However,  the
    evidence before him pointed  to  the  fact  that  the  letter  was  not
    received until after the three days had expired, thus meaning that  the
    Appellant did not have any opportunity to provide any  documents.   The
    letter is clear that "no further extension will be given".  I find that
    it is immaterial that the decision was made 18 days after the  date  of
    the letter, given that the letter  stated  that  no  further  extension
    would be given if the evidence was not provided within three days.


22. In relation to the materiality of the judge's failure to find that  the
    Respondent's failure to comply with the immigration  rules  meant  that
    the decision was not in accordance with the law, given that  judge  was
    not entitled under section 85A of the 2002 Act to take into account the
    bank letter of 12 March 2013, which did  comply  with  the  immigration
    rules, but that the  Respondent  could  have  taken  this  letter  into
    account had he remitted the application  for  reconsideration,  I  find
    that his error was material.








Notice of Decision


23. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.


24. I remake the decision, allowing the Appellant's appeal  to  the  extent
    that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.


25.  I  remit  the  Appellants'  applications   to   the   Respondent   for
    reconsideration.


26. I have set the decision aside in its entirety, but for the avoidance of
    doubt, the findings in  paragraph  [22]  of  the  decision  are  to  be
    disregarded.  The judge was not able to take into account any  evidence
    which was not before the Respondent, as is the case with the letter  of
    12 March 2013.  Further, the principles in Tanveer Ahmed did not  apply
    to the evidence in this appeal.  As accepted by Mr. Harrison, there was
    no reason for the judge to have made any  findings  such  as  those  in
    paragraph [22].




Signed                                  Date 11 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have allowed the appeal and a fee has been paid.  The Respondent's
decision was not in accordance with the law as she failed to comply with
her own policy, codified in the immigration rules.  In the circumstances I
make a fee award for the entire fee paid.


Signed                                  Date 11 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

