
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11340/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 9 November 2015                   |On 31 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                           NAFEES-UR-REHMAN ABBASI
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C. Querton of counsel, instructed by  Rashid &
                    Rashid Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. B. Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, who was born on 25  December  1985,  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan. He entered the United Kingdom on 16 December 2009 as a Tier 4
    (General) Student migrant on a visa, which  was  valid  until  25  June
    2011. He was subsequently granted further leave to remain in  the  same
    capacity until April 2013 and during this time he completed an  MBA  at
    Anglia Ruskin University in October 2012.

2.   On 17 April 2013 he applied for an EEA residence card as the spouse  of
    an  EEA  national,  whom  he  had  married  on  4  January  2013.   His
    application was refused on 24 February 2014 on the basis that  she  had
    previously been married  and  was  not  divorced  and,  therefore,  the
    Appellant was not able to establish that he  was  lawfully  married  to
    her. The Respondent also asserted that the Appellant had not been  able
    to show that he was in a durable relationship with her and  that  there
    was insufficient evidence to establish that his partner was  exercising
    Treaty rights at the time of her divorce.

3.   The Appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fitzgibbon Q.C. on 14 November 2014.  He allowed the  Appellant's
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 24 November 2014. At paragraph 3 of
    his decision, he noted that the Appellant had not relied on his  rights
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights at the  time
    of his application but did so at the hearing.

4.   At paragraph 9 of his  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  also
    noted that the Appellant accepted that  he  did  not  comply  with  the
    applicable requirements to show that he  was  a  family  member  or  an
    extended family member of an EEA national.  However, in paragraph 19 he
    found that the particular circumstances of the  Appellant's  case  were
    not catered for in the Immigration Rules and in paragraph 20  he  found
    that the Appellant had established a strong private life in the  United
    Kingdom for the purposes of Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights and that his removal was not required to uphold the public
    interest in maintaining effective immigration controls.

5.   The Respondent applied for permission to appeal on  24  November  2014.
    In particular, she  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    approach to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and section  117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was legally flawed.
     First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever granted permission  to  appeal  on  20
    January 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the Judge  had  not
    adequately considered the public  interest  and,  in  particular,  sub-
    paragraphs 117B(1) and (5) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

6.   The Appellant lodged a Rule 24 Response, dated 4 February 2015 and  the
    appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge  Southern  and  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Finch on 27 April 2015. At this hearing the Respondent applied to
    amend her grounds so as to submit that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    had no jurisdiction to consider Article 8 of the ECHR. Her  application
    was granted.

7.   On 11 May 2015 the Respondent filed and served her amended  grounds  of
    appeal and on 22 May 2015  the  Appellant  served  a  further  Rule  24
    response. The matter was set down for an error of  law  hearing  on  15
    July 2015. The Upper Tribunal heard oral submissions  by  both  parties
    but then  reserved  its  decision  to  await  the  determination  of  a
    Presidential Panel that had already heard the point of law  arising  in
    this appeal. Directions in relation to this decision were sent  out  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Southern on 16 July  2015  and  the  parties  were
    given leave to make written decisions on the Presidential determination
    within 14 days of it being promulgated.

8.   The Appellant filed further submissions on 14 September  2015  and  the
    Respondent filed her further submissions  on  21  September  2015.  The
    appeal was subsequently re-listed  on  9  November  2015  in  front  of
    myself.  By this time, the Presidential case,  Amirteymour  and  others
    (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC) had  been  appealed
    to the Court of Appeal. This necessitated a further adjournment pending
    the Court of Appeal's decision.

9.   I directed that the  Appellant's  solicitors  do  file  and  serve  any
    further submissions within 14 days of handing  down  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal's judgment in Amirteymour and that the Respondent  do  file  and
    serve any further submissions  within  14  days  thereafter.   No  such
    further submissions have been received, despite  the  Court  of  Appeal
    handing down its decision in TY (Sri Lanka) v The  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1233 on 1 December 2015.

10.  I had also granted leave to both parties to  apply  for  a  hearing  to
    make oral submissions, if so advised. But again, no  such  applications
    have been received. Neither did either  party  apply  for  any  further
    directions, as provided for in the directions.

11.  The Appellant's solicitors wrote to the Upper Tribunal on 27 June  2016
    asking why no decision had been reached in this case, despite the  fact
    that they had failed to seek  any  further  directions  or  supply  any
    further submissions. They were then given a further seven days form  22
    July 2016 to make any further written submissions but have failed to do
    so.

The Error of Law Hearing

12.  At the first error of law hearing on 16 July 2015 the parties  accepted
    that the case due to be heard  by  the  President  in  Amriteymour  was
    likely to be determinative  of  the  preliminary  jurisdictional  issue
    arising in this appeal.

13.  The need for the Applicant to make an application under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR if he wished to rely on this provision was stressed in page  3
    of the Respondent's  refusal  letter,  dated  24  February  2014.   The
    Appellant did make a bare assertion in his grounds of appeal,  dated  4
    March 2014, that he had rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

14.  However, in Amirteymour the Upper Tribunal found that "where no  notice
    under section 120 of the 2002 Act has been  served  and  where  no  EEA
    decision to remove has been made, an  appellant  cannot  in  an  appeal
    under the EEA Regulations being a human rights challenge to removal".

15.  Furthermore, at paragraph 26, the President noted that "as can be  seen
    from section 3 of  the  Immigration  Act  1971,  there  is  a  distinct
    difference drawn in the system of immigration control between those who
    require leave to enter and those who do not. By operation of section  7
    of the 1988 Act, those having a right to enter or reside under European
    Law do not (absent any exclusion or deportation order) require leave to
    enter or remain. A right to enter or remain (and the conditions  placed
    on that) depends on an action taken  by  the  Secretary  of  State.  In
    contrast, a right to enter or reside  under  European  Law  does  not".
    Therefore, the Upper Tribunal was acknowledging the fact that  domestic
    and European law runs in parallel to each other.

16.  As the President  went  on  to  make  clear  in  paragraph  31  of  his
    judgement, the "rights granted under EU law and leave granted under the
    Rules or Immigration Acts are conceptually and legally  distinct.   Any
    assertion of a right to leave to remain under the Human Rights  Act  is
    thus made on a different juridical basis".

17.  He also looked at the correct interpretation of "Schedule 1,  paragraph
    1 of the EEA Regulations which provides that certain of the  provisions
    of the 2002 Act  have  effect  in  relation  to  an  appeal  under  the
    regulations as if  (emphasis  added)  it  were  an  appeal  against  an
    immigration decision under section 82(1) of that Act. That is  not  the
    same as providing that an EEA decision is an immigration decision under
    the 2002 Act which could have been done. It was thus evidently not  the
    intention to do so". He then went on to note,  in  paragraph  38,  that
    "the permissible grounds of appeal against an  EEA  decision  expressly
    exclude grounds (a) and (f) indicating a clear intention that questions
    arising under the Rules cannot be raised, consistent with the  two-fold
    system described above".

18.  In paragraph 39, the President found this to be significant  as  "since
    July 2012, when Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE were incorporated into
    the Rules, much of the system  for  consideration  of  Human  Rights  i
    particular Article 8, is now operated under the Rules". At paragraph 42
    he added that "any consideration by a court of article  8  issues  must
    now commence with a consideration under  the  Rules;  yet  that  is  an
    analysis which could not be carried out in an EEA  appeal,  given  that
    the grounds of appeal prohibit an analysis of whether  a  decision  was
    not in accordance with the Rules".

19.  Further, in paragraph 49 he accepted that  section  84(1)  (c)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  appeared  to  enable  the
    Appellant to rely on his Article 8 rights in an appeal but held that it
    was of little assistance to an appellant challenging a  decision  about
    documentation under the EEA Regulations. He returned to  his  point  in
    paragraph 61 where he found the section 85(4) does allow  an  appellant
    in an EEA appeal to argue that he is entitled to a  residence  card  on
    another basis under the Regulations.

20.  However, his underlying  reasoning  was  that  relying  on  a  distinct
    Article 8 right amounted to an  additional  ground  and  could  not  be
    pursued in the absence of a section 120 notice having been  served.  He
    noted that in paragraph 41 of Lamichhane v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 260 Stanley Burnton  LJ  had  concluded
    that "an appellant on whom no section 120 notice has  been  served  may
    not raise before the Tribunal any ground for  the  grant  of  leave  to
    remain different from that which was the subject of the decision of the
    Secretary of State appealed against".

21.  The President went on to noted  that  the  Supreme  Court  in  Patel  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 741 had  not
    disproved this finding.  He  also  noted  that  Arden  LJ  said  in  AS
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1469 that "we are concerned with grounds other  than  human  rights
    grounds or grounds for seeking asylum. It is accepted that they can  be
    raised in any event". But distinguished this on the basis that the case
    concerned decisions to refuse leave to remain, not a decision under the
    EEA Regulations.

22.  He also noted that in NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 995 and Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v NA (Pakistan) [2015] EWCA Civ 140 the  issues  before  the
    court and the primary basis on which the  appeal  was  allowed  in  the
    Upper Tribunal, related to EU law.

23.  At paragraph 70 the President noted that "an  application  made  for  a
    residence  document  as  confirmation  of  an  existing  right  and  an
    application based on a claim that removal  would  be  contrary  to  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under  the  Human  Rights  Convention  are
    entirely different".

24.  In her written and oral submission counsel for the Appellant asked  the
    Tribunal not to follow Amirteymour as it was not a starred  or  country
    guidance decision.  However, it is a decision by a  Presidential  Panel
    and, in any event, this argument has now been  rendered  irrelevant  by
    the fact that Amirteymour has been followed by the Court of  Appeal  in
    TY (Sri Lanka). Jackson LJ found at paragraph 36 that:

         "In the result therefore I reach a similar decision on  the  issues
         before us  to  the  decision  reached  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         Amirteymour v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2015]
         UKUT 00466 (IAC). The Upper Tribunal distinguished JM (Liberia)  on
         a different basis from that which I have  identified...Nevertheless
         in the end the Upper Tribunal has come  to  the  same  decision  as
         myself".

25.  Counsel for the Appellant also sought to rely on the principles  in  JM
    (Liberia) but in paragraph 34 of TY (Sri Lanka) Jackson LJ  noted  that
    "the crucial feature of JM was that the Secretary  of  State  served  a
    section one stop notice. That  had  two  consequences.  First,  if  M's
    appeal to the AIT failed the  Secretary  of  State  would  be  able  to
    proceed to removal, without giving M any  opportunity  to  raise  human
    rights argument or to appeal on human rights grounds. Secondly,  M  was
    fully entitled to advance all his arguments under ECHR and the AIT  was
    obliged to consider them".  When reaching its  decision  the  Court  of
    Appeal relied on the earlier decision in Lamichhane, which is  referred
    to above.  In the current case, no section 120 notice had been filed.

26.  In addition, counsel for the Appellant relied on the fact that  section
    86(2)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  states
    that the Tribunal must determine any matter  before  it  and  that  the
    Appellant is entitled to an appeal by virtue of Schedule 1  para  1  of
    the EEA Regulations under section 82(1) as the decision is  treated  as
    an immigration  decision.  But  in  paragraph  57  of  Amirteymour  the
    President found that "schedule 1 applies the relevant sections  of  the
    2002 Act as if the decision were an immigration decision under  section
    82(1) of the 2002 Act; it does not, as we noted above, make it  such  a
    decision, nor do we discern either in the case law  to  which  we  have
    been referred or in the scheme of the legislation, any reason  to  take
    [the approach being argued for.]

27.  In paragraph 27 of  TY (Sri Lanka) Jackson LJ similarly  found  that  "
    since there is no  section  120  one  stop  notice,  the  appellant  is
    confined to the subject matter of the original decision.  That  is  the
    decision that the appellant does not fulfil the requirements of the EEA
    Regulations. That decision was unquestionably correct.  However  strong
    or weak the appellant's claims may  be  under  the  provisions  of  the
    Refugee Convention and ECHR, those provisions  could  not  entitle  the
    appellant to receive a residence card under the EEA Regulations.

28.  Jackson LJ then added at paragraph  28  that  "it  is  clear  from  the
    decision in Lamichhane that the Secretary of State is under not duty to
    serve a one stop notice under section 120. It is clear from Patel  that
    the Secretary of State was under no duty to make a  removal  decision".
    He added at paragraph 35 that "the UK will only be in  breach  of  [the
    ECHR] if in the future the appellant makes  a  ...human  rights  claim,
    which the Secretary of State and/or the tribunals incorrectly reject".

29.  There was nothing in the arguments raised by the Appellant to  identify
    any error in this approach by the President or the Court of  Appeal.  I
    also note that the case of Haque (s 86(2) - adjournment  not  required)
    Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00481 (IAC) was premised on  the  fact  that  an
    immigration decision had been made in the first place.

DECISION

      1) First-tier Tribunal Judge Fitzgibbon did make  arguable  errors  of
         law in his decision.


      2) The appeal should be remitted to a First-tier Tribunal Judge  other
         than First-tier Tribunal Judge Fitzgibbon for a de novo hearing.


                                    Date: 22 August 2016


    Nadine Finch

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
