
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11241/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th October 2013                            |On 31st October 2013       |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON
                        Upper Tribunal Judge MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                            edward mulenga mwansa
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Zambia born on 3rd January 1976.  He
    first arrived in the UK on 23rd January 2000 when he was given leave to
    enter as a student until  31st  December  2000.   He  was  subsequently
    granted further leave  to  remain  in  the  same  capacity  until  28th
    February 2003.  Nothing more was heard  from  the  Appellant  until  he
    applied for leave to remain on human rights  grounds  on  9th  February
    2012.  That application was  refused  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    Respondent's letter of 27th March 2013.  At the same  time  a  decision
    was made to remove the Appellant to  Zambia  under  the  provisions  of
    Section 10 Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.   The  Appellant  appealed,
    and his appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro  (the
    Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross on 23rd July 2013.  He decided to  allow
    the appeal for the reasons given in his Determination dated  29th  July
    2013.  The Respondent sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 21st
    August 2013 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. We must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The bare facts of this case which are  not  in  dispute  are  that  the
    Appellant has been resident in the UK since January 2000,  but  without
    leave from February 2003.  Some time in 2009 he was  diagnosed  as  HIV
    positive and started antiretroviral treatment.   The  Appellant  has  a
    partner named Kangwa Laura Mubanga who is a Zambian national.  She  has
    no leave to be in the UK.  They have  a  child  named  Kailani  Mulenga
    Mwansa born on 5th May 2010.   The  Appellant's  partner  has  made  an
    application for leave to remain in the UK on human rights grounds which
    is undecided.

 4. The Appellant's appeal was  originally  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Monro on 7th November 2012.  He decided that there  would  be  no
    breach of the Appellant's Article 3  ECHR  rights  by  his  removal  to
    Zambia, and that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 in relation to the Appellant's private  life
    for Article 8 purposes.  However, he also found that  the  decision  of
    the Respondent was not in accordance with the law in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's  family  life  as  the  Respondent  had   not   given   any
    consideration to the interests of the Appellant's child as required  by
    Section 55, Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009,  hence  the
    Respondent's later decision of 27th March 2013.

 5. The Judge allowed the appeal because he found that the Appellant had  a
    family life with his partner and child which would be  interfered  with
    by his removal.  That interference would be of such a degree of gravity
    as to engage the Appellant's Article 8 rights.  The  Judge  also  found
    that the interference was in accordance with the law, and  pursued  the
    legitimate public aim of maintaining the  economic  well-being  of  the
    country through immigration control.   Finally,  the  Judge  found  the
    Respondent's decision to be not proportionate as it was not in the best
    interests of the child to remove the Appellant  until  a  decision  had
    been made in respect of the application of the Appellant's partner  for
    leave to remain.

 6. At the hearing, there  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  Instead, there was a letter from him dated 9th October 2013
    stating  that  he  would  not  be  attending  the  hearing.   In  those
    circumstances we decided to hear the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant in accordance with the provisions of Rule 38 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 7. We did not hear a submission from Ms Horsley as  we  indicated  to  her
    that we were minded to find an error of law  in  the  decision  of  the
    Judge and set it aside.

 8. We do find such an error of law.  In deciding  the  appeal,  the  Judge
    failed to carry out the balancing exercise necessary for any assessment
    of proportionality, and in  particular  attributed  no  weight  to  the
    public interest and failed to  explain  why.   The  Judge  should  have
    decided the issues in the appeal according to the circumstances at  the
    date of the hearing at which time the Appellant's partner had no  leave
    to be in the UK.  Instead the  Judge  speculated  as  to  the  possible
    outcomes of the application for leave to remain made by the Appellant's
    partner.  These errors amount to errors of law and hence we  set  aside
    the decision of the Judge. We decided to proceed to remake the decision
    of the Judge on the basis of the evidence before  him.   We  have  also
    taken into account the contents of the  Appellant's  letter  dated  9th
    October 2013.

Remade Decision

 9. At the hearing Ms Horsley made a brief submission to  the  effect  that
    the Respondent's decision was proportionate.   The  Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules as  regards  Article  8,
    and there were no exceptional circumstances.  The best interests of the
    child had now been considered by the Respondent.  Those best  interests
    were for the child to return to Zambia with her parents.

10. Although we have found an error of law in the decision of the Judge, we
    are able to adopt some of his findings.  We agree with the decision  of
    the Judge given at paragraph 34 of his Determination that the Appellant
    cannot succeed under Appendix FM of HC 395.  Likewise,  we  agree  with
    the findings of the Judge given at paragraphs 38 to 40 inclusive of his
    Determination that the Appellant has a family life with his partner and
    child;  that  that  family  life  will  be  interfered  with   by   the
    Respondent's decision to such a degree of  gravity  as  to  engage  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights; and that the decision of  the  Respondent
    is in accordance with the law and pursues a legitimate public aim being
    the economic well-being of the  country  achieved  through  immigration
    control.

11. We are left to decide the issue of proportionality.  In this case,  the
    public interest must weigh heavily.  None of the members of this family
    are British citizens, and they do not have any right to be in  the  UK.
    On the other side of the balance, the best interests of the child are a
    primary consideration.  She has lived all of her life in  the  UK,  and
    apparently has recently started at a nursery school.  However,  she  is
    not yet 4 years of age, and her best interests must be to continue  her
    life with her parents wherever that may be.  Otherwise, we accept  that
    the Appellant has been resident in the  UK  for  over  thirteen  years,
    although the majority of that time has been without any sort of  leave.
    The Appellant is HIV positive but there has been no evidence  that  the
    appropriate medical treatment is not available to him in  Zambia.   The
    Appellant's partner and his child have no right to be  in  the  UK  and
    therefore can return to Zambia with him.  The Appellant's partner is  a
    citizen of Zambia.  There was no evidence that it would be unreasonable
    for her to return with the Appellant.  In those circumstances, we  find
    that the public interest carries the most weight and that therefore the
    decision of the Respondent is proportionate.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision.

We remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and  we  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

