


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/11397/2014
                                                               IA/11394/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On : 23 March 2015                   |On : 25 March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                         harshad girish chinchanikar
                         Shweta harshad chinchanikar
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Sharma instructed by H & M Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, husband and wife, are citizens  of  India  born  on  10
    November 1978 and 2 April  1981  respectively.  They  have  been  given
    permission to appeal against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing their appeals against the respondent's decision to refuse to
    vary their leave to remain and to remove them from the United Kingdom.

 2. The first  appellant  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  "the  appellant")
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 25 September 2005 with a student  visa
    valid until 28 February 2007. He was granted further leave to remain on
    the Science and Engineering Graduate Scheme (SEGS)  until  22  February
    2008, followed by leave to remain as a Highly Skilled Migrant until  24
    September 2009. On 5 September 2009 he applied for leave to remain as a
    Tier 1 General Migrant and was granted leave until 24  September  2012.
    On 5 September 2012 he applied for indefinite leave to remain as a Tier
    1 (General) Migrant. His application was refused on 11  December  2013.
    His wife's application as his dependant was refused in  line  with  his
    application.

 3. The appellant's application was refused under paragraph 322(2)  of  the
    immigration rules on the basis that he had employed deception and  made
    false representations as part of his application for leave to remain as
    a Tier 1 General Migrant on 5 September 2009. In that  application  the
    appellant had claimed and been awarded points for previous earnings  on
    the basis of contracted work said to have been undertaken for RJ Techno
    Limited, which was in addition to his earnings from  other  employment.
    The legal representatives who had submitted the appellant's application
    at the time were later found to have been involved in (and successfully
    prosecuted for) facilitation  of  unlawful  immigration  practices  and
    money laundering involving the use of bogus companies and company  bank
    accounts in order to falsely uplift the earnings  of  visa  applicants,
    and one of the bogus companies was RJ Techno  Limited.  The  respondent
    was therefore satisfied that the documents the appellant had  submitted
    in relation to his employment with that company  were  counterfeit  and
    refused his application under paragraph  245CD(b)  of  the  rules.  The
    respondent also considered the immigration rules relating to family and
    private life but concluded that  the  appellant  met  the  criteria  of
    neither.

 4. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was  heard  in
    the First-tier Tribunal on 28 November 2014  by  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Manuell. Before the judge it was argued on behalf of the
    appellant that he had not known of  the  fraudulent  activities  of  Mr
    Sorthia for whom he had been employed and that he had believed that  he
    was in genuine employment  and  that  RJ  Techno  Ltd  was  one  of  Mr
    Sorthia's companies from which his salary was drawn. The judge did  not
    find the appellant's claim to be credible and considered  his  evidence
    to be a  "tissue  of  lies".  He  considered  that  the  appellant  had
    conspired with Mr Sorthia to submit a fraudulent application  and  that
    his application  was  accordingly  correctly  refused  under  paragraph
    322(2) and 245CD(b) of the rules. He dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
    immigration rules, as well as on Article 8 grounds.

 5. Permission to appeal was sought on behalf of  the  appellant  on  three
    grounds: that the judge had breached the appellant's right  to  a  fair
    hearing by preventing his  solicitor  from  completing  submissions  in
    support of his case (such ground being supported by a witness statement
    from the appellant's legal representative Ms Manjit  Hayre  of  H  &  M
    Solicitors); that the judge had erred by considering  there  to  be  no
    bank statements for the relevant periods of the  claimed  salary,  when
    such evidence was available before him; and that the judge had erred in
    his approach to Article 8 outside the immigration rules.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on 26  January  2015  in  relation  in
    particular to the first ground on the grounds  of  arguable  procedural
    unfairness.

Appeal hearing and submissions

 7. At the hearing before me the appellant was in attendance  but  was  not
    required  to  give  oral  evidence.  Mr  Sharma  advised  me  that  his
    instructing solicitor Ms Hayre was on her way to the Tribunal  and  was
    willing to submit to cross-examination, but Ms Kenny informed  me  that
    she intended only  to  make  submissions  in  response  to  Ms  Hayre's
    statement. I heard submissions on the error of law.

 8. Mr Sharma, in his submissions, expanded upon the grounds of appeal  and
    relied upon the decisions  in  BW  (witness  statements  by  advocates)
    [2014] UKUT 568, KD (Inattentive Judges) Afghanistan  [2010]  UKUT  261
    and Kalidas (agreed facts - best practice) Tanzania [2012] UKUT 327  in
    submitting that the appellant had been deprived  of  a  full  and  fair
    hearing owing to the perception given by the judge that the appeal  was
    to be allowed and that no further submissions were  therefore  required
    from the appellant's representative, Ms  Hayre.  He  submitted  further
    that, whilst  the  judge  was  correct  in  his  observation  that  the
    appellant's bank statements were not before him, the fact was that  the
    bank statements had been submitted to the respondent and  were  in  the
    respondent's possession and that it was therefore erroneous for adverse
    findings to be made against the appellant owing to the absence  of  the
    documents. The  judge  had  accordingly  failed  to  consider  material
    issues. With regard to the third ground, the judge  had  erred  in  his
    cursory approach to Article 8, and in particular in  his  finding  that
    the appellant had accepted that medical treatment would be available to
    him in India and that deception was an  insurmountable  obstacle  to  a
    grant of leave outside the rules.

 9. Ms Kenny relied upon Judge Manuell's response to the allegation made by
    the appellant's representative and submitted that  there  had  been  no
    procedural  unfairness.  She  accepted  that   the   appellant's   bank
    statements had been in the respondent's possession but not included  in
    the appeal bundle, but she submitted that the documents could have made
    no material difference to  the  judge's  decision,  given  his  overall
    findings on the evidence. She  submitted  further  that  the  appellant
    could not have succeeded on Article 8 grounds outside the rules in  any
    event.

10. Mr Sharma responded by way of reiterating the points already made.

Consideration and findings

11. In my view there are no errors of law in the judge's decision requiring
    it to be set aside.

12. The first ground relies upon the statement made by Ms Manjit Hayre of H
    & M Solicitors, who represented the appellant  at  the  hearing  before
    Judge Manuell. According to Ms Hayre  she  was  prevented  from  making
    submissions by the judge who told her not  to  "waste  her  breath  and
    energy",  which  she  understood  to  be  an  indication  that  he  had
    sufficient evidence and information to allow  the  appeal.  She  states
    that she would otherwise have  addressed  the  reasons  given  for  the
    appeal being refused and would have made submissions under  Article  8.
    Mr Sharma informed me that  his  instructions  were  that  the  judge's
    comments had apparently been made to assist Ms Hayre as she had a  cold
    and was losing her  voice,  although  that  is  not  suggested  in  her
    statement.

13. Judge Manuell has responded to Ms Hayre's statement  and  categorically
    denies having told her not to "waste her breath and energy". He  states
    that he gave no indication of what his decision would be and  that  she
    was given a full opportunity to make submissions and indeed did so,  as
    his record of proceedings shows.

14. I have carefully considered the judge's written record  of  proceedings
    and it is apparent that Ms Hayre did indeed make submissions before the
    judge and there is nothing to indicate  that  she  was  prevented  from
    doing  so  or  from  completing  her  submissions.  Whilst  the  record
    indicates that no submissions were made with respect to Article  8,  it
    is relevant to note  that  neither  party  examined  the  appellant  in
    relation to such a claim and that the respondent made no submissions in
    that regard. Ms Hayre has not produced a contemporaneous  note  of  the
    proceedings to confirm that the judge prevented her from continuing her
    submissions. Mr Sharma submitted that neither was there any  such  note
    from the respondent, but it seems to me that that does not detract from
    the fact that if Ms Hayre felt that  the  proceedings  were  not  being
    conducted fairly, or if she curtailed her  submissions  because  of  an
    implied indication by the judge, it would be reasonable to  expect  her
    to have made a note of that at  the  time.  There  is  nothing  in  the
    judge's notes or his findings to indicate, or to give  the  impression,
    that he was satisfied with the evidence  to  the  extent  that  he  was
    minded to allow the appeal and it cannot be said  that  any  procedural
    unfairness arose as a result of Ms Hayre being under  such  a  mistaken
    impression. It is plain that Ms Hayre was given the opportunity to make
    any relevant submissions before the judge and that the judge considered
    those submissions in the light of the evidence before him in making his
    decision. Accordingly I find that the first ground is not made out.

15. Mr Sharma accepted that,  contrary  to  the  assertion  in  the  second
    ground, the appellant's bank statements were not before the judge  when
    he made his decision. The ground of appeal was, however, pursued before
    me on the alternative  basis  that  the  judge  had  erroneously  found
    against the appellant in that regard when the respondent had  the  bank
    statements and had  failed  to  produce  them.  The  relevant  question
    therefore appears to me to be whether any procedural  unfairness  arose
    as a  result  of  the  bank  statements  not  being  disclosed  by  the
    respondent. In response to that question I find  merit  in  Ms  Kenny's
    submission, that the  bank  statements  would  have  made  no  material
    difference to the judge's decision and that the entries  showing  funds
    deposited from R J Techno Ltd did  not  assist  the  appellant's  case,
    given the judge's overall findings.

16. The bank statements show two deposits of funds from R J Techno  Ltd  on
    26 May 2009 and 27 June 2009, together with a third deposit on 26  July
    2009 which it is reasonable to infer, given the figure stated, emanates
    from the same source. The first two deposits are  consistent  with  the
    payslips produced at E1 and  E2  of  the  respondent's  appeal  bundle.
    However the deposit of  what  is  claimed  to  be  salary  payments  is
    entirely consistent with the modus operandi of the scam detailed in the
    witness statements of Sonal Rajshakha and DC Laura Curry, whereby funds
    were circulated between the clients of Migration Gurus and the 15 bogus
    companies including R J Techno Ltd, ending  up  in  the  personal  bank
    accounts of the MG clients to provide evidence of earnings  in  support
    of their Tier 1 applications. I refer in particular to pages A37 to A41
    of the respondent's bundle in that  regard.  Contrary  to  Mr  Sharma's
    assertion that the appellant's claimed employment for R J  Techno  Ltd,
    in May to July 2009, was prior to the fraudulent activities referred to
    in the witness statements and therefore not part of the  fraud,  it  is
    plain that it occurred precisely during  the  relevant  period.  Whilst
    Judge Manuell, not having sight of the bank statements, did not  go  on
    to make specific findings in that regard, it is plain from his findings
    at paragraphs 12 and 13 that he  accepted,  and  gave  weight  to,  the
    evidence produced by the  respondent  in  regard  to  the  fraud,  such
    evidence consisting of those witness statements. Having heard  detailed
    oral evidence from the appellant he concluded, for various reasons  set
    out in  those  paragraphs  including  the  absence  of  a  contract  of
    employment and P60 certificate, as well as the timing of his employment
    with Mr Sorthia and his lack of  enquiry  about  the  identity  of  his
    employer, that he was involved in the fraud.

17. Accordingly there is no reason why the entries in the  bank  statements
    would have made any material difference  to  the  conclusions  properly
    reached by the judge. On the totality of the evidence before him he was
    perfectly entitled to find that the appellant was knowingly involved in
    the fraud and that he conspired with Mr Sorthia to submit a  fraudulent
    visa application. The judge's  decision,  to  uphold  the  respondent's
    refusal under paragraph 322(2), was therefore  one  that  was  entirely
    open to him on the evidence before him.

18. Turning finally to the third ground, it is submitted that  the  judge's
    assessment of the appellant's Article 8 claim was cursory and that  the
    test of exceptionality applied was the wrong test. However it seems  to
    me that whilst the judge's Article 8 assessment is brief, he  took  all
    relevant matters into account and that whatever test  he  applied,  the
    claim was bound to fail.

19. There was no question that the appellant could succeed within the rules
    and the judge therefore went on to  consider  whether  there  were  any
    other circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the  rules.  In
    so doing, he took account of all the relevant evidence. At paragraph 16
    he considered the medical  evidence  produced  by  the  appellant.  The
    grounds assert that he erred by considering the appellant's evidence to
    have been that he could access medical attention for his  condition  in
    India, when that was not in fact his  evidence,  and  that  that  error
    materially affected his findings. However it is clear that  the  judge,
    in making such  a  comment,  was  referring  to  paragraph  45  of  the
    appellant's statement of 15 September 2014 where the  appellant  stated
    that "I have been told that although there may well  be  treatment  for
    all the above in India, my medical history  is  known  here...",  which
    certainly lends  itself  to  such  an  interpretation.  The  judge  was
    accordingly entitled to consider that the appellant's evidence  was  as
    he stated. The judge went on to consider the appellant's claim, in  the
    same paragraph in his statement, that his life would be in danger if he
    left the United Kingdom in the middle of  his  medical  treatment,  but
    properly concluded that there was no evidence to support such a  claim.
    There is certainly no such evidence within the medical reports produced
    by the appellant, at pages 20 to 74 of his appeal bundle and neither is
    there any evidence to indicate that relevant  medical  treatment  would
    not be available and accessible in India. Accordingly it  seems  to  me
    that the judge was perfectly entitled to conclude as  he  did  in  that
    regard.

20. Furthermore, it is not  the  case,  as  is  asserted,  that  the  judge
    considered the appellant's fraud  to  be  determinative  of  the  claim
    outside the rules. On the contrary he clearly took account of  all  the
    evidence and all the appellant's circumstances  including,  as  already
    stated, the medical evidence. He was, in any event, entitled  to  place
    considerable weight upon the  deception  when  considering  the  public
    interest in the appellant's removal from the United  Kingdom  and  when
    considering proportionality under Article 8.

21. As regards the reference by the judge to  "exceptional  circumstances",
    it  is  plain  that  he  was  thereby  simply   concluding,   after   a
    consideration of all the evidence, and as consistent with the  relevant
    case law,  that  there  did  not  exist  any  particular  circumstances
    justifying  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the  immigration  rules.  His
    conclusion, that no  such  circumstances  existed,  was  one  that  was
    properly open to him on the evidence before him. Accordingly the  third
    ground of appeal also fails.

22. Taken as a whole, the judge's determination  contains  a  detailed  and
    thorough assessment of the appellant's circumstances and the  evidence,
    together with clearly and cogently reasoned findings properly  open  to
    him on the evidence before him.  The  grounds  of  appeal  disclose  no
    errors of law in his decision.

DECISION

23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    an error on a point of law. I  do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
    decision to dismiss the appeal stands.



Signed   Date: 23 March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
