

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11075/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1st October 2013                           |On 4th October 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                            mohammed Sanaul Alam

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, counsel, instructed by Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by Mr Alam against a decision of the Secretary  of
       State  to  refuse  to  vary  his  leave  to   remain   as   a   Tier
       1(Entrepreneur) Migrant and to remove him from  the  UK  by  way  of
       directions under s47 Immigration Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006
       such  decision  being  taken  on  22nd  March  2013   following   an
       application on 9th February 2013.


    2. Mr Alam has been in the  UK  lawfully  since  first  entry  on  21st
       November 2011 initially as a student and  culminating  in  leave  to
       remain as a Tier 1  (Post  study  work)  migrant  valid  until  11th
       February 2013.

    3. Before First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson  the  Secretary  of  State
       withdrew the decision to remove Mr Alam under s47 as  a  consequence
       of which Judge Davidson held that he did not have to  determine  the
       appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.

    4. Judge Davidson determined that Mr Alam did not meet the requirements
       of the Immigration Rules in two specific matters: he had  failed  to
       provide marketing material which  gave  his  name  (as  required  by
       Appendix A paragraph 41(c)(iii)(1) and the contract he provided  did
       not have on the face of it a landline or email address  as  required
       by Appendix A paragraph 41(c)(iv)(3). Judge  Davidson,  in  reaching
       his  decision  considered  the  Secretary  of   State's   Evidential
       Flexibility  Policy  and  the  caselaw  of  Rodriguez  [2013]   UKUT
       00042(IAC). He does not consider paragraph 245AA of the  Immigration
       Rules which was in force at the date of application and decision. It
       does not appear that this was brought to his attention.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted on the grounds that it was arguable
       that the First-tier Tribunal judge had failed to consider Article  8
       and that it could not be said that a decision to dismiss the  appeal
       under Article 8  was  inevitable.  Given  the  length  of  time  the
       appellant had been in the UK and the relatively weak arguments  made
       on behalf of the Secretary of State  regarding  the  extent  of  the
       public interest in removing him. Although  considered  to  be  weak,
       permission to appeal was also granted on the grounds that the  judge
       had erred in his application and  consideration  of  the  Evidential
       Flexibility policy.

    6. The Secretary of State confirmed in her Rule 24  response  that  the
       judge had erred in his consideration of Article 8 and  requested  an
       oral continuance hearing.

    7.  Before  me  Mr  Karim  referred  extensively  to  paragraph   245AA
       submitting in essence that the failure of Mr Alam to meet the strict
       requirements of the Rules as to  marketing  materials  and  contract
       requirements were insignificant and alternatively that the  failures
       amounted to the production of  documents in the 'wrong  format'  and
       were thus covered by paragraph 245AA of the Rules: the Secretary  of
       State should have requested further additional  material  to  enable
       the appellant to produce the materials required to meet  the  Rules.
       He further submitted that the covering letter which, it was asserted
       accompanied the contract although not submitted until the day of the
       hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  did  have  the  requisite
       information and should be read with the actual contract and thus met
       the Rules.

    8. Dealing first with the meaning of 'wrong format' I am not  satisfied
       that this term enables information that is missing to be  considered
       as constituting a document in the wrong format.  Format  is  a  term
       that relates to the physical properties of a  document  not  to  the
       information in the document.  Paragraph 245AA enables the  Secretary
       of State to accept documents that comply with  the  requirements  of
       the Rules in terms of the information provided albeit in a different
       format to that set out in the Rules. Paragraph 245AA  sets  out  the
       circumstances in which the Secretary of State will  request  missing
       documents. Neither of these applies to this appellant: the documents
       submitted simply did not include the information required.  Although
       the appellant argued that the covering letter amounted to additional
       information that formed part and parcel of the contract, that letter
       was not submitted until the date of the hearing and  the  advert  in
       any event did not meet the requirements of the Rules. There  was  no
       requirement, under the Rules, for the Secretary of State to  request
       the letter; there was nothing on the face of  the  documents  before
       her to indicate that something significant may be missing and in any
       event the application would fail because it did not comply with  the
       marketing requirements.


    9. There is no error of law in the decision in  so  far  as  compliance
       with the Immigration Rules is concerned.

   10. In so far as Article 8 is concerned the Secretary of State  concedes
       there is an error of law by the First-tier Tribunal Judge: he  found
       that Article 8 was not engaged because  of  the  withdrawal  by  the
       Secretary of State of  the  removal  decision  under  s47.  Although
       submitted by Mr Karim that this resulted in the appeal being reheard
       on Article 8 grounds this was not accepted by Mr Bramble who  stated
       that although it was accepted that the judge had erred  in  law,  it
       was not accepted that the error was such as  to  merit  the  setting
       aside of the decision to be remade.

   11. I agree. The fact that a First-tier Tribunal Judge has erred in  law
       does not absolve the Upper Tribunal from considering the extent  and
       nature of that error such as to determine whether the error  results
       in the setting aside and remaking of the decision.

   12. In response to a question from me, Mr Karim confirmed that the basis
       of the Article 8 grounds of appeal are as set out  in  the  skeleton
       argument and paragraph 7 of Mr Alam's witness statement;  there  was
       nothing further. These factors included,  briefly,  reliance  by  Mr
       Alam on his length of lawful residence, that he had developed strong
       ties with the UK since his arrival, his continued presence will  not
       be a detriment to the UK economy but of  benefit,  that  he  has  no
       criminal record and is unlikely to claim public funds.

   13. Although all of the factors relied upon are correct and the relevant
       Razgar question is the final question of proportionality,  they  are
       not, at their highest matters such as to overcome the pubic interest
       in the control of immigration.  The  secretary  of  State  took  her
       decision to refuse the application to very leave within a reasonable
       time  frame;  Mr  Alam  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of   the
       Immigration Rules for a variation in his leave  to  remain  and  the
       attributes upon which he relies in his Article 8 grounds  of  appeal
       are little more than would be expected of a law abiding  migrant  to
       the UK who has  come  to  the  UK  to  undertake  studies  and  post
       qualification work. None of the categories in which he has had leave
       to remain carry with them an expectation of future settlement. It is
       inconceivable that any First-tier  Tribunal  judge  would,  in  this
       appellant's circumstance have found that the decision to  refuse  to
       vary leave to remain was a breach of Article 8.

   14. On this basis although the judge erred in law in failing to reach  a
       decision on the article 8 grounds of appeal, that error was not such
       as to merit the setting aside of the decision.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision is  set
    aside to be remade. The appeal is dismissed.







                                    Date 3rd October 2013
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
