
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11416/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th May 2016                             |On 27th May 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                           IFEANYI ONENESS ADIKWU
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, Counsel instructed by Waterstone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 20th November 1970.   His
    appeal, against the Respondent's decision of 11th June 2013  to  remove
    him from the UK, was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  H  A
    Cooper in a decision promulgated on 30th September 2015.

2.   The Appellant entered the UK as a student on  6th  February  2002.  His
    leave was subsequently extended in different categories on a number  of
    occasions, the last being for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  Highly
    Skilled Migrant which was valid from 4th August until 4th  April  2012.
    The Appellant therefore had ten years' continuous lawful  residence  in
    the UK.

3.   On 26th March 2012, the  Appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain under the ten year long residency provisions of the  Immigration
    Rules. Unfortunately, the application was rejected as invalid  on  31st
    May 2012 and returned to the Appellant because there were  insufficient
    funds  in  his  bank  account  to  cover  the  application   fees.   It
    subsequently transpired that the money had been fraudulently taken from
    the Appellant's bank account  without  his  knowledge.  Prior  to  this
    fraudulent withdrawal the Appellant had sufficient funds to  cover  the
    fees and the Respondent accepted that this was in fact the case.

4.   The Appellant therefore submitted a further  application  on  8th  June
    2012. However, this was rejected as invalid because the  Appellant  had
    omitted to sign the cheque for his application fees.

5.   The Appellant then submitted a further  application  on  13th  December
    2012. His explanation for the delay in  re-submitting  the  application
    was that his Nigerian passport had expired and it took time to obtain a
    new one. As soon as a new one was issued, he submitted the application.



6.   The application was refused on 11th June 2013 on the  ground  that  the
    Appellant had not had leave since 1st June 2012 so he  could  not  show
    ten years' continuous lawful  residence  in  the  UK  at  the  date  of
    application.  The Respondent did not accept that the decision  breached
    Article 8 under the Immigration Rules.

7.   The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and this  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom on  27th  November  2013.  His
    decision dated 2nd December 2013 allowed the Appellant's appeal on  the
    basis that the decision of the Respondent was not  in  accordance  with
    the law. The Reasons for Refusal Letter gave  no  indication  that  the
    Respondent had applied her own policy of considering  the  exercise  of
    discretion, where there were circumstances justify overlooking the fact
    that an application was made out of time.

8.   The Respondent reconsidered her decision, but decided to  maintain  the
    refusal and the Appellant appealed against this refusal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Majid
    on 31st October 2014 and was allowed on Article 8 grounds in a decision
    dated 6th November 2014.

9.   The Respondent  appealed  and  permission  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 5th January 2015. The appeal was  heard  on  20th  February
    2015 and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray  allowed  the  Respondent's
    appeal and set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that the judge had failed to make  clear  findings  and  had  not
    given adequate reasons for his decision. The Appellant had consequently
    not had a fair hearing and the case  was  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for substantive hearing on all grounds.

10.  That is how the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cooper
    who found that the Appellant could not succeed in showing that  he  met
    the requirements of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules because his
    application, made in December 2012, was outside the 28 day  time  limit
    imposed for periods of overstaying. Although that provision was not  in
    force when the Appellant made his  first  application  in  March  2012,
    which was rejected for non payment of fee, it was in fact in  force  by
    December 2012.

11.  The  judge  considered  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Appendix FM did not apply in this case.  The  judge  rightly  concluded
    that paragraph 276ADE did not apply and the Appellant  could  not  meet
    the Article 8 requirements of the Immigration Rules.

12.  The judge then went on to assess the Appellant's  Article  8  claim  in
    accordance with the five questions set out in Razgar. She accepted that
    the Appellant  had  established  private  life,  that  there  would  be
    interference and  such  interference  was  necessary  in  a  democratic
    society but concluded that the decision to refuse indefinite  leave  to
    remain and remove the Appellant was proportionate in the circumstances.

13.  The judge made the following findings:

         "56. Miss Easty submitted that this was a 'but for'  case,  arguing
             that had the Appellant not suffered the misfortune  of  having
             his bank account raided before the Respondent had  applied  to
             draw the application fees from it, had  the  Respondent  drawn
             the fees promptly from the account, and had the Appellant  not
             made the simple mistake of omitting to sign his cheque on  the
             second  application,  by  now  he  would  have  been   granted
             indefinite leave to remain that he had originally sought.  She
             implied that these  were  factors  that  I  should  take  into
             account in making the article 8 private life assessment.


         57.  However, I find that submission to be misconceived, it  is  in
             effect a 'near miss' argument and it is well established  that
             Article 8 cannot be used to make  good  the  inability  of  an
             applicant to meet the requirements of the Rules.


         58.  In assessing the weight to be given to any  interference  with
             the Appellant's private  life  I  am  required  to  take  into
             account Section 117B  of  the  Act,  paragraph  (5)  of  which
             provides that little weight should be given to a private  life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.


         59.  Although I acknowledge that the Appellant did accrue 10 years'
             lawful residence prior to the expiry of  his  leave  in  April
             2012,  since  the  beginning  of  June  2012  he  had  had  no
             entitlement to remain in the United Kingdom, other  than  that
             preserved by the fact that he has  appealed  the  Respondent's
             decision. Although, it is regrettable that  it  has  taken  so
             long to conclude his case, those further 3� years carry little
             weight when assessing his private life.


         60.  The Appellant was indeed unfortunate that he was the victim of
             fraud at a time when he was  maintaining  a  bank  balance  to
             cover his  application  fees  (I  do  not  consider  that  the
             Respondent can be held responsible for the consequences of the
             precise timing of her application to the bank for  payment  of
             the fees).  However,  he  was  the  sole  author  of  his  own
             misfortune when he failed to sign the cheque accompanying  the
             second application. It may have been that the Respondent would
             have  exercised  discretion  in  his  favour  had  he  quickly
             remedied that failure and  submitted  a  further  application,
             albeit he would still have fallen  outside  the  28  day  time
             limit. However, in the event his application was well  out  of
             time.

         61.  Whilst the Appellant has established a private  life  in  this
             country I considered it optimistic of  Miss  Easty  to  submit
             that in removing him the Respondent was causing 'the loss of a
             business of great benefit to the  UK'.  I  conclude  that  the
             removal of the  Appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  by  the
             Respondent in pursuit of the  lawful  and  legitimate  aim  of
             maintaining effective immigration control would not amount  to
             a  disproportionate  interference  with  his  right  to  enjoy
             private life."

14.  The grounds of appeal submit that the judge made a  material  error  of
    law in failing to consider material evidence.  The judge accepted  that
    Article 8(1) was engaged and therefore 'near miss' arguments  could  be
    considered as part of the proportionality assessment. The judge  failed
    to consider the case of the Secretary of State v SS (Congo) and  Others
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at paragraph 56 where Lord Justice Richards stated:
         "However, it cannot be said that the fact that a  case  involves  a
         'near miss' in relation to the requirements set out in the Rules is
         wholly irrelevant to the balancing exercise required under  Article
         8.  If an applicant can show that there are individual interests at
         stake covered by Article 8 which give rise to a strong  claim  that
         compelling circumstances may exist to justify the grant of leave to
         enter outside the Rules, the fact that their case is also  a  'near
         miss' case may be a relevant consideration which tips  the  balance
         under Article 8 in their favour. In such a case, the applicant will
         be able to say that the detrimental impact on the  public  interest
         in issue if LTE is granted in their favour will  be  somewhat  less
         than in a case where the gap between the applicant's  position  and
         the requirements of the Rules is great, and the risk that they  may
         end up having recourse to public funds and resources  is  therefore
         greater."
15.  Secondly, the judge failed to consider whether this was  a  case  where
    the public interest against the Appellant should  have  carried  little
    weight given that he had ten years' continuous lawful residence  before
    his leave ran out in April 2012.  The  judge  only  took  into  account
    paragraph 117B(5) and failed to take into  account  the  whole  of  the
    statutory scheme set out in 117A to 117D.

16.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McDade
    on the  basis  that  the  judge  had  arguably  erred  in  law  by  not
    considering the 'near miss' that he found to have occurred as  part  of
    the assessment under Article 8. The judge was correct in stating that a
    'near miss' cannot plug a gap such that the Immigration  Rules  can  be
    satisfied, but was arguably wrong by not considering this as  a  factor
    to be considered in relation to Article 8.

17.  In submissions Mr Pipe confirmed that the  Appellant  did  not  qualify
    for indefinite leave to remain  because  his  current  application  was
    outside the 28 day period from the expiry of his leave  and  the  judge
    had indeed been correct on that point.  However, he submitted that  the
    Appellant had been the victim of a series of unfortunate events. It was
    not in dispute that he had ten year's lawful residence in  the  UK  and
    there were no public interest arguments relevant to the application  of
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

18.  The Appellant had been a victim of fraud and had  unfortunately  failed
    to sign a cheque. The only  reason  he  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules was because his application was made outside  the  28
    day period from the expiry of his leave and this had  been  because  he
    was waiting the renewal of his passport from the Nigerian  authorities.



19.  Mr Pipe submitted that the judge had excluded  relevant  considerations
    from her proportionality assessment.  The  Appellant's  representatives
    at the First-tier Tribunal had in effect submitted at paragraph 56 that
    the Appellant's private life outweighed the public interest. The  judge
    had not categorised this case as  a  'near  miss'.  In  doing  so,  she
    excluded relevant considerations from  her  assessment  of  the  public
    interest element of  the  balancing  exercise  in  Article  8.  It  was
    accepted that a 'near miss' could not plug a  gap  in  the  Immigration
    Rules,  but  that  it  could  be  relevant   to   the   assessment   of
    proportionality in Article 8.

20.  Mr Pipe relied on SS (Congo) and the Respondent  agreed  with  this  in
    the Rule 24 response. Mr Pipe accepted that the Appellant's failure  to
    satisfy a procedural requirement of  the  Immigration  Rules,  a  'near
    miss', to make the application within 28 days of expiry  of  his  leave
    did not create compelling circumstances but it was a factor  which  was
    relevant and could tip the balance in the proportionality exercise.

21.  However, there were clear compelling circumstances in  this  case.  The
    Appellant had ten years'  lawful  residence  and  as  a  result  of  an
    unfortunate series of events the Appellant was unable  to  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules. The Immigration Rules were an  expression  of  where
    the balance should lie in terms of Article 8. The judge had  failed  to
    consider material matters in his proportionality assessment. The little
    weight provisions in  Section  117B  did  not  contain  all  Article  8
    considerations and the judge had in fact erred in finding  that  little
    weight should be given to the Appellant's  private  life,  particularly
    where the Appellant met the substantive provisions for indefinite leave
    to remain and, but for the unfortunate series of events, he would  have
    obtained it.

22.  The judge failed to properly assess the  public  interest  question  in
    the balancing exercise. Prima facie the Appellant met  the  Rules.  The
    judge had erred in law and the decision should be set aside.  This  was
    not a case where the Appellant was trying to evade compliance with  the
    Immigration Rules, but a case where his  private  life  outweighed  the
    limited public interest. The decision should be set aside,  remade  and
    allowed.

23.  Mr Tufan submitted Home Office guidance  on  the  issues  which  stated
    "Once an applicant has built up  a  period  of  ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence there is no limit on the  length  of  time  afterwards
    when they can apply. This means they could leave the  UK,  re-enter  on
    any lawful basis and apply for settlement from within the UK  based  on
    the ten year period of continuous lawful residence they built up in the
    past."

24.  There is nothing to prevent a person relying on a ten year period  that
    they may have relied on in a previous application or grant.  Therefore,
    the Appellant  could  re-enter  the  UK  at  any  time  and  apply  for
    indefinite leave to remain.

25.  Mr Tufan submitted  that  the  judge  had  in  fact  erred  in  law  in
    considering Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules.  There  were  no
    compelling   or   exceptional   circumstances   to   warrant   such   a
    consideration. On the facts of this case  the  circumstances  were  not
    compelling. He relied on paragraph 55 of SS (Congo) and the Appellant's
    'near miss' argument could not be sustained.

26.  In response, Mr Pipe submitted that the judge had  properly  considered
    Article 8 having first assessed the Appellant's claim  under  paragraph
    276ADE and then Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  There was  no
    gateway test to Article 8 and the Rules did not amount to an exhaustive
    consideration in this particular case because of the special compelling
    circumstances. These had not been created by the  'near  miss'  but  by
    other factors.  The Appellant had been a victim of fraud and,  but  for
    that  unfortunate  incident,  his  original  application   would   have
    succeeded.

27.  The Appellant met the substantive provisions of the Immigration  Rules,
    but not the procedural issue. The delay in making the  application  was
    not the fault of the Appellant, but the Nigerian passport authorities.
28.  Although, there was no 'near  miss'  provision  in  the  Rules  it  was
    relevant to proportionality and Miah was still good  law  according  to
    paragraph 55 of SS (Congo).  It was quite clear from paragraph 66  that
    a 'near miss' can tip the balance  in  favour  of  the  Appellant.  The
    guidance, to which Mr Tufan referred, was before  the  judge,  but  the
    point raised by Mr Tufan was not argued. The guidance was relied on  in
    respect of the point in relation to the application being made 28  days
    from the expiry of leave.

29.  Therefore, looking at the guidance it would appear that  the  Appellant
    would have  to  go  through  some  sort  of  legal  fiction  to  secure
    indefinite leave to remain in  returning  to  his  country  of  origin,
    obtaining leave on another basis and then applying for settlement. This
    situation  was  disproportionate  when  the  Appellant  quite   clearly
    satisfied all the substantive requirements of the Rules. The  Appellant
    was not attempting to avoid  compliance  with  the  Rules,  but  had  a
    private life which commanded respect because  he  met  the  substantive
    requirements of the Rules which  reflected  where  the  proportionality
    balance should lie. Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  did  not
    exhaust it.  The Appellant had ten years' lawful residence,  enough  to
    establish a private life here which tipped the balance in his favour.


Discussion and Conclusion

30.  I find that the judge erred in law at paragraph 57 of the  decision  in
    finding that a 'near miss' argument was irrelevant to the assessment of
    Article 8 and that Article 8  could  not  be  used  to  make  good  the
    inability of an applicant to meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules. This was contrary to paragraph 56  of  SS  (Congo)  and  it  was
    accepted by the Respondent that such an argument was indeed relevant to
    the assessment of proportionality.

31.  I also find that the judge erred in law in relying  solely  on  Section
    117B(5) of the 2002 Act and attaching little weight to the  Appellant's
    private life.  This clearly ignores the other factors in Section 117A-D
    and also fails to attach the  appropriate  weight  to  the  Appellant's
    private life given that it was accepted that he had obtained ten years'
    continuous lawful residence in the UK.

32.  Accordingly, I find that the judge has erred in law in  his  assessment
    of proportionality under Article 8 and I set aside his  conclusions  at
    paragraphs 57, 58, 59, 60 and 61.  I remake them as follows.

33.  The  Appellant  cannot  satisfy  the  Article  8  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. However, I find that he has established private life
    in the UK having lived here lawfully for a period  of  ten  years.   He
    initially applied for indefinite leave to remain during the currency of
    his leave and it would appear that he has only  overstayed  his  leaved
    due to what has been termed in this appeal as a 'series of  unfortunate
    events', some of which were out of his control.

34.  I find that the Appellant's circumstances in this case  are  compelling
    and justify an assessment of Article 8 outside  the  Immigration  Rules
    and that the relevant Immigration Rule in this case is  paragraph  276B
    because it is accepted that the Appellant  has  ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence.  His private life should be assessed on  that  basis,
    not only the basis of paragraph 276ADE, which is relevant to those  who
    remain in the UK without leave.

35.  Paragraph 276B states: "The requirements to be met by an applicant  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long residence  in  the  UK
    are that


         (1)  He has at least ten years continuous' lawful residence in  the
             UK;


         (2)  Having regard to the public interest there are no reasons  why
             it would be undesirable for him to be given  indefinite  leave
             to remain on the grounds of long residence taking into account
             various  factors  including  age,  strength  of   connections,
             personal   history,   character,    domestic    circumstances,
             compassionate circumstances and any representations;


         (3)  The applicant does not have one or  more  unspent  convictions
             within the meaning of  the  Rehabilitation  of  Offenders  Act
             1974;


         (4)   The  applicant  has  sufficient  knowledge  of  English   and
             sufficient knowledge about life in the UK;


         (5)  The  Appellant  must  not  be  in  the  UK  in  breach  of  UK
             immigration laws except that any period of overstaying  for  a
             period of 28 days or less will  be  disregarded  as  will  any
             period of overstaying between periods of  entry  clearance  or
             leave to enter or leave to remain within 28 days."

36.  This paragraph represents where the balance lies in granting  leave  to
    remain for a person who has ten years' lawful residence.  It  is  quite
    clear that the Appellant satisfies all of the substantive requirements,
    but that he fails on subparagraph (5) in that  he  has  overstayed  his
    current leave for a period exceeding 28 days.

37.  I find that the reason for overstaying  was  not  entirely  within  the
    Appellant's control.  His original application was made  in  time,  but
    unfortunately he was a victim of fraud and the funds were not available
    when the Respondent sought to obtain them  from  the  Appellant's  bank
    account. The Respondent has accepted that the failure to provide a  fee
    was no fault of the Appellant and the Appellant was invited to resubmit
    his application. It is unfortunate that he failed to sign the cheque in
    this second application and it is also unfortunate that no one realised
    that, when he made his application, his passport has  in  fact  expired
    which meant that he had to obtain a new passport before he was able  to
    make a further application.



38.  The Appellant has not contrived to frustrate the Immigration Rules  and
    has done all in his power indeed  to  comply  with  them.  Given  those
    findings, and the fact that the Appellant speaks good  English  and  is
    not a drain on resources in the UK,  I  find  that  the  weight  to  be
    attached to the public interest is somewhat limited.  The  only  matter
    weighing in the balance is the fact that the Appellant  has  overstayed
    his leave for a short period of time.

39.  However, he has a reasonable explanation for why this is the case  and,
    therefore, there would be a limited public  interest  in  removing  him
    when it is quite clear  from  the  Home  Office  guidance  that  he  is
    perfectly at liberty to return and make the  same  application  on  re-
    entering the country on a lawful basis. It seems to me disproportionate
    to expect him to do so  when  he  in  fact  satisfies  the  substantive
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

40.  Accordingly,  I  find  that  the  Appellant's  private  life,  in  this
    particular case and on these particular  facts,  outweighs  the  public
    interest such that the decision  to  refuse  him  indefinite  leave  is
    disproportionate.

41.  I therefore allow the Appellant's appeal.  I set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal dated 30th September  2015  and  I  remake  it,
    allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.


Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.

              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 26th May 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal, I have decided to make a fee award of any  fee
which has been paid by the Appellant.

              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 26th May 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
