
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/11533/2014
                                                           and IA/11534/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 24 April 2015                     |On 29 April 2015                      |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                             (1) Mrs TOJU OLABIYI
                    (2) Mr OLUWASEUN OLATUNBOSUN OLABIYI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Ononeme, Solicitor (Moorhouse Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with permission granted by Upper Tribunal
         Judge Jordan on 10 February 2015 against the determination of First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Powell who had dismissed the Appellants' linked
         appeals  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  and  her  dependant.   The
         determination was promulgated on 9 September 2014.

    2.     The Appellants are nationals of Nigeria, wife and husband,  born
         respectively on 25 February 1982  and  11  September  1986.   Judge
         Powell found that the Appellant had failed to show  that  they  had
         submitted the specified documents with their  applications  and  so
         had failed to satisfy the Immigration Rules.  Their appeal  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal thus failed.

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Jordan
         because he considered that it was arguable that the judge had erred
         in his assessment of the evidence, although it had to  be  accepted
         that it was for the Appellants to establish prima  facie  that  the
         specified documents had been sent.

    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal.  A rule 24 notice
         dated 25 February 2015 opposing the appeal had been  filed  on  the
         Respondent's behalf.

    Submissions - error of law

    5.     Mr Ononeme for the Appellant relied on the grounds of onwards of
         appeal and the grant of permission to appeal.   He  submitted  that
         the judge had reached erroneous findings.  He  had  not  considered
         the firm which was acting for the Appellants' good reputation.  The
         judge had not considered all of the testimony.  Section 85A of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 had not been relevant.

    6.     Mr Kandola for the Respondent relied on the rule 24 notice.   He
         submitted that the judge's decision had been open  to  him.   There
         had been no misdirection in law.

    7.     There was nothing Mr Ononeme wished to add by way of reply

    8.     The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
         found no error of law and that its determination was reserved.

    No material error of law finding

    9.     In the tribunal's view the grant of permission to appeal by  the
         Upper Tribunal was not easy to follow and was at best generous.  It
         was for the Appellants to show that Judge Powell had erred  in  law
         in his  findings  of  fact  and  in  the  tribunal's  judgment  the
         Appellants manifestly failed to do so.  The  permission  to  appeal
         application was simply  an  expression  of  disagreement  with  the
         judge's findings and Mr Ononeme's  submissions  were  to  the  same
         effect.

    10.     It  is  plain  from  Judge  Powell's  meticulous  and  balanced
         determination that he carefully weighed the evidence placed  before
         him.  The burden of proof was  on  the  Appellants.   Judge  Powell
         explained why (with regret) he had to find that the Appellants  had
         not discharged  the  burden  and  so  had  not  complied  with  the
         Immigration Rules.  The judge mentioned all of the factors which it
         was permissible for him to take into account.   His  findings  were
         all open to him and were clearly explained.

    11.    The tribunal finds that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the
         determination and there  is  no  basis  for  interfering  with  the
         judge's decision.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and stands unchanged






    Signed Dated 24 April 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




