

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11829/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14th November 2013                         |On 28th November 2013        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                              Mahmudhul Hussain

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hassan of Hamlet solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  10th  May  1978
      appeals against a decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davda who,  by
      a determination promulgated  on  4th  September  2013,  dismissed  his
      appeal against a decision of the respondent that he should be  removed
      from the UK.


   2. The challenges to that determination raised in the grounds for seeking
      permission to appeal, and upon which permission was granted  are  that
      the Judge failed properly to consider the appellant's Article 8  claim
      based on 15 years residence in the UK; found that Article  8  was  not
      engaged by interference with the appellant's private life;  failed  to
      consider the appellant's case  under  the  correct  Immigration  Rules
      namely paragraph 276B (long residence) as oppose to paragraph  276ADE;
      had erred in treating a bank statement as belonging to  the  appellant
      whereas it belonged to  one  of  the  witnesses  and  failed  to  have
      adequate regard to the appellant's medical condition.

   3. There was no challenge  to  the  facts  as  found  by  the  judge,  in
      particular:

   a.  The  appellant  first  came  to  the  attention  of  the  immigration
      authorities when he applied for leave to remain on 18th January  2008.
      He then came to their attention when encountered working illegally  on
      22nd May 2008 and was  served  with  notice  that  he  was  liable  to
      removal; he failed  to  report  as  required  by  temporary  admission
      restrictions. He  next  came  to  the  attention  of  the  immigration
      authorities on 18th January 2011 when he requested a decision  on  his
      outstanding application and stated he wished to visit  his  mother  in
      Bangladesh. He was asked to attend an interview on 22nd March 2011 but
      failed to attend. He was again encountered by immigration officials on
      2nd February 2013 in the same restaurant where he had previously  been
      encountered working;
   b. the first documentary evidence that corroborates the  appellant  being
      in the UK is an NMS medical card issued 30th September 2003;
   c. although claiming to have an excellent work record the  appellant  did
      not produce the names of any of the catering  establishments  that  he
      claimed employed  him  in  Exeter,  Manchester,  Glasgow,  Swansea  or
      Newcastle; he produced a level 2 award  in  Food  Safety  in  Catering
      dated February 2011;
   d. Judge Davda placed no weight on the oral evidence of  the  appellant's
      witness Mr Maruf Ahmed;
   e. The judge did not place much weight  on  written  evidence  from  four
      individuals who did not come to give oral evidence;
   f. The appellant produced no evidence of savings or that he sent money to
      his siblings in Bangladesh;
   g. The appellant  has  medical  problems  of  inflammation  of  the  gall
      bladder, small haemorrhoids, eczema, episodes of biliary  colic;  none
      are terminal and there was no evidence to suggest the appellant  could
      not have appropriate treatment in Bangladesh;
   h. The appellant has failed to provide adequate evidence that he  entered
      the UK in 1997 as claimed;
   i. The appellant has family in Bangladesh; the skills he has acquired  in
      the UK including culinary and language skills will stand him  in  good
      stead on return to Bangladesh; there was no  evidence  to  suggest  he
      would not be able to adjust to life in Bangladesh;
   j. He  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
      Immigration Rules.

   4. The application for leave to  remain  pre-dated  the  introduction  of
      paragraph 276ADE  and  although  the  decision  was  taken  after  its
      introduction,  the  application  should,  in   accordance   with   the
      transitional provisions,  have  been  considered  in  accordance  with
      paragraph 276B, since deleted. Before me Mr  Hasan  withdrew  reliance
      upon that paragraph; he acknowledged that irrespective of  which  Rule
      was applicable to the appellant's appeal he could not  meet  the  long
      residence requirements. This was so even if it were accepted  that  he
      had arrived in 1997 as claimed because the service of the  enforcement
      notice in 2003 'stopped the clock'.


   5. He did however assert that the appellant's case remained that  he  had
      arrived in the UK in 1997 as claimed.  In  the  skeleton  argument  he
      submitted he also, in essence, referred to the failure of the judge to
      find that Article 8 was engaged, failed to make adequate  findings  as
      to the appellant's medical condition, that the appellant has lost  all
      meaningful ties with Bangladesh, and that the Home Office has  delayed
      reaching  a  decision  on  the  appellant's  case  thus  resulting  in
      increased stronger ties in  the  UK.  In  oral  submissions  Mr  Hasan
      submitted  that  although  Article  3  was  a  high   threshold,   the
      appellant's medical condition was such that  the  appellant's  removal
      would be a breach. I said I was not  prepared  to  entertain  such  an
      argument: it had not been raised before in the grounds  of  appeal  to
      the First-tier Tribunal, had not been  raised  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge and nor had it  been  raised  in  the  grounds  seeking
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

   6. The judge plainly considered the application under paragraph 276ADE of
      the Rules which was an error of  law,  although  this  was  no  longer
      relied upon by the appellant.  The  judge  also  wrongly  stated  that
      Article 8 was not engaged. Where an individual has been in the UK  for
      a considerable period of time (as here) it is plain that Article 8  is
      engaged and the  significant  issue  is  the  proportionality  of  the
      decision to remove.  I am satisfied that there has been  an  error  of
      law by the judge in reaching her decision but the issue is whether the
      error is such that the decision be set aside to be re-made.

   7. Although the judge stated that Article 8 was not engaged, she did then
      however assess the proportionality of  the  decision  to  remove.  She
      relied upon her findings (summarised in paragraph 3 above)  and  found
      that his removal was proportionate.

   8. The judge failed to make a finding as to when the appellant arrived in
      the UK and it was argued that  without  such  a  finding  it  was  not
      possible to properly consider  the  proportionality  of  any  proposed
      removal. Whilst it is correct that she did not reach a decision as  to
      when he had arrived she refers at length to the unreliability  of  the
      appellant's and his witnesses' evidence as to his arrival and that the
      first documentary evidence is from 2003. It would be  unreasonable  to
      expect any judge to pluck a date or month or year out on such evidence
      as was produced to her. Plainly she has reached her conclusion on  the
      basis that he did not arrive in 1997, as  he  claimed,  and  that  the
      earliest date upon which he was able to produce  evidence  of  arrival
      was September 2003. She assessed this evidence alongside the fact that
      he had been served with an enforcement notice together  with  all  the
      other evidence before her, including the inconsistencies and  lack  of
      coherence of some of his evidence, in reaching her decision.

   9. In so far as delay was concerned, she makes no direct reference to the
      delay in  the  respondent  reaching  a  decision  on  the  appellant's
      application dated 14th December 2007 (received by  the  respondent  on
      18th January 2008) other than to set it out. But it is disingenuous of
      the appellant, at the very least, to rely on the respondent's delay in
      reaching a decision when  he  has  failed  to  comply  with  reporting
      restrictions and failed to attend  an  interview.  He  had  stated  he
      wished to return to Bangladesh to see his mother, in March  2011,  and
      yet failed to disembark. He could easily have done so; he knew that he
      was unlawfully in the UK. I am satisfied  that  the  failure  to  take
      direct account of the delay by the respondent  in  responding  to  the
      application does not in any way mitigate in favour of the appellant.

  10. Mr Hasan said that the major and significant element  that  the  judge
      should have taken into account but did not was the appellant's  length
      of residence, albeit an enforcement notice had been  served  in  2008.
      The judge has made a sustainable finding that the  appellant  did  not
      arrive in 1997 as claimed. Her findings  as  regards  the  appellant's
      medical conditions, his family in Bangladesh, the extent and nature of
      his  private  life  in  the  UK  are  unimpeachable.   It   would   be
      extraordinary if unlawful residence in the  UK  following  failure  to
      comply with temporary admission conditions and failure  to  attend  an
      interview, when considered with all the  other  evidence  before  her,
      could or would  have  led  to  any  other  conclusion  than  that  the
      appellant's removal was proportionate.

    11. I am therefore satisfied that although there was an error of law in
        the First-tier Tribunal judge's determination it was not such as to
        merit the setting aside of the decision.


          Conclusions:

    Although there was an error on a point of law it  is  not  such  as  to
    merit the setting aside of the decision.

     I dismiss the appeal; the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
stands.


                                    Date 14th November 2013
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
