
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11810/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th February 2015                         |On 5th March 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 MRS DHARSHANEE SUMANGALA PREMANATHAN DURAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Khan, Counsel for Louis Kennedy Solicitors,
London


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on  7th  June  1988.   She
    appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  18th  February
    2014 refusing her leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant under the points-based system (PBS) and for a
    biometric immigration document under paragraph 245ZX of the Immigration
    Rules.  Her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Walker
    on 3rd November 2014.  The appeal was dismissed under  the  Immigration
    Rules  but  allowed  on  human  rights  grounds  in   a   determination
    promulgated on 11th November 2014.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Colyer on 9th January 2015.
      The  grounds  of  application  are  that  the  judge  has  materially
    misdirected himself in law as the Appellant cannot show that she  meets
    the requirements of the Rules as they relate to maintenance.  The judge
    holds that this is the fault of the Secretary of State for  failing  to
    return the Appellant's bank passbook but the Respondent argues that the
    Appellant's  bank  is  equally  responsible  for  failing  to  issue  a
    replacement for a seemingly spurious reason which the  judge  seems  to
    accept with equanimity.  The grounds state that by allowing the  appeal
    under Article 8 of ECHR the judge is guilty of an error  identified  in
    paragraph 57 of Patel [2013] UKSC 72  and  that  if  the  decision  was
    either procedurally or substantively unfair the correct approach  would
    have been to make a finding of "otherwise not in  accordance  with  the
    law" rather than impermissibly allow the appeal under Article 8.

The Hearing

 4. There is now a letter on file  dated  21st  January  2015  from  Hatton
    National Bank which states that it will not issue a passbook unless the
    previous passbook is lost or stolen or unless the Home Office forward a
    request to them in a letter for the issue of a new passbook, when  they
    will then issue a temporary passbook.  The Presenting Officer  had  not
    seen this letter although it was sent to the Tribunal on  4th  February
    2015.

 5. The Presenting Officer submitted  that  in  this  claim  the  Appellant
    cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  as  they   relate   to
    maintenance.  He submitted that it was wrong for the judge to say  that
    the Secretary of State should have  sorted  this  matter  out,  as  the
    Appellant has to produce evidence from her bank to show  that  she  has
    the required sums for maintenance for a 28 day period and he  submitted
    that she should have made sure  that  the  bank  provided  evidence  to
    satisfy the terms of the Rules.  He  submitted  that  the  reasons  for
    being unable to do this are irrelevant and based  on  what  was  before
    him;  the  judge  found  that  the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
    maintenance terms of the Rules.

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge has allowed the  appeal
    under Article 8 of ECHR but this is not justifiable.  He submitted that
    the judge has not explained how Article 8  applies  to  the  Appellant.
    The Appellant is in the United Kingdom as a student and  has  to  leave
    the United Kingdom, in terms of her visa, at the end  of  her  studies.
    He submitted that she has a limited private life in the United  Kingdom
    based on her studies.  He submitted that the judge's decision to  allow
    the claim under Article 8 means that the judge is guilty of  the  error
    identified in paragraph 57 of Patel - "Of using Article 8 as a  general
    dispensing power".  The Presenting Officer submitted  that  in  reality
    the situation has nothing to do with Article 8. For whatever reason the
    Appellant has not provided the required evidence to meet the  terms  of
    the Rules.  He submitted that to allow the claim under Article 8  is  a
    wrong approach and if the judge had  found  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to be  unfair  it  should  have  been  remitted  back  to  the
    Secretary of State for reconsideration.  He submitted that to allow the
    claim under Article 8 is not the correct course.

 7. The Appellant's representative submitted that the judge made  a  proper
    assessment.  The Appellant  could  not  meet  the  criteria  under  the
    Immigration Rules because the bank passbook was with the  Home  Office.
    He submitted that the Respondent did not return  the  passbook  to  the
    Appellant and this caused the problem.  He submitted  that  because  of
    the  non-action  of  the  Respondent,  the  Appellant  was  left  in  a
    vulnerable position as the bank was  not  prepared  to  provide  a  new
    passbook, if the passbook was not lost or stolen.   He  submitted  that
    the Appellant has been heavily prejudiced and it cannot  be  right  for
    the Home Office to be able to profit from its  own  negligence  at  the
    expense of an Appellant.  He submitted that the responsibility is  with
    the Home Office.

 8. The representative submitted that the bank passbook  was  submitted  to
    the Home Office with a previous application and has not been sent  back
    and is still in its possession.

 9. The representative referred to Article 8 and the said  case  of  Patel.
    He submitted that this case does not mean that a student in the  United
    Kingdom has no private life under Article 8.  The Appellant has friends
    and contacts in the United Kingdom  because  of  her  life  here  as  a
    student.  She has a private life and this has now been interfered  with
    through no fault of her own.  He submitted that the judge has made  his
    decision properly and has dealt properly with  proportionality  and  he
    submitted that the interference to  the  Appellant's  private  life  is
    because  of  the  actions  of  the  Home  Office.   The  representative
    submitted that it  cannot  be  right  to  say  that  the  Appellant  is
    responsible for this lack of evidence. She cannot produce the evidence.
     There is now a letter from the bank which states that a  new  passbook
    will not be issued unless the old passbook has been lost or stolen.

10. I was referred to paragraphs 21 and 22 of the determination which refer
    to the Appellant's representative making subject  access  requests  and
    the evidence that the bank book was received by  the  Respondent.   The
    judge accepts the Appellant's evidence that she has not  been  able  to
    obtain  a  replacement  passbook.   The  determination  refers  to  the
    Appellant having confirmation from the bank about the  balance  in  the
    account but this only relates to the balance at a certain date  and  is
    not sufficient for the terms of the Immigration Rules to be met.

11. I asked the Presenting Officer if  the  only  evidence  that  could  be
    accepted by him would be the passbook and he said that is not the case.
     The Respondent requires evidence to show that the  Appellant  had  the
    money for  the  required  period  and  bank  statements,  for  example,
    relating to the 28 day period  would  have  been  sufficient  or  other
    relevant evidence.

12. The Presenting Officer submitted that the bank said it would  not  give
    the Appellant a new passbook so what she got  was  a  letter  dated  in
    January 2015 but nothing else.  He submitted that  the  judge  accepted
    her evidence but did not have the required documentary evidence  before
    him.  He submitted that the bank  could  have  given  the  evidence  in
    another way but did not do so.  He submitted that we still do not  have
    evidence that the required maintenance sums were available for  the  28
    day period and I was asked to find that there is an error of law in the
    determination.

Determination

13. This Appellant's appeal cannot succeed because  the  required  evidence
    has not been obtained by the Appellant.  The burden of proof is on  the
    Appellant.

14. The judge did not have before him any evidence relating to the passbook
    although we now have a letter from the bank stating that  it  will  not
    issue a new passbook unless the old one has been lost or  stolen.   The
    judge accepted that the passbook was not available  and  was  with  the
    Home Office.  He also accepted that the Appellant's representative  had
    made access requests and accepted that the Respondent had  acknowledged
    receipt of the passbook.  The  judge  found  that  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities the passbook had not been returned to the  Appellant  and
    is still held by the Respondent.  The Appellant produced to  the  judge
    confirmation from the bank of what the balance in her account  was  but
    only at one certain date.

15. Because of this situation  the  appeal  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules but the judge has allowed it under Article 8.

16. What the judge has done is used Article 8 as a general dispensing power
    as the Rules cannot be satisfied.  This is an error of law.

17. The Presenting Officer made it clear at the hearing that he would  have
    accepted a statement from the bank for the 28 day period and  that  the
    passbook itself was not required.  We still have no evidence  that  the
    Appellant had sufficient funds in her account for the  28  day  period.
    The judge cannot find on the balance  of  probabilities  that  she  had
    this.  All the judge knew was that she had a certain amount in the bank
    at a certain date.  As the burden of proof is  on  the  Appellant,  the
    Appellant should have made an effort to  obtain  satisfactory  evidence
    from the bank so that the terms of the Immigration Rules could be  met.
    She did not do so.

18. In the said case of Patel it is  stated  that  the  opportunity  for  a
    promising student to complete  her  course  in  this  country,  however
    desirable in general terms, is not in itself a  protected  right  under
    Article 8. I do not  find  that  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  is
    procedurally or substantively unfair.



Notice of Decision

19. There is a clear material error of law in the judge's determination.

20. I set aside the decision.  The claim under  the  Immigration  Rules  is
    dismissed and the claim on human rights grounds is dismissed.

21. Anonymity has not been directed.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray








