


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11485/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided at : Field House                      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 2 October 2014                           |On 2 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           JULIUS NZERIBE AGWUBUO


                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Agwubuo's
   appeal against the respondent's decision of 17 February 2014 to refuse to
   vary his leave and to remove him by way of directions under section 47 of
   the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.  For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer  to  the  Secretary  of
   State as the respondent and Mr Agwubuo as the appellant, reflecting their
   positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  on  2  November  1971.  He
   entered the United Kingdom on 17 August 2012 in possession of  a  Tier  4
   Student visa conferring limited leave to enter until 30 January 2014.  On
   30 January 2014 he applied, on Form FLR (O), for  further  leave  outside
   the immigration rules, in order to  complete  his  dissertation  and  his
   studies. He claimed that, as a result of the death of his sister in April
   2013 and the distress arising from that, he had failed three examinations
   and had had to re-sit them. He had passed the examinations but was  as  a
   result unable to complete his dissertation on time  and  his  course  had
   been extended to 31 August 2014 to enable him to do so.

4. The respondent refused the appellant's application on  17  February  2014
   on the grounds that a grant of leave outside the immigration rules  would
   only  be  made  in  cases  where  particularly  compelling  circumstances
   existed. It was not accepted that  such  circumstances  existed  and  the
   respondent considered that the appellant  could  pursue  his  studies  in
   Nigeria.

5. The appellant appealed against that decision  on  the  grounds  that  the
   decision was not in accordance  with  the  immigration  rules;  that  the
   decision was otherwise not in accordance  with  the  law;  and  that  the
   person taking the decision should have exercised differently a discretion
   conferred by the immigration rules. It was asserted in the  grounds  that
   the respondent had failed  to  consider  the  evidence  produced  by  the
   appellant demonstrating  that  there  were  compelling,  exceptional  and
   compassionate circumstances to warrant an extension of  leave  to  remain
   outside the immigration rules.

6. At the appellant's request the appeal was determined  on  the  papers  by
   the First-tier Tribunal, on 28 May 2014. Judge Lloyd considered  that  to
   require the appellant to return to Nigeria before completing  his  course
   would be  unduly  harsh  and  found  that  the  decision  to  refuse  his
   application lacked adequate reasoning. He allowed the appeal.

7. Permission to appeal was sought by the Secretary of State on the  grounds
   that there was no power to allow the appeal outright  under  s86  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

8. Permission was granted on 17 July 2014, on the  grounds  that  the  judge
   ought arguably to have allowed the appeal only to the limited extent that
   it remained outstanding with the respondent for a lawful decision  to  be
   made.

9. In  a  skeleton  argument  submitted  for  the  appeal,  the  appellant's
   representatives asserted that the judge had not erred in law and that  it
   was open to him to allow the appeal  in  full  under  the  provisions  of
   s86(3) of the 2002 Act.

10. The appellant requested that his appeal be determined on the papers  and
   I have proceeded to consider it on that basis.

Consideration and findings.

11. In my view Judge Lloyd clearly erred in  law  by  not  setting  out  the
   basis upon which he  allowed  the  appeal.  As  Judge  Coates  stated  in
   granting permission, the findings made by the judge  suggested  that  his
   conclusion was that the respondent's decision was "not in accordance with
   the law" and that that was the  basis  upon  which  he  had  allowed  the
   appeal. However he did not make that clear.

12. It is the  appellant's  case,  as  set  out  in  the  skeleton  argument
   submitted, that the judge was nevertheless entitled to allow  the  appeal
   outright on the basis of the grounds of appeal before him.  The  skeleton
   then goes on to address each ground, although on the basis  of  arguments
   clearly not put before the judge.

13.  With regard to  the  first  ground,  that  the  decision  was  "not  in
   accordance with the immigration rules", the skeleton argument invites the
   Tribunal to consider  paragraph  353B,  with  reference  to  "exceptional
   circumstances". As stated that was never a matter previously  raised.  In
   any  event  it  is  wholly  misconceived,  since  paragraph  353B  refers
   specifically to fresh claims made by applicants facing removal subsequent
   to the refusal of previous applications and when all appeal  rights  have
   been exhausted. In the appellant's case, his application was not  in  the
   form of submissions  presented  as  a  fresh  claim.  It  was  simply  an
   application for leave to remain outside the rules, made at a time when he
   had extant  leave  and  was  not  subject  to  a  removal  decision.  The
   application having been made outside the rules, there was no basis for an
   argument that the refusal decision was not in accordance with the rules.

14. The second ground addressed in the skeleton, that the decision  was  not
   otherwise in accordance with the law, refers to the Home Office policy in
   Chapter 53 of the Enforcement Instructions and Guidance. Again, that is a
   matter that was never previously raised and that, for the same reasons as
   given above, is wholly misconceived in that it  refers  to  circumstances
   entirely different to those of the appellant.

15. Furthermore, it was made clear by the Upper Tribunal in  AG  and  others
   (Policies; executive discretions; Tribunal's powers) Kosovo [2007]  UKAIT
   00082 that s86(3)(a) did not  amount  to  a  power  to  allow  an  appeal
   outright on such a basis. Although AG was  concerned  with  circumstances
   involving the existence of a policy, the Tribunal made clear at paragraph
   44 that the effect of allowing an appeal on the grounds that the decision
   was not in accordance with the law "would not be to grant  the  appellant
   the substantive relief he seeks but merely  to  set  aside  the  unlawful
   decision so that a lawful decision (whether  in  favour  or  against  the
   appellant) may in due course be made."

16.  Finally, in regard to the third ground, that  "the  person  taking  the
   decision should have exercised differently a discretion conferred by  the
   immigration rules", the skeleton argument fails to take  account  of  the
   fact that this was  not  a  matter  of  a  discretion  conferred  by  the
   immigration rules. The application, as already stated, was  made  outside
   the immigration rules. Accordingly the appellant was unable  to  rely  on
   the ground of appeal in  s84(1)(f)  and  as  found  in  AG,  albeit  with
   reference to a  policy,  where  it  is  a  question  of  an  exercise  of
   discretion outside the immigration rules "the Tribunal has  no  power  to
   seek to substitute its own decision  for  that  of  the  decision-maker".
   Accordingly in the appellant's case, the Tribunal had no power  to  allow
   the appeal outright on the basis  that  discretion  ought  to  have  been
   exercised differently.

17. In all of these circumstances I  find  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
   grounds are made out and that the judge had no power to allow the  appeal
   outright. For that reason, and given that he did not  make  it  clear  on
   what basis he had allowed  the  appeal,  I  set  aside  his  decision  as
   containing material errors of law.

18. In re-making the decision I have considered, as suggested in  the  grant
   of permission, whether there should  simply  be  substituted  a  decision
   allowing the appeal on the basis of  the  judge's  findings  and  on  the
   limited basis that the decision was not in accordance with  the  law  and
   that the matter be remitted to the Secretary of State to  make  a  lawful
   decision. However, matters have since moved on and  the  reason  why  the
   appellant sought an extension of leave no longer exists, in so far as the
   completion date of his course has now passed and he has had  the  benefit
   of the additional time requested.  His  evidence  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal was that he had no intention of staying in  the  United  Kingdom
   once he completed his Masters and that he intended to return to Africa to
   take up the many opportunities open to him there or alternatively take up
   an offer to pursue  studies  at  the  Northern  Caribbean  University  in
   Jamaica. There is no evidence before me to suggest that those  intentions
   have since changed or that the appellant has not been  able  to  complete
   his course. Accordingly there is no basis  for  the  Secretary  of  State
   giving further consideration to exceptional or compelling  circumstances,
   when it has not been suggested that any now exist and  neither  is  there
   any basis for concluding that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was
   unlawful.

19. No Article 8 grounds have  been  raised,  but  in  any  event  there  is
   clearly no basis upon which an Article  8  claim  could  succeed  on  the
   evidence available to me. It seems to me that the appeal has simply to be
   dismissed.

DECISION

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error
   on a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly allowed
   and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. I  re-make  the
   decision by dismissing Mr Agwubuo's appeal on all grounds.






                               Signed


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
