
[pic]

Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        IA/11687/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 22 November 2013               On 28 November 2013

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                             Mehar Nessa Khatoon
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. E. Martin, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:            Mr. M. Hassan of Kalam Solicitors.


                         DETERMINATION: ERROR OF LAW

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Callender  Smith
      promulgated on 16 September 2013, allowing Ms Khatoon's appeal against
      the Respondent's decision dated 22 March 2013 to refuse her  leave  to
      remain in the UK. (A further decision also  dated  22  March  2013  to
      remove Ms Khatoon pursuant to section 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
      and Nationality Act 2006, appears to have been appropriately withdrawn
      by the Secretary of State at the hearing:  no  specific  reference  is
      made to this in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination, but  so
      far as it is decipherable there appears to be a note to this effect on
      the record of proceedings on file.)


   2. Although in the proceedings before me the Secretary of  State  is  the
      appellant,  and  Ms  Khatoon  is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of
      consistency with the proceedings  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  I
      shall hereafter refer to Ms Khatoon as the Appellant and the Secretary
      of State as the Respondent.


Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on  11  November  1950.
      She entered the UK with entry clearance as a visitor on 10 March 2012.
      On 29 June 2012 she applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  the
      dependent relative of her son Mr MD Fazal Karim. The  application  was
      refused for reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter dated 22
      March 2013 and the Appellant was formally refused variation  of  leave
      to enter or remain by way of a Notice of Immigration Decision  of  the
      same date.


   4. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for  reasons   set   out   in   his
      determination.


   5. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Landes on 4 October 2013.


Error of Law

   6. The Respondent's  decision  was  taken  primarily  with  reference  to
      paragraph 317 of  the  Immigration  Rules,  in  particular  paragraphs
      317(i)(d), (iii), and (v); the Respondent also had regard to paragraph
      A277B and Appendix FM of the Rules.


   7. Paragraph 317(i)(d) makes it a requirement that an applicant who is  a
      dependent parent under the age of 65  be  "living  alone  outside  the
      United Kingdom in the most exceptional  compassionate  circumstances".
      It is well established that when making an application under paragraph
      317 from within the UK an applicant must demonstrate  that  she  would
      meet the substantive requirements of paragraph 317 if she  were  still
      in her own  country:  see  MB  (para  317:  in  country  applications)
      Bangladesh [2006] UKAIT 00091, and in particular at paragraph 9 - "The
      correct question is what the applicant's position would be if, instead
      of being in the United Kingdom, she were in her own country."


   8. In the instant case, having set out primary findings at paragraphs 21-
      24 of the determination, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  reaches  the
      following conclusion in what appears to be the determinative paragraph
      in his determination, paragraph 26:

"The evidence I have considered is cogent and credible and I  am  satisfied,
      to  the  required  standard,  that  there  are  the  most  exceptional
      compassionate circumstances that merit her been  [sic.]  permitted  to
      remain in the United Kingdom with her eldest  son,  the  sponsor,  who
      provides for her needs and looks after her now."


   9. In my judgement this does not represent a  statement  of  the  correct
      test to be derived from paragraph 317(i)(d). The test is  not  whether
      the  current  circumstances  in   the   UK   amount   to   exceptional
      compassionate circumstances that merit an applicant being  allowed  to
      remain. The test implicit in the formulation of words adopted  by  the
      Judge does not demonstrate an enquiry into whether  the  circumstances
      in Bangladesh, were the Appellant to be there,  would  amount  to  her
      living in the most exceptional compassionate circumstances.


  10. Although at paragraph 27 the Judge asserts that the  Appellant  "falls
      within the provisions of Paragraph 317", in light of the  foregoing  I
      am not satisfied that in stating as much the Judge had had  regard  to
      the proper test under paragraph 317.  Nor  am  I  satisfied  that  the
      determination of the Judge in favour of the Appellant is, as it  were,
      'saved' by his perfunctory reference to Article 8 in  the  alternative
      at paragraph 28. Paragraph 28 does not demonstrate a full  and  proper
      consideration of Article 8 by reference to the  Immigration  Rules  or
      the established  jurisprudence  that  predated  the  incorporation  of
      Appendix FM. Further in this context I agree with the observations  of
      Judge Landes in granting permission to appeal to the effect that Judge
      Handley came to his decision on  Article  8  "For  the  same  reasons"
      (paragraph 27) as his decision under the Rules,  and  accordingly  any
      error in his approach  under  the  Rules  would  have  'infected'  his
      consideration under Article 8.


  11. Accordingly in all the circumstances I find that there was a  material
      error of law in that the First-tier Tribunal Judge misdirected himself
      as to the requirements of the Immigration Rules, and did not otherwise
      undertake a full and proper assessment under Article 8.


  12. In considering the future conduct of the appeal I have had  regard  to
      the following matters:

(i) The Respondent has raised issues of  credibility  by  reference  to  the
      Appellant's alleged failure to declare her true circumstances prior to
      entering the UK, and  in  particular,  having  failed  to  inform  the
      Respondent at the Entry Clearance Manager's review stage of the  death
      of her husband. In this context there may also be an issue in  respect
      of the number of her children who were said  to  be  still  living  in
      Bangladesh when the Appellant made her application for entry clearance
      as a visitor.

(ii) The presence of the Appellant's younger son in  the  UK  as  a  student
      only became apparent during the course of the hearing before the First-
      tier Tribunal. There has been no exploration  as  to  the  basis  upon
      which he demonstrated an ability to meet the financial requirements of
      the Rules, which may be a matter relevant to the issues in the instant
      appeal.

(iii) The Appellant has claimed in her Grounds of Appeal to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal that "Prior to entering  the  UK  [her]  intentions  were  to
      simply visit and return". In the premises the fact of being  a  widow,
      and the fact of her pre-existing medical conditions had not been  such
      as to deter her from intending to return to her home. The  plea  of  a
      change of circumstances since arriving  in  the  UK  requires  further
      exploration,  possibly  with  the  assistance  of  further  supporting
      evidence.

(iv) There remains an issue  in  respect  of  paragraph  317(v).  The  Judge
      records in his determination the Appellant's evidence  to  the  effect
      that her daughter had married somebody with a  good  job,  who  earned
      well; although the Appellant  stated  that  her  daughter  "would  not
      welcome her as part of their house" (determination at  paragraph  14),
      there was no clear evidence or finding as to the availability, or non-
      availability, of financial support.


  13. Given the nature of the issues that now require to be determined,  and
      including the possibility that the Respondent may wish to  cross-refer
      to the Appellant's sons student applications (as was indicated  by  Ms
      Martin), both parties agreed that the  most  appropriate  and  fairest
      option was for the appeal to be heard  afresh  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. In my judgement this is the most just approach.


  14. Accordingly I conclude that the decision in the appeal requires to  be
      remade after a full rehearing, with all issues at  large,  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal.


Decision

  15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside. The decision in the appeal is to  be  remade  by
      the First-tier Tribunal by any judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Callender Smith with all issues at large.


      Consequent Directions

      1. The appeal is to be heard at Taylor House on 28 February 2014  with
      a time estimate of 2 hours, before any  judge  other  than  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Callender Smith.

      2. In the event that the Respondent wishes to rely  upon  any  further
      evidence, including in particular any  evidence  in  relation  to  the
      Appellant's student son, and/or wishes  to  amend  or  supplement  the
      reasons relied upon for denying the Appellant leave to remain  in  the
      UK, any such evidence, or further reasons, is to be filed  and  served
      within 14 days from the promulgation of this determination.

      3. Any further evidence upon which the Appellant wishes to rely,  must
      be filed and served at least 7 days prior to the next hearing..

      4. An interpreter in Sylheti is required for the hearing.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     22 November 2013


