
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/11730/2013
                                                               IA/11731/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination promulgated    |
|On 3 December 2013                            |On 9 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                 THE SECRETARY STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MRS RIDMIKA DULARI ARAWWALAGE
                     MR THUSHARA SAMAN KUMARA RANHALUGE
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr N Bramble a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents: Miss A Nizami of counsel instructed Sahida & Co Legal
Services
                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department. I will
   refer to her as the Secretary of State. The respondents are citizens of
   Sri Lanka and husband-and-wife. She was born on 14 July 1979 and he on 13
   August 1977. I will refer to them as the claimants. The Secretary of
   State has been given permission to appeal the determination of First-Tier
   Tribunal Judge V A Cox ("the FTTJ") who allowed the claimants' appeals
   against the Secretary of State's decisions of 27 March 2013 to refuse the
   wife leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant
   under the Points-based System and for a Biometric Residence Permit and to
   refuse the husband leave to remain as her dependant. The Secretary of
   State also gave directions for their removal from the UK under the
   provisions of Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act
   2006.


2. I heard the Secretary of State's appeal against the FTTJ's decision on
   17 October 2013. On 18 October 2013 I issued a Decision and Directions
   which is annexed to this determination. It should be read with this
   determination, preferably first. I will not repeat what I said there.


3. Mr Bramble informed me that the Secretary of State had not complied with
   my directions. Clearly he has made repeated efforts to get the
   appropriate department to consider and reach a decision on the correction
   letter starting soon after the hearing on 17 October and culminating with
   the manager of the appropriate department telling him this morning that
   they would look for the file. I have been given copies of Mr Bramble's
   memo and e-mails. Telephone calls have not been returned or e-mails
   answered. Mr Bramble accepted that the directions had given the Secretary
   of State ample time to deal with the correction letter and to make a
   decision.


4. Miss Nizami submitted that the Secretary of State had provided no basis
   on which to challenge the correction letter. I was asked to uphold the
   decision made by the FTTJ by remaking it and allowing the appeal. The
   claimants were privately funding the appeal and absent any prior
   notification from the Secretary of State as to what the position would be
   at the hearing today they had to instruct counsel to attend on their
   behalf.


5. The only basis on which I found that the FTTJ erred in law and set aside
   her decision was because, when dealing with a paper case, she had not
   adjourned to give the Secretary of State the opportunity to consider the
   correction letter. That opportunity has now been given. Mr Bramble
   accepted that there was sufficient time for the Secretary of State to
   consider and react to the correction letter. She has not done so and has
   not given any good reason for failing to do so. At the hearing on 17
   October I indicated to Mr Bramble that I would be reluctant to grant a
   further adjournment unless the Secretary of State could show a compelling
   reason for doing so. She has not.


6. There has been no criticism of the FTTJ's decision to allow the appeals
   against the Section 47 removal directions. The only criticism of her
   decision to allow the appeals under the Immigration Rules was in relation
   to procedural unfairness. The Secretary of State has now had the
   opportunity to show that the procedural unfairness would have made a
   difference to the conclusion, for example if the correction letter was
   disputed in any way, but has failed to do so. Having set aside the
   decision of the FTTJ I remake it and conclude that for the reasons she
   gave the claimants have established that they met the requirements of the
   Immigration Rules.


7. I allow the claimants' appeals.








   Signed:........................................
   Date: 4 December 2013
   Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department. I
      will refer to her as the Secretary of State. The respondents are
      citizens of Sri Lanka and husband-and-wife. She was born on 14 July
      1979 and he on 13 August 1977. I will refer to them as the claimants.
      The Secretary of State been given permission to appeal the
      determination of First-Tier Tribunal Judge (FTTJ) V A Cox who allowed
      the claimants appeals against the Secretary of State's decisions of 27
      March 2013 to refuse the wife leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4
      (General) Student Migrant under the Points-based System and for a
      Biometric Residence Permit and to refuse husband leave to remain as
      her dependant. The Secretary of State also gave directions for their
      removal from the UK under the provisions of Section 47 of the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


   2. The claimants made their applications on 16 February 2012. When
      refusing them the Secretary of State accepted that the wife was
      entitled to the claimed 30 points for Confirmation of Acceptance for
      Studies and the claimed 10 points the Maintenance (Funds). The
      applications were refused on one point only. With her application the
      wife submitted a letter from the Accrediting & Assessment Bureau for
      Post Secondary Schools (AABPS) confirming that she had been awarded a
      Level 4 Diploma in Business Management Studies on 22 August 2011.
      According to the reasons for refusal letter somebody from the UKBA
      contacted the AABPS who said that the wife had never been registered
      with them and had not obtained an accredited award. As a result there
      were additional grounds for refusal under paragraph 322 (1A) of the
      Immigration Rules on the basis that the wife had used deception. If
      this is upheld it would have severe consequences for any future
      application to come to the UK.


   3. The wife contacted AABPS who issued an open letter dated 22 April 2013
      in which they confirmed that she had been awarded a Level 4 Diploma in
      Business Management Studies on 22 August 2011 and that the error
      occurred because she had been registered under an incorrect date of
      birth during the registration process at AABPS. Clearly this was an
      error on the part of AABPS which neither the wife nor the Secretary of
      State had been aware of. I will refer to this is the correction
      letter.


   4. The claimants appealed and the FTTJ was asked to determine the appeal
      on the papers, which is what she did. The claimants' representatives
      submitted a bundle of documents including a copy and the original of
      the correction letter and written submissions.


   5. The FTTJ determine the appeal on 26 July 2013. She concluded that
      there had been no deception and that the claimants met the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules. She allowed both appeals
      including the appeals against the Section 47 decisions.


   6. In the grounds of appeal accompanying her application for permission
      to appeal the Secretary of State alleges that the FTTJ erred in law by
      not adjourning the hearing to give her the opportunity to check and
      consider the correction letter. It was argued that the failure to do
      so amounted to procedural unfairness.


   7. The first question that arose at the hearing before me was whether the
      correction letter had been submitted to the Secretary of State at any
      time and in particular prior to the hearing before the FTTJ. Mr
      Bramble said that there was no evidence on his file to indicate that
      this had been done. Mr Davison said, on instructions that the
      claimants thought that it had been sent but were unable to say when or
      how. This is not surprising because they thought that it had been sent
      by their representatives. Mr Davison was not able to produce any
      evidence to show that the representatives had sent the correction
      letter to the Secretary of State. On the Tribunal file I found a
      letter from the claimants' representatives dated 18 July 2013 sending
      the claimants documents to the tribunal. These included the original
      of the correction letter. There was no indication that the letter or
      its enclosures had been copied to the Secretary of State. However, set
      against this, in paragraph 7 of the determination the FTTJ said; "none
      of the parties have requested an oral hearing and none of the parties
      have submitted any documents that have not been seen by the other
      party".


   8. No evidence can be found on the Tribunal file and neither
      representative has been able to provide me with any evidence that the
      correction letter had been submitted to the Secretary of State at any
      time prior to the hearing before the FTTJ. The weight of the evidence
      points to the conclusion that it had not, which is the conclusion I
      reach.


   9. I accept Mr Davison's submission that in these circumstances there was
      no mandatory requirement for the FTTJ to grant an adjournment. The
      decision was within her discretion. However, in the light of my
      finding in the last paragraph, Mr Davison accepted and I find that
      justice required an adjournment to give the Secretary of State the
      opportunity to inspect and consider the correction letter. The failure
      to do so amounted to procedural unfairness and was an error of law.


  10. There is no criticism of the decisions to allow the appeals against
      the Section 47 removal directions and these stand. I set aside the
      decisions to allow the appeals under the Immigration Rules. It will be
      necessary to remake these decisions unless, after considering the
      correction letter, it is accepted by the Secretary of State who
      decides to grant the claimants applications. The directions which I
      have given below are designed so that the appeals only need to be
      reheard if the Secretary of State maintains her decisions.


  11. I record that I gave the original correction letter to Mr Bramble.




DIRECTIONS

No later than 28 November 2013 the Secretary of State is to consider the
correction letter and inform the Upper  Tribunal and the claimant's
representatives whether she maintains her decisions and if so on what basis






