
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/11122/2015
                                                               IA/11126/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 20th July 2016                    |On 30th August 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                              AHMED ALI CHAPTI
                             SUEHEL VALI CHAPTI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Muman (Counsel, instructed by J M Wilson)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The First Appellant had entered the UK under the Immigration Rules at a
    time when he did not require an English language certificate  in  order
    to succeed under the Rules. His original application had  been  refused
    but following a successful appeal he entered  the  UK  on  the  2nd  of
    December 2012 with leave expiring on the 28th of December 2014.

 2. The Appellant had been party to the first instance  litigation  in  the
    case of Bibi [2015] UKSC68 but did not take part in  the  appeals  that
    followed. It is not disputed that the Appellant cannot meet the English
    language test requirements that now apply to any application he has  to
    make. In the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it was argued  that
    in the circumstances it was disproportionate to require  the  Appellant
    take the test and so the appeals should have been allowed under article
    8 outside the rules.

 3. The Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules, He noted specifically that the case was put  on  the
    basis of fairness. He found that the amendment to the rules was open to
    the Secretary of State and that paragraph 281 allowed for compassionate
    circumstances such as age or medical problems and he noted that it  had
    not been suggested that the Appellant fell within any of the exceptions
    and it could not  be  suggested  that  the  imposition  of  an  English
    language test was not article 8  compliant,  relying  on  Bibi.  Having
    found that there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing in India the appeal was dismissed under article 8.

 4. The application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal asserted
    that the Judge had erred in a number  of  respects.  Referring  to  the
    finding in paragraph 20 that the  Appellants'  immigration  status  had
    been precarious it was suggested that was not correct as they  had  had
    leave to remain, were  in  the  UK  lawfully  where  they  legitimately
    expected to remain and their private life warranted significant weight.
    It was further argued  that  the  First  Appellant's  family  life  had
    developed whilst in the UK as had the First Appellant's  wife's  family
    life with his mother. It was submitted that the  Judge's  consideration
    of the Appellants' family and private lives had been inadequate and the
    assertion they could live in India gave no consideration  to  the  time
    they had spent in the UK.

 5. The application was considered by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson  on
    the 3rd of March 2016. In granting permission it  was  noted  that  the
    Appellants had been granted entry clearance to the UK and at  the  time
    of the application were  lawfully  in  the  UK  and  had  a  legitimate
    expectation of settlement, in those circumstances it was arguable  that
    their status was not precarious. It was also arguable  that  the  Judge
    had not properly considered the Appellants' family life.

 6. The Respondent's rule 24 response was served on the 15th of March 2016.
    Relying on AM (s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260  (IAC)  it  was  submitted
    that their presence was precarious as it was dependent on the grant  of
    further leave. The Appellant could not meet the Immigration  Rules  and
    had no legitimate expectation to remain. Reasons for the findings under
    paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM were given.

 7. At the hearing Mr Muman put the case on a  completely  different  basis
    arguing that the Judge had been wrong to find that the Appellant  could
    not succeed given he had not  passed  the  English  language  test.  He
    submitted that it was not proportionate as it  was  not  fair,  he  had
    satisfied the pre-entry tests and once in could not do so, account  had
    to be taken of his age and level of intellect and that he  had  had  no
    formal education, the evidence to the High Court was that he would find
    it difficult to pass the test. His wife is a British Citizen and living
    in the UK as such and his age was relevant.

 8. Mr Muman went on, still arguing on the English language test, that  the
    Judge had not recognised that the First Appellant did not have to  pass
    the test. In paragraph 20 looking outside the rules  was  not  strictly
    necessary, the Judge  did  not  explore  the  exemptions  in  paragraph
    284(ix), Bibi was a capacious  basket  and  had  been  interpreted  too
    narrowly. It should have been treated as a gateway to article 8.

 9. For the Home Office Mr Mills noted  that  the  grounds  as  drawn  were
    narrow and were based on legitimate expectation and precariousness  and
    that was answered by the case law, AM (Malawi). Legitimate  expectation
    is specific and well defined and does not apply here.  The  expectation
    would be that the application would be considered under the rules  that
    apply. Under section 117B the Judge was right to say that little weight
    attached to the Appellants' private life.

10. With regard to the Appellant's wife it had been thought  that  she  was
    Indian with a right of abode rather than a British Citizen. She was  in
    her 50s when she came to the UK having lived her life in India. It  was
    open to the Judge to find that she could be expected to  return  there.
    There had been no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to show  that
    he had been on courses or had tutoring and, referring to paragraph 6 of
    his witness  statement,  there  was  no  evidence  of  his  having  had
    assistance when he attended the offices. This was not a case  where  it
    had been shown that he could  not  do  it  if  he  tried.  It  was  not
    compelling such that the  Immigration  Rules  attracted  little  weight
    compared to his private and family life.  Section  117B  was  aimed  at
    integration and that was a continuous aim, the reasons given were  more
    than adequate.

11. The grounds were specific and narrow as set out above. It is clear that
    the term precarious means  that  a  person's  presence  in  the  UK  is
    dependent on a grant of leave and on that basis the grounds  and  grant
    of permission are simply wrong.

12. Legitimate  expectation  is  a  limited  concept  and  only  arises  in
    circumstances where an individual or organisation with authority  makes
    a specific undertaking which another person is  entitled  to  rely  on.
    That is very clearly not the case here and it would be better if  those
    drafting  grounds  of  application  for  permission  to   appeal   used
    appropriate terminology. The Appellants had an expectation  that  their
    applications would be considered  in  accordance  with  the  applicable
    Immigration Rules. That expectation was met

13. There is no dispute taken in the grounds  with  the  statement  by  the
    Judge in paragraph 14 that "It is not suggested that that the Appellant
    falls within any of the exceptions under paragraph 281."  The  argument
    put forward by Mr Muman was not raised in the  grounds  of  application
    and he did not apply to amend the grounds of application.

14. Having regard to the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  I  have  considered
    the 5 stages. The interference in the Appellants life is in  accordance
    with the law, stage 3. The  case  of  Bibi  has  established  that  the
    interference can be justified. So far as proportionality  is  concerned
    the First Appellant had not provided evidence to show that he had  done
    all that could sensibly have been expected of him.

15. Mr Mills observed there was no evidence of his attending  classes  such
    as ESOL or other form  of  tutoring.  His  witness  statement  did  not
    suggest  that  he  was  accompanied  to  where  tests  were  held,  the
    assistance of family members might have assisted his  ability  to  cope
    with the circumstances.

16. There are a number of problems with the appeal which lead me to dismiss
    it. The first is that Mr Muman put the case on a basis which  was  very
    different from that raised in the grounds of application and  on  which
    permission was granted and there was no application to amend.

17. Putting that procedural matter to  one  side  the  fact  is  the  First
    Appellant had not shown that he is unable to pass the test  as  he  has
    not shown that he has taken reasonable steps to equip himself to do so.
    Had there been evidence of attendance and ESOL classes and/or  tutoring
    and evidence that he was assisted in  attending  the  tests  then  that
    might have been different but the evidence suggested that he  had  done
    very little to take advantage of  living  in  the  UK  to  improve  his
    chances.

18.  In  those  circumstances  the  finding  that  he  did  not  meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 281, apparently conceded  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing, was open to the Judge and the argument appears to  be
    an attempt to use article 8 to circumvent the rules when  the  evidence
    does not show compelling circumstances.

19. I would add that the findings in relation to article 8 and the  ability
    of the Sponsor and Appellant to live  in  India  were  also  justified.
    Whether the Sponsor is now a British Citizen of has ILR does not  alter
    the finding that, given she lived for many decades in India  and  still
    converses with the Appellant in Gujarati, the finding  that  she  could
    reasonably live there was open to the Judge for the reasons given.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
Dated: 22nd August 2016
