

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Ia/11293/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 September 2015                           |On 15 April 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                    Appellant
                                     and

                              TIKLU DEY LASKAR
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr .E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr. M. Hasan, Counsel instructed by Kalam Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The First-tier Tribunal (FtTT) did not make an anonymity direction. I
    have not been asked to make one and see no public policy reason for
    doing so and none is made.


2.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    (hereafter "the respondent") against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtTT) (Judge Omotosho). On 7 January 2015  the  FtTT  allowed
    the appeal of Mr  Laskar  (hereafter  "the  claimant"),  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh, against the decision of the respondent  dated  12  February
    2014 refusing his application for leave to remain as the  spouse  of  a
    British citizen and giving  directions  for  his  removal  contrary  to
    section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

3.    The claimant arrived in the UK on 19 May  1991  with  entry  clearance
    conferring leave to enter as a  visitor  until  19  November  1991.  He
    overstayed his permitted leave and the events that followed disclose  a
    protracted immigration history. It is not necessary at  this  stage  to
    make detailed reference to that history but, essentially, the  claimant
    made a settlement application on 30 March 2007 in order  to  regularise
    his status in the UK. That application was refused on  5  October  2009
    and the claimant was served  with  an  IS151B  removal  decision.  What
    followed was a string of requests from the respondent  for  information
    and  subsequent   representations   made   by   the   claimant's   then
    representatives.

4.    On 12  February  2014  the  Respondent  refused  the  application  for
    reasons set out in a Reasons for Refusal letter ('RFRL') of  that  date
    and a Notice of Immigration Decision was issued. The RFRL  referred  to
    paragraph 276A-D of the  Rules  and  noted,  in  particular,  that  the
    respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  claimant  had  completed  a
    continuous period of 14`years unlawful residence in the UK pursuant  to
    paragraph 276B of the Rules. The  application  was  also  refused  with
    reference to Appendix FM of the Rules, paragraph 276ADE and  Article  8
    (ECHR).

5.    The claimant appealed to the IAC.

6.    Both the claimant and his  wife  attended  before  the  FtTT  to  give
    evidence: they each adopted their  respective  witness  statements  and
    both were  cross-examined.  The  FtTT  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds  pursuant  to  Article  8
    (ECHR) for reasons set out in its decision. In summary, the FtTT  found
    that the claimant  and  his  wife  gave  credible  evidence  [34].  The
    evidence established that the couple were in a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship and the claimant's wife was expecting their  first  child.
    The FtTT accepted the claimant's wife was the sole carer of her  father
    who  suffered  from  Parkinson's  disease  and  had  been  so   for   a
    considerable period [36]. The FtTT was satisfied that the claimant  had
    been resident in the UK since 1991; had not left since entry  and  that
    credible explanations had  been  given  for  the  lack  of  documentary
    evidence [37]. The FtTT acknowledged the claimant's "poor"  immigration
    history, but was satisfied that he had lived in the UK  for  23  years.
    The FtTT was thus satisfied that all of the requirements  of  paragraph
    276A-D  were  met  and  consequently  allowed  the  appeal.  The   FtTT
    considered Article 8 and found that, whilst having regard to the public
    interest provisions in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), removal would be  a  disproportionate
    interference with family and private life. The FtTT took  into  account
    the claimant's immigration history and the inability of the  claimant's
    wife to travel to Bangladesh. The  FtTT  gave  weight  to  the  settled
    status of the claimant's  wife  and  the  fact  that  the  couple  were
    expecting a child together. Accordingly,  the  appeal  was  allowed  on
    human rights grounds.

7.    The respondent applied for permission to appeal which was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on 22 April 2015 on all grounds.

Decision on Error of Law

8.    The respondent's grounds in support of the application for  permission
    to appeal challenge the decision of the FtTT under  the  Rules  and  on
    Article 8 (ECHR) grounds. In respect of the former, it is  argued  that
    the FtTT failed to reason its finding that the claim was credible  and,
    in particular, the finding that the claimant had been resident  in  the
    UK for a period of 23 years. In respect of  the  latter  ground  it  is
    argued that the FtTT failed to have proper regard to the provisions  of
    section 117B of the 2002 Act, noting that no reasons had been  provided
    as to why the FtTT placed weight on a relationship  formed  whilst  the
    claimant was in the UK unlawfully. Mr Tufan relied on those grounds and
    amplified them at the hearing.

9.    Mr Hasan submitted that the FtTT allowed the appeal  under  the  Rules
    on the basis that it was satisfied the claimant had been in the UK  for
    a  period  in  excess  of  20  years.  In  referring  to  the   Judge's
    consideration of Article 8, he submitted that the Judge looked  at  the
    circumstances as a whole  and  accepted  the  claimant  was  married  a
    British citizen. The Judge considered section 117B of the 2002 Act  and
    made  reference  to  relevant  jurisprudence.  He  submitted  that  the
    circumstances were exceptional and  that  the  Judge  referred  to  the
    Immigration Rules at para. [38].

10.   I am satisfied that the respondent's grounds are  made  out  and  that
    the FtTT materially erred in law. The FtTT deals with the appeal  under
    the Rules in brief terms at [33 to 38]. Two of  these  paragraphs  deal
    with uncontentious matters and  in  essence  the  FtTT's  consideration
    appears  at  [37]  and  [38].  At  [37]   the   FtTT   concludes   that
    notwithstanding the lack  of  documentary  evidence  corroborating  the
    period of claimed residence  that,  "I  find  that  the  appellant  has
    provided  me  with  satisfactory  and  credible  explanations  for  his
    inability to provide sufficient documentary  evidence  to  substantiate
    this part of his claim." It was in respect of that conclusion that  the
    FtTT accepted the claimant had been resident in  the  UK  for  over  23
    years [38], which was the very basis upon which the appeal was  allowed
    under the Rules. The FtTT's statement at [37] is conclusionary and must
    be supported by adequate reasons. I find that no reasons are  given  as
    to why the FtTT so concluded. It is not clear what  explanation(s)  the
    FtTT considered were credible and why. Whilst it is  not  incumbent  on
    the FtTT to spell out in great detail the evidence relied  upon,  there
    is a duty to give reasons which discloses the rationale as to why  that
    conclusion(s) was reached. The FtTT failed to discharge that duty. That
    conclusion was material to the FtTT's  decision  to  allow  the  appeal
    under the Rules and I am satisfied that the FtTT thus erred in law.

11.   At the hearing Mr Tufan made the additional  point  that  it  was  not
    clear under which Immigration Rule the FtTT  allowed  the  appeal,  and
    that, if it was pursuant to paragraph 276B of the Rules, then the  FtTT
    failed to consider the discretionary element of that Rule. Whilst  that
    contention was not pleaded in the grounds and, whilst it is clear  that
    the FtTT allowed the appeal with reference to paragraph 276A-D  of  the
    Rules, I find that there is an obvious error in that, the  FtTT  failed
    to consider the requirements of paragraph 276B(ii)  of  the  Rules  and
    thus failed to recognise that the Rules require  an  assessment  to  be
    undertaken          of          the          public           interest.





























































































12.   I am satisfied that these errors impact upon the  FtTT's  decision  to
    allow the appeal on human rights grounds as the claimant's  ability  to
    meet  the  requirements  thereof  is  relevant  to  the  assessment  of
    proportionality. Of further relevance is the duty to have regard to the
    public interest considerations identified in section 117B of  the  2002
    Act. I have little difficulty  in  reaching  the  conclusion  that  the
    Judge's  consideration  of  the  proportionality  of  the  decision  by
    applying Section 117B of the 2002 Act (as amended) is flawed.  That  is
    because the  Judge  by  mere  reference  to  the  provisions  does  not
    demonstrate at [42] that the requirements have been given full  effect,
    in particular, with reference to section 117B(4): see Forman (ss 117A-C
    considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC).

13.   For all the above reasons, I am  satisfied  that  the  decision  shows
    errors on points of law such that it should be set aside  and  re-made.
    Having regard to the  provisions  of  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statements  for  the  First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Senior
    President of Tribunals dated 25th September 2012, I am  satisfied  that
    the nature and extent  of  fact-finding  necessary  in  order  for  the
    decision to be  re-made  is  such,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective in Rule 2, that it is appropriate to remit the  case  to  the
    FtTT for a rehearing on all issues.

Decision:

The making of the decision of the FtTT did involve the making  of  an  error
on a point of law. I set aside the decision. By  agreement  of  the  parties
the appeal is remitted to the FtTT for a de novo rehearing.  It is a  matter
for the FtTT to make the appropriate  directions  for  the  hearing  of  the
appeal in due course.







Signed:                           Dated:



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


