
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11484/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 March 2017                         |On 2 May 2017                       |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     e m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr R Sharma, Counsel, Lee Valley solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant or her child sibling.  Any failure to comply with  this  direction
could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.   This  direction  applies
to, amongst others, all parties.
                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1.  In a decision promulgated on  24  March  2016  (Appendix  A  which  is
    attached to this decsion) I found an error of law in  the  decision  of
    the FtT to dismiss the appellant's appeal and set aside the decision. I
    concluded that the FtT  erred  when  assessing  reasonableness  in  the
    context of EX.1. in respect of the appellant's son, E.  I  invited  the
    parties to  make  written  submissions  within  fourteen  days  of  the
    promulgation of the error of law decision before proceeding  to  remake
    the decision. None have been received.

2.   E is a British citizen.  I agree with the conclusion of the panel  that
    it would in his best interests to remain with  both  his  parents.  The
    outcome of the decision will inevitably  result  in  upheaval  for  the
    family as a whole or separation  (as  the  appellant  is  E's   primary
    carer, the decision will involve separation from  his  father  and  the
    interference with his rights to enjoy British citizenship).  I would go
    further than the First-tier Tribunal and  say  that  the  child's  best
    interests are not only to remain with his parents, but in  addition  to
    remain in the UK with both parents.

3.   E would not be  compelled  to  leave  the  UK,  but  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect him to do so in the context of paragraph EX.1.  of
    Appendix FM (or  reasonable  in  the  context  of  Section  117B,  (6),
    following the approach to the interpretation of Part 5A of the 2002 Act
    to ensure compliance with Article 8 as explained by the Court of Appeal
    in NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662).

  4.     The maintenance of immigration control is in the  public  interest.
    Parliament has declared this to be the case (Part 5A of the 2002  Act).
    I have taken into account the  overarching  importance  of  the  public
    interest.  However, this  is  capable  of  being  outweighed  by  other
    relevant considerations (Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803).  Section
    117B  (6)  says  that  regard  should  properly  be  had  to  all   the
    circumstances and the wider public interest: R (MA)  Pakistan  v  Upper
    Tribunal [2016] EWCA Civ 705. The appellant  has  a  sound  immigration
    history and has a particularly strong family  life  here.   It  is  not
    disputed that her husband has strong ties here.

5.   The appellant has been here lawfully, albeit on a temporary basis,  and
    she has a good immigration history. The family is self-supporting.  The
    fact that family life has been established by her in full knowledge  of
    her temporary status here affects the weight  to  be  attached  to  her
    family life in the balancing exercise but the significance of  this  is
    affected by other factors such as the individual  having  been  granted
    leave to enter from outside the  UK  (see  R  (on  the  application  of
    Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 and Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40).

6.   The appellant can meet the substantive requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules at the date of the hearing before the FtT, but not the evidential
    requirements. I have had regard to MM (Lebanon) and Ors v  SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 10.  It is not a matter of a near miss where there is a breach  of
    the substantive Rules  (  for  example  where  there  are  insufficient
    earnings so that there is a risk of becoming a financial burden on  the
    state) where the public interest is  clear.   On  the  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal there was no financial burden on the  state  in
    this case.  I have had particular regard to paragraph 76  in  MM  which
    reads as follows ...;

         "The Tribunal is entitled to see a difference in principle  between
         the underlying  public  interest  considerations,  as  set  by  the
         Secretary of State with the approval of Parliament and the  working
         out of that policy through the detailed machinery of the Rules  and
         its application to individual cases ... Rules as to the quality  of
         the evidence necessary to satisfy that test in  a  particular  case
         are, as the committee acknowledged, matters of practicality  rather
         than principle; and as such matters on which the Tribunal may  more
         readily draw on its own experience and expertise."

7.   I have not received submissions from either party in  relation  to  the
    policy that was before me at the error of law hearing (see paragraph 18
    of Appendix A), but not before the First-tier Tribunal.  On the face of
    it, it assists the appellant and I attach weight to it when considering
    reasonableness; however, it is not determinative.

8.   Permission was not granted on the Chikwamba point, but the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal has  been  set  aside  and  it  is  a  relevant
    consideration for me when remaking the  decision.   The  appellant  can
    meet the requirements of the substantive  Rules  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing. For one reason or another the applicant  failed to include the
    correct documentation, but it is not in any way speculative to conclude
    that the appellant would be able to provide the necessary documentation
    if she were to make an out of country  application.  (See  Agyarko  and
    Chikwamba).

9.   To summarise the appellant's appeal succeeds under paragraph  EX.1.  of
    Appendix FM because it would not be reasonable to  expect  her  son  to
    leave the UK. Therefore, her appeal is allowed  under  the  Rules.   It
    would also succeed under Article 8 outside of the Rules if it  were  to
    come to considering the appeal on this basis (by virtue of Section 117B
    (6)).

10.  The appeal is allowed.

Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 28 April 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

