
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/11303/2014

                                                             IA/11304/2014
      IA/11305/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 February 2015                           |On 11 March 2015             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                               MARY ANN RIVERA
                         PACIFICO BERNARDINO AGUILAR
                          ELIZABETH RIVERA AGUILAR
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants: Mr D Gillard, Visa Inn
For the Respondent: Mrs A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellants, nationals of the Philippines, appealed to the  First-tier
  Tribunal against the decisions of the Secretary of State of  18  February
  2014 to refuse to vary their leave to remain and to remove them from  the
  UK.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bird  dismissed  the  appeals  and  the
  appellants now appeal with permission to this Tribunal.

2. The background to these appeals is that the first appellant,  Ms  Rivera,
  entered the UK on 29 December 2009 as a Tier 4 General  Student  and  was
  granted leave to remain until 31 December 2013. She  was  joined  by  her
  husband and elder child (the second and third appellants) on  16  October
  2010 who were given leave to remain in line  with  hers.  The  first  and
  second appellants have a younger child born in the UK on 8 June 2012.  On
  17  December  2013  the  appellants'  representatives  applied   on   the
  appellants' behalf for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules. The
  basis of the application was that the appellant had  entered  the  UK  to
  undertake a course in Tourism and Management with the  London  School  of
  Management and Technology but that the college closed down  in  2011  and
  that appellant did not complete her qualification and was unable to enrol
  at another college without a CAS. The appellants  also  sought  leave  to
  remain under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules on  the  basis  of
  their private life and under Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
  Human Rights on the basis of their family life.  The  respondent  refused
  the  applications  deciding  that  the  appellants  did  not   meet   the
  requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.

3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the appeals on  the  documentary
  evidence in accordance with the appellant's request.  The  Judge  decided
  that the appellants could not meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM  and
  paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The Judge went on to  consider
  Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and found  that  the
  decisions to remove the appellants are proportionate.

4. There are  three  grounds  of  appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal
  Judge's decision. Permission to appeal was  granted  in  respect  of  the
  third ground only. For completeness I find that there is no merit in  the
  first or second grounds of appeal. The first  ground  contends  that  the
  First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in her consideration of section 117B  (5)
  of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  in  concluding  that
  the appellants applied for leave to remain under  Article  8  when  their
  leave to remain was 'precarious'. However by the time  they  applied  for
  leave to remain in December 2013, although they had leave to remain until
  31 December 2013, the first appellant had not  been  studying  since  her
  college  closed  down  in  2011.  The  Judge  was   entitled   in   these
  circumstances to conclude that the first appellant  and  her  family  had
  remained in the UK in breach of their conditions as the  first  appellant
  was no longer studying and that  their  leave  to  remain  was  therefore
  precarious.

5. The second ground contends that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to
  assess the children in her determination and therefore  failed  to  apply
  section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  However
  the Judge did refer to the children's best interests at paragraph  20  of
  the determination. There was no evidence  before  the  Judge  as  to  the
  children's best interests. In the absence of evidence  to  the  contrary,
  there was no other conclusion open to her than that, as they had been  in
  the UK for a relatively short time and were  to  be  removed  with  their
  parents, it is in the children's best interests to be with their parents.



6. Permission was granted in relation to the  third  ground.  This  contends
  that the Judge erred in failing to consider paragraph 276ADE (vi) of  the
  Immigration Rules. The grounds cite the version of paragraph 276ADE which
  came into force on 28 July 2014. This is misleading as this  version  was
  not in force when the applications were made or the decisions issued.  In
  fact the version relevant to this appeal was that in force  prior  to  28
  July 2014 which provides that an appellant;

      '(vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK  for
      less tan 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has  no
      ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country to  which
      he would have to go if required to leave the UK.'

7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with the evidence before her on  this
  issue at paragraph 21 of the determination. This included the  fact  that
  the first appellant had been in the UK only since  2009  and  the  others
  since 2010; the first and second appellants have lived all their lives in
  the Philippines; it is more than likely they have still family there;  it
  would not be unreasonable to expect them to re-establish  their  ties  in
  the Philippines; it was their choice to sell their house before coming to
  the UK; the first  and  second  appellants  have  family  living  in  the
  Philippines who can provide them with support to re-establish themselves.
  The Judge  concluded  that  the  appellants  still  have  ties  with  the
  Philippines. This was a conclusion entirely open to her on  the  evidence
  before her.

8. I am therefore satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
  Judge does not contain a material error of law.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed
                       Date: 10 March 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



















