
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA116512015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 June 2016                       |On 13 June 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ERNESTINA ADU
                       (Anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms K. Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr. W. Akaho, BWF Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Tipping, promulgated on 13 November 2015,  in
    which he allowed Ms Adu's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal to issue her with an EU residence card as confirmation  of  her
    right to reside in the United Kingdom.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to Ms Adu as  the  Appellant
    and to the Secretary of  State  as  the  Respondent,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The grounds seeking permission criticise the  Judge  for  allowing
         the appeal outright on the basis of a durable  relationship  rather
         than remitting the matter to the Respondent to exercise  discretion
         on the basis of the Judge's factual finding.

         Although the outcome is unlikely to be any different there being no
         challenge to the factual findings the Judge made; it was  an  error
         of law to allow the appeal outright rather than to remit it to  the
         Secretary of State."

 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   Mr.  Akaho  provided  a  skeleton
    argument in which he accepted that the judge should have  remitted  the
    matter to the Respondent to exercise her discretion in accordance  with
    Regulations 17(4) and 17(5).

 5. At the hearing I announced that the decision involved the making  of  a
    material error of law.  I set the  decision  aside  and  remade  it  as
    follows.

Error of law

 6. The grounds of appeal referred to the case of Ihemedu (OFMs -  meaning)
    Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340.  This  states  in  the  headnote,  paragraph
    (iii):

         "Regulation 17(4) makes  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family  member  a  matter  of  discretion.  Where  the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow  the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether
         to exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour or not to the
         Secretary of State."

 7. It was confirmed by Ms Pal that there was no challenge to  the  finding
    that the Appellant and her EEA Sponsor were in a  durable  relationship
    (paragraph [11] of the decision).

 8. Once  the  judge  had  found  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with her EEA Sponsor, and was therefore an extended family
    member for the purposes of Regulation 8(5), given that  the  Respondent
    had  not  considered  whether  to  exercise  discretion  to  issue  the
    Appellant with a residence  card  under  Regulation  17(4),  the  judge
    should have remitted the matter to the Secretary of State.   The  judge
    erred in allowing the appeal outright.

 9. I do not make an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.

11. The reasoning of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  preserved  up  to  and
    including paragraph [11].

12. Paragraph [12] and the final decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set
    aside.  The decision is remade as follows.

13. The appeal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  the  refusal  is  not  in
    accordance with the law.  The matter is remitted to  the  Secretary  of
    State to consider whether she  will  exercise  discretion  to  issue  a
    residence  card  in  accordance  with  Regulation  17(4)  of  the   EEA
    Regulations.


Signed                                  Date 10 June 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

