
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11126/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 October 2013                            |On 24 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                 awa sangare

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C McNicholas, Counsel, instructed by Calices
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who was born on 20 January 1987, is a  national  of  the
    Ivory Coast.  In 2003, she married a French national, Mr Kone and  they
    moved to the United Kingdom  in  or  around  2006.   In  January  2008,
    following an application made some time in 2007, she was issued with  a
    residence card as a family member of an EEA national,  valid  until  24
    January 2013.  It is accepted on behalf of the respondent that at  that
    time her husband was a worker exercising treaty  rights  and  that  the
    marriage was a genuine one.

 2. On 12 January 2013 the appellant applied for a permanent residence card
    as confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom.  She  would
    be entitled to such a card, in accordance with Regulation  15(1)(b)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 if she  could
    establish that she had been "a family member of an EEA national...  who
    has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  [that]  EEA  national  in
    accordance with these Regulations  for  a  continuous  period  of  five
    years".  Although by this time,  the  appellant  and  her  husband  had
    apparently separated, it is not now in dispute that at the time of this
    application, he was in the UK and the parties, although separated,  had
    not finalised a divorce.  Accordingly, if the appellant could show that
    there was a five year continuous period in which she  had  been  living
    with her  husband  while  he  had  been  living  in  this  country  (in
    accordance with these Regulations) she would have acquired a  right  of
    permanent residence and thus would be entitled to a permanent residence
    card as confirmation of her right to reside in this country.

 3. The respondent refused her  application  on  24  March  2013,  and  the
    refusal letter is dated the same date.  The basis of refusal  was  that
    the appellant's husband had been unemployed for more than  six  months,
    in circumstances where he  was  not  seeking  work.   Accordingly,  the
    appellant had not been living  with  the  EEA  national  who  had  been
    residing in this country "in accordance with these  Regulations  for  a
    continuous period of five years" (because there was a  gap  within  the
    five year period when he had not been exercising his treaty rights) and
    so she was not entitled to a permanent residence card.

 4. The appellant appealed against this decision, and her appeal was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin, sitting at Hatton Cross,  on  28
    June 2013, but in a determination promulgated on 15  July  2013,  Judge
    Amin dismissed the appeal.

 5. The appellant now appeals to the Upper Tribunal, permission having been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman  on  4  September  2013.   The
    basis upon which the appeal is now put is that even though  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had found that there had been a period  within  the  five
    years when the appellant's  husband  had  not  been  exercising  treaty
    rights by working, nonetheless during that period he  had  been  "self-
    sufficient", which is  a  category  of  "qualified  person"  recognised
    within the Regulations, and thus, even if not working  throughout  that
    period, had still been residing in this  country  "in  accordance  with
    these Regulations" during the period when  he  was  not  working.   The
    basis upon which it is argued that the  judge  should  have  considered
    that he was self-sufficient was that during that period  the  appellant
    was working and thus providing sufficient income on  which  the  couple
    could be adequately maintained without recourse to public funds.

 6. Before me, the way in which the cases of the  respective  parties  were
    put can be summarised as follows.  On behalf of the appellant,  it  was
    claimed  (as  already  briefly  summarised  above),  that  because  the
    appellant's husband had been self-sufficient during such period  as  he
    was not working (because the appellant had been working throughout that
    time) he was at all material times exercising treaty rights during  his
    residence in this country and thus  the  family  member  had  been  the
    family member of an EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  this
    country for a continuous period of over five years.  She should thus be
    entitled to a permanent residence card.

 7. On behalf of the respondent,  Mr  Deller  accepted  that  the  evidence
    showed that the appellant had been residing  in  this  country  as  the
    family member of her husband, and that status did not change  following
    separation.  At the time  of  application,  and  at  the  time  of  the
    respondent's decision  and  indeed  Judge  Amin's  decision  also,  the
    appellant had not yet been divorced, and it was  now  well  established
    that an applicant would not cease to be  a  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national until a divorce was finalised.  Also, Mr Deller did  not  seek
    to suggest that the appellant's  husband  had  left  the  UK,  but  was
    content to make his submissions on the basis that he was still in  this
    country.

 8. The issue was whether or not the appellant  had  acquired  a  right  of
    permanent residence through being the family member of an EEA  national
    and resident in this country during a continuous five year period while
    he was exercising treaty rights.  If  she  had,  then  she  would  have
    acquired a permanent right of residence.  If she had not, however, then
    she would not.  In this case, it might well be that after the temporary
    period of unemployment as found by Judge Amin, the appellant's  husband
    had again begun to exercise his treaty rights by working.  If this  was
    the case, then on divorce, by virtue of Regulations 10(5)  and  (6)  of
    the 2006 Regulations, this appellant might well be able to  argue  that
    she is entitled to reside here under these Regulations,  but  that  was
    not the issue which this Tribunal had to determine today.  Nor was  the
    Tribunal concerned with the appellant's Article 8 position; it was  not
    whether or not the appellant should be allowed to remain here which was
    the focus of this appeal, but whether she was entitled to  a  permanent
    right of residence pursuant to the 2006 Regulations.

 9. Mr Deller accepted that if during the period of unemployment identified
    by Judge Amin, the appellant's husband had been  self-sufficient,  then
    in those circumstances he would have  been  exercising  treaty  rights.
    However, the issue before this Tribunal now was a narrow  one,  and  it
    was whether in order to establish self-sufficiency, it was  permissible
    to rely on income from the appellant, who would not have had any  right
    to work during this period except as the  family  member  of  a  person
    exercising treaty rights.  Mr Deller's contention was that  this  would
    not be permissible.

10. Mr Deller put his argument in the following way.  The basis upon  which
    the appellant would have been entitled to work was  that  she  was  the
    family member of a person exercising treaty rights.  If  the  appellant
    was not working (as found by Judge Amin on  the  evidence  before  him)
    then unless he was exercising treaty rights in some other way, such  as
    by establishing that he was self-sufficient, the appellant would not be
    the family member of a person exercising  treaty  rights.   Accordingly
    she could not lawfully work.  If she could not lawfully work, then  her
    income should not be taken into account when assessing whether  or  not
    her husband was "self-sufficient".  As he put  it,  the  appellant  was
    relying on a circular argument but could not be allowed to rely on what
    the courts had previously referred to as  "impermissible  circularity".
    Without  the  benefit  of  the  income  which  was  derived  from   the
    appellant's working, her husband would not be self-sufficient,  and  so
    this income could not be relied upon.

11. Mr Deller recognised that in practical terms  it  was  highly  unlikely
    that enforcement action would have ever been taken to  prevent  someone
    such as the appellant working  in  circumstances  such  as  these  (for
    example when an EEA national took an extended time off work in order to
    bring up the couple's children) but that did not alter  the  core  fact
    which is that if, technically, the appellant's  husband  could  not  be
    said to have been  exercising  treaty  rights,  then  for  the  reasons
    already set out, she would not be entitled  to  a  permanent  residence
    card now.

12. On behalf of the appellant, Mr McNicholas agreed that  the  core  issue
    which had to be  determined  by  the  Tribunal  was  whether  in  these
    circumstances, the appellant's earnings could be relied upon.  If  they
    could, and the appellant's husband, or rather the couple, could be said
    to be self-sufficient, then he would have been exercising treaty rights
    throughout the relevant period and the appellant would be  entitled  to
    permanent residence in this country.

13. This decision which I have been asked to reach is not  dissimilar  from
    trying to determine which came first, the chicken or the egg, and it is
    a question which I would have to determine without the benefit  of  any
    direct authority, although both Mr Deller and Mr McNicholas did seek to
    rely upon authority which they said was relevant,  albeit  not  direct.
    It may be (although this was not argued before me)  that  in  order  to
    determine this issue I would have had to consider whether  or  not  the
    grant of the  five  year  temporary  residence  card  itself  gave  the
    appellant the right to work lawfully in the UK until revoked, such that
    her argument was not a circular  one.  However,  in  my  judgment,  for
    reasons which I canvassed during the hearing and which I set out below,
    it is not necessary for me to determine this point.

14. My reason for considering that the very difficult question  posed  does
    not need to be determined in this case is because until  this  hearing,
    the requirements under the  Regulations  before  one  can  be  properly
    considered to be "self-sufficient" have not been addressed.

15. Under Regulation 6(1) a "qualified person" is defined as follows:

16. "'Qualified Person'

         6.-(1) In these Regulations, "qualified person" means a person  who
         is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as -

         (a)  a jobseeker;

         (b)  a worker;

         (c)  a self-employed person;

         (d)  a self-sufficient person; or

         (e)  a student"

17. Accordingly, as is accepted on behalf of both parties,  if  during  the
    period when he was not working, and not seeking work,  the  appellant's
    husband was "self-sufficient"  he  would  still  be  exercising  treaty
    rights in this country.  However, as  I  pointed  out  to  the  parties
    during the course of  the  hearing,  under  Regulation  4(1)  a  "self-
    sufficient person" is defined as follows:

         "4-(1)   In these Regulations - ...

              (c) 'Self-sufficient person' means a person who has -

                  (i)  sufficient resources not to become a  burden  on  the
                      social assistance system of the United Kingdom during
                      his period of residence; and

                  (ii) comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the  United
                      Kingdom."

18. I asked Mr McNicholas to take instructions as to whether it would be or
    could be argued on behalf of the appellant that during the period  when
    he was not working, her husband had  in  place  comprehensive  sickness
    insurance  cover  in  this  country.   Having  taken  instructions,  Mr
    McNicholas told me that there had been no such insurance cover.

19. In those circumstances, whether or not the appellant should be entitled
    to rely on her income for the purpose of establishing that at that time
    her husband was "self-sufficient", he could anyway not  be  treated  as
    self-sufficient in accordance with the Regulations.   It  follows  that
    there was a period during the period relied upon when  the  appellant's
    husband was not exercising  treaty  rights  in  this  country,  because
    during that time he was neither a worker nor a  self-sufficient  person
    as defined within the Regulations, and therefore  the  appellant  could
    not establish that she had been the family member of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in this country for  a  continuous  five  year
    period.

20. It follows that whether  or  not  Judge  Amin  should  have  considered
    whether or not the appellant's husband was self-sufficient  during  the
    period when he was not working could not have had a material difference
    to the outcome, because, in the  absence  of  the  necessary  insurance
    cover, he could not have been found to be "self-sufficient" as this  is
    defined within the Regulations.

21.  Accordingly,  while  the  appellant   might   still,   following   the
    finalisation of her divorce, be entitled to rely upon  other  parts  of
    the Regulations (in particular Regulations 10(5) and (6)),  so  far  as
    the application which is before me is concerned, her appeal must  fail,
    and I so find.

Decision

There being no material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
Tribunal, this appeal is dismissed.


Signed:                                 Date:  17 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


