
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11292/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5th June 2015                         |On 22nd June 2015                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       CHRIS VERDIER ASSONGWA DJOUSSE
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S McLoughlin of TRP Solicitors Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal V A Osborne promulgated on 24th September 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the claimant.

 3. The claimant is a male citizen of Cameroon born 19th March 1989 who  on
    21st September 2012 applied for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    as the spouse of a person with refugee status.  The  claimant's  spouse
    had entered the United Kingdom as the dependant of her mother, who  had
    been granted refugee status.

 4. The application was refused on 25th March 2013.  The claimant  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The claimant's marriage broke down, but the claimant and his spouse had
    two children born in the United Kingdom on 21st  August  2012  and  7th
    November 2013.

 6. Tribunal proceedings were adjourned on a number  of  occasions  as  the
    claimant had made an application to the Family Court  in  order  to  be
    granted contact with his children.  Eventually the Family Court made an
    order on 14th August  2014  that  the  claimant  should  have  extended
    unsupervised contact  on  23rd  and  30th  August  2014,  which  should
    thereafter progress to  fortnightly  staying  contact  from  Friday  to
    Sunday commencing on 13th September 2014.

 7. The final Tribunal hearing took place on 10th  September  2014.   Judge
    Osborne (the judge) noted that the appeal could not succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and allowed the appeal under Article 8  of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 8. This prompted the Secretary of State to apply for permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, relying upon five grounds which I set out below;

         "Ground 1 - RS (India) was of no applicability

         At [44] and [45] the learned judge directed himself to  RS  (India)
         UKUT 00218 (IAC).  Following his finding at [47]  that  the  Family
         Court proceedings had concluded at the final date of hearing, it is
         clearly a misdirection in law to apply  an  authority  directed  at
         contemplated proceedings.  There were no contemplated  proceedings,
         they were concluded.  Therefore going on to consider the  questions
         in RS as the learned judge does at [47], [49] and [57] was entirely
         immaterial to the matter before the Tribunal.

         Ground 2 - s117B(6) was of no applicability

         At [54] the learned judge finds s117B(6) to be of no  applicability
         because the Appellant's children do not qualify.  He then  proceeds
         at [55] to misapply that provision anyway.  This is submitted to be
         a clear error in law.  Parliament cannot possibly be said  to  have
         intended the Appellant to benefit from that provision in any way by
         specifically excluding him from it.

         Ground 3 - Failure to give any or any adequate reasons

         Further it is unclear what finding the learned judge is  making  at
         [62] as the reasoning includes very lengthy  sentences  and  double
         negatives.  It is also unclear what the "low standard" the  learned
         judge applies might be.  It cannot be said that the civil  standard
         which is applicable is a low standard.

         Ground 4 - Material consideration of an irrelevant factor

         At [63] the learned judge appears to consider it relevant what type
         of leave the Secretary of State would grant the Appellant.   It  is
         respectfully submitted that it is not.  This is a  matter  entirely
         for the Secretary of State, and it is inappropriate for an  FtJ  to
         speculate on a hypothetical exercise of executive discretion.

         Ground 5 - Failure to apply a relevant recent authority

         Further the learned judge has failed  to  consider  and  apply  the
         authority of EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 where  the
         Court of Appeal held inter alia that appeals  centred  on  children
         must be considered  "in  the  real  world."   In  this  appeal  the
         Appellant has no claim to immigration  status  independent  of  his
         children, whose own immigration status is precarious."

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  E
    B Grant who found it arguable that the judge erred in  law  in  finding
    there were compelling circumstances outside the Immigration  Rules,  to
    justify allowing the appeal under Article 8.

10. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision should be set aside.  The claimant did not submit  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me Mr Smart opened his submissions by  confirming
    that the claimant's estranged wife had been granted indefinite leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  The  children  as  yet  had  no  status,
    although they would be entitled to apply for British citizenship.

12. Mr Smart relied upon the grounds contained within the  application  for
    permission to appeal in submitting that the judge had materially  erred
    in law.  I was asked to find that RS was irrelevant and should not have
    been considered.

13. In relation to section 117B at paragraph 55 of the decision,  Mr  Smart
    submitted that the judge appeared to apply a near miss principle.

14. In relation to paragraph 62 of the decision, I was asked to  find  that
    the judge had not set out  what  compelling  circumstances  existed  to
    consider the appeal outside the Immigration Rules, and it would  appear
    that the judge relied upon a near miss principle  as  being  compelling
    circumstances, which was wrong in law.

15. Mr McLoughlin submitted that RS did  not  apply  only  to  contemplated
    proceedings, as there was reference, in the third paragraph of the head
    note, to proceedings having been initiated.

16. In relation to section 117B(6) it was submitted that the judge had  not
    relied upon a near miss principle, and had stated that  the  claimant's
    children were not "qualified" children and had not erred on this issue.



17. Mr McLoughlin submitted that the judge had  not  applied  an  incorrect
    standard of proof  in  paragraph  62,  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    complaint that the judge had considered the type of leave that would be
    granted, was irrelevant.

18. In relation to EV (Philippines), I was asked to find that the judge had
    not erred, and had considered the best interests of the children.

19. Mr Smart responded briefly, contending that RS was only concerned  with
    contemplated proceedings.

20. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

21. I will address the challenges made by the Secretary  of  State  in  the
    order that they are set  out  in  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal.

22. Ground 1

    I do not find that the reference to RS (India) is  entirely  immaterial
    and the judge did not materially err in law on this issue.   The  judge
    recognised in paragraph 44 that RS applied to contemplated proceedings,
    but nevertheless found  some  of  the  principles  to  be  relevant  in
    determining the appeal before her.

    The judge took into account the three questions which  were  considered
    in RS (India).  The first of these  was  whether  the  outcome  of  the
    family proceedings  was  likely  to  be  material  to  the  Immigration
    Decision, and in RS (India) this was found to be relevant and material,
    as set out in paragraphs 50-54 of that decision.  The Judge did not err
    in finding this a relevant consideration.

    The judge also considered whether there were compelling public interest
    reasons to exclude the claimant from the United Kingdom irrespective of
    the outcome of family proceedings, and  again  I  find  the  judge  was
    correct to  consider  this  as  a  relevant  consideration.  The  third
    question considered by the judge was whether there was  any  reason  to
    believe that the family proceedings had been  instituted  to  delay  or
    frustrate removal, and not to promote the child's welfare.  Again  that
    is a relevant consideration, even though family proceedings  have  been
    concluded.

23. Ground 2

    The judge did not err in referring to section 117B(6) in paragraph  54,
    and did not misapply the provisions.  In  my  view  the  judge  rightly
    recognised that  the  Appellant's  children  could  not  qualify  under
    section 117B(6), and was simply stating that there was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  parental  relationship  between  the  Appellant   and   his
    children, even though they could not qualify under that subsection.   I
    do not accept that the judge was making any reference to a "near  miss"
    principle.  I find no error.




24. Ground 3

    In paragraph 62 the judge is considering the five stage  test  outlined
    in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  Reference to a low standard is in my view  a
    reference to what was stated by the Court of  Appeal  in  AG  (Eritrea)
    [2007] EWCA Civ 801 at paragraph 21 when it was stated;

         "It follows, in our  judgment,  that  while  an  interference  with
         private or family life must be real if it is to engage  Art.  8(1),
         the  threshold  of  engagement  (the  "minimum  level")  is  not  a
         specially high one."

25. The judge finds in paragraph 62 that there are compelling circumstances
    for  considering  the  appeal  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.    The
    compelling circumstances are set out in paragraphs 41 to 43, and amount
    to the decision by the Family Court that it was in the  best  interests
    of the claimant's two children, for him  to  have  significant  contact
    with them.  The judge takes into  account  in  assessing  Article  8(2)
    factors set out in section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, and concludes that the claimant's  removal  would,  in
    the circumstances of this case, be disproportionate.

26. In my view the finding in paragraph 62 is not unclear.  The  judge  has
    found compelling circumstances  to  consider  the  appeal  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, and has  then  gone  on  to  apply  the  five  stage
    approach advocated in Razgar, and given adequate reasons for concluding
    that the best interests of the claimant's  children  make  his  removal
    disproportionate.

27. Ground 4

    It is not an error to state at paragraph 63  that  if  the  appeal  was
    successful the claimant would be granted discretionary leave.  This  is
    not a particularly relevant statement  by  the  judge  and  it  is  not
    necessary to make such a statement, but it is not a material  error  of
    law.  This statement was made after the  proportionality  exercise  had
    been  considered,  and  the  judge  had  decided  that  it   would   be
    disproportionate for the claimant to be removed.

28. Ground 5

    There  appears  to  be  no  evidence  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative referred the judge to EV (Philippines) and I do not find
    any merit in this ground of appeal.  I find no evidence that the  judge
    did not consider this appeal "in the real  world".   The  judge  placed
    weight upon the decision of the Family Court as she was entitled to do.
     The Upper Tribunal in RS (India) indicated that weight would be placed
    upon the decision of the Family Court.  The judge was clearly aware  of
    the immigration status of the claimant's children.  I find this  ground
    has no merit.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that  the  decision  must  be  set
aside.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal of the Secretary  of  State  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier  Tribunal  made  no  anonymity  order.   There  has  been  no
application to the Upper Tribunal for anonymity and no  anonymity  order  is
made.



Signed   Date 9th June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and  therefore  so  does  the
decision not to make a fee award.



Signed   Date 9th June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

