
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11842/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 September 2014                          |On 1 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                          mr ismail ademola talabi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Revill of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant Ismail Ademola Talabi is a citizen of Nigeria born on  18
    January 1982.  On 30 December 2013  he  made  application  for  further
    leave to remain which was refused by  the  respondent  on  24  February
    2014.  The appellant applied as the spouse of Intunu  Comfort  Awolesi.
    He said in his application that she had discretionary leave to  remain,
    having been here for a long time as a child dependant.  Her parent  and
    other sibling  had  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain.   The
    Secretary of State refused the application.  She did  not  accept  that
    the appellant satisfied the requirements of Appendix  FM  R-LTRP1.1(d).
    The appellant's spouse was in the  UK  with  discretionary  leave.   To
    qualify for leave under Section D-LTRP the appellant's  partner  needed
    to be either a British citizen present and settled in the UK or  be  in
    the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian  protection.   As   the
    appellant's spouse did not fulfil  those  requirements,  he  failed  to
    qualify for leave by virtue of E-LTRP1.2 of Appendix FM.   It  was  not
    considered that the appellant met the eligibility requirements such  as
    to benefit from the criteria set out at EX.1.  Further,  the  appellant
    did  not  satisfy  Rule  276ADE(1)(iv)  and  276ADE(1)(v).   Given  the
    appellant had spent the majority of his life living in Nigeria, in  the
    absence of any evidence to the contrary, it was not  accepted  that  in
    the period of time he had been in the United Kingdom, he had lost  ties
    to Nigeria.  Further, he had family still  living  in  Nigeria.   As  a
    result, the respondent was not satisfied the appellant could  meet  the
    requirements  of  Rule  276ADE(1)(vi).   It  was  not  considered   the
    application raised or contained any exceptional circumstances in  terms
    of Article 8 to warrant consideration of grant of leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules.

 2. The appellant's appeal against the adverse decision  was  dismissed  by
    FTT Judge Hussain ("the judge") in a determination  promulgated  on  25
    June 2014.  There was no representation before the judge.   He  recited
    what the appellant had to say in his application which I have  set  out
    at [1] above.  The judge found the respondent had not engaged with  the
    application and instead, that  it  was  refused  on  grounds  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph
    276ADE.  As to the grounds of appeal lodged on the appellant's  behalf,
    the judge found that they did no more than recite some of  the  grounds
    available to  the  appellant  under  Section  84  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  such  that  it  was  not  possible  to
    establish in what way the appellant wished  to  make  his  claim.   The
    judge said that the burden of proof was on the appellant  and  that  he
    had not discharged that burden.

 3. An application was made for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
     It was contended that the  judge  erred  because  he  failed  to  make
    findings as to whether the appellant enjoyed family life in the UK  and
    if so, whether the  refusal  disproportionately  interfered  with  that
    family life.  Further, that the judge erred in dismissing the appeal in
    circumstances where, owing to poor representation,  the  appellant  had
    been deprived of a fair hearing.

 4. In more detail, the grounds claimed that the evidence before the  judge
    was that the appellant was married to a person with discretionary leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom, the respondent did not take issue with
    the genuineness of the relationship  such  that  it  was  arguable  the
    appellant enjoyed family life here.   Bearing  in  mind  the  case  law
    Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) affirming Nagre
    and Gulshan, if the Rules were not met then only if there were arguably
    good grounds for granting leave to remain  outside  the  Rules  was  it
    necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on  to  consider  whether  there
    were compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  by  them.
    (Gulshan at  [24(b)]).   There  was  no  requirement  for  "exceptional
    circumstances" in the form of a threshold that must be reached before a
    breach of Article 8 could be found.  (Nagre at [49]).

 5. It was submitted that the judge had failed to  assess  whether  or  not
    there were "arguably good grounds" for granting leave to remain outside
    the Rules and he also failed to consider whether there were "compelling
    circumstances" not recognised by the Rules.  He should have  made  that
    assessment and the failure to do so  was  an  error  which  flawed  the
    entire determination.  If he had made a proper assessment and found  in
    the appellant's favour, it would have been arguable that  the  decision
    interfered with his family life and it would have then  been  incumbent
    upon the respondent to justify  that  interference  failing  which  her
    decision would be disproportionate.  In any event it was arguable  that
    the respondent's decision  in  the  section  "Decision  on  Exceptional
    Circumstances" illegitimately applied  an  "exceptional  circumstances"
    test contrary to what was said in  R  (on  the  application  of  Nagre)
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

 6. In any event, the appellant had  been  denied  a  fair  hearing.   Shen
    (Paper appeals; proving dishonesty) [2014] UKUT  00236  (IAC)  at  [27]
    provided that if the judge entertained doubts in a paper appeal it  was
    open to him to direct the  appellant  to  produce  further  documentary
    evidence.  If the papers did not disclose the footing  upon  which  the
    appellant's case was put then he erred  in  not  seeking  clarification
    from the appellant.  See also MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014]  UKUT
    00105 (IAC) at [22] and [23].  As  a  result  of  the  defects  in  the
    appellant's representative's conduct of the appeal, he had been  denied
    a fair hearing.

 7. In granting permission to appeal, FTT Judge Colyer found  that  it  was
    arguable the judge erred in his approach given there was  no  reference
    by him to the skeleton argument prepared by the appellant's  solicitors
    or any findings on the facts set out in the witness statements  of  the
    appellant and the sponsor.  Accordingly, there was a  failure  to  give
    adequate reasons.

Submissions on Error of Law

 8. Ms Revill adopted the grounds.  Mr Tarlow adopted the Rule 24 response.
     Ms Revill submitted that Article 8 was in issue and the  judge  failed
    to engage with  the  terms  of  the  application  which  was  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor were living together as  a  family.   It  was
    Robinson obvious that the judge should have dealt with Article  8.   In
    any event, merely in terms of procedural fairness with regard to  Shen,
    the judge should have made directions for  further  information  to  be
    produced, in all likelihood at an oral hearing.

 9. Mr Tarlow submitted that the burden was upon the appellant to make  out
    his case.  The judge did the best he could.  It was unclear  what  were
    the compelling reasons with which he was meant to engage.

Conclusion on Error of Law

10. I find the appellant's grounds are made out.  I  find  that  there  was
    evidence before the judge with  regard  to  family  life  and  that  an
    Article 8 assessment should have been carried out although the case law
    in the meantime has moved on from Gulshan.  See [128] of MM [2014] EWCA
    Civ 985 per Aikens LJ:

         "...... Nagre does not add anything to the  debate,  save  for  the
         statement that if a particular person is outside the rule  then  he
         has to demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside the
         rule, that he has an arguable case that there may be  good  grounds
         for granting leave to remain outside the rules.  I cannot see  much
         utility in imposing  this  further,  intermediary,  test.   If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim."

    and at [134]:

         "...... if the relevant group of IRs is not such a 'complete  code'
         then the proportionality test will be more at large, albeit  guided
         by the Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law."

11. Gulshan was disapproved of in the sense that there should not be a test
    of exceptionality to consider circumstances outside the Rules when  the
    test in Article 8 is one of reasonableness  and  proportionality.   See
    also Patel [2013] UKSC 72.  The Rules are no  more  than  the  starting
    point for the consideration of Article 8.

12. I find that the appellant was denied a fair hearing as it was  open  to
    the judge to  direct  him  to  produce  further  documentary  evidence.
    Further, the judge appeared to have overlooked  the  skeleton  argument
    and the contents of the witness statements of  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor which were before him.

13. I conclude that the determination does contain material errors  of  law
    such that the decision is set aside in its entirety to be remade in the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law, is  set
    aside and shall be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date  15 September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart



