
IAC-AH-CO-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11301/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th February 2015                         |On 22nd April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              MRS NASEEM AKHTAR
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sarwar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1st January  1955.   She
    was the wife of the original first  Appellant.   On  21st  August  2013
    application had been made on  the  Appellant's  behalf  for  indefinite
    leave to remain outside the  Immigration  Rules.   The  Appellants  had
    arrived in the UK on  visit  visas  on  12th  January  2010.   On  18th
    February 2010 they made applications in time for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as dependent relatives.  Subsequent applications  for  leave  to
    remain were dismissed.  The final application led to a  decision  being
    made on 24th January 2014 to refuse their  applications  for  leave  to
    remain on the ground that removal would not place the United Kingdom in
    breach of its obligation under the  Human  Rights  Act  1998.   Removal
    directions were dated 14th February 2014.  The Secretary of  State  was
    not satisfied that the Appellants had met requirements as  set  out  in
    paragraph  276ADE  and  Appendix  FM  and  had  found  there  were   no
    exceptional circumstances  to  warrant  consideration  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Lloyd-Smith  on  25th  June  2014.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 25th June 2014 the Appellants'  appeals  were  dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules and pursuant to human rights grounds.

 3. On 2nd July 2014 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On  22nd  July  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Robertson   granted
    permission to appeal.  On 31st July 2014 the Secretary of State opposed
    the appeal by way of response under Rule 24.

 4. It was on that basis that  the  appeal  came  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there was a material error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal.  However I was advised of one material development
    that has considerable effect on the conduct of this litigation.   Sadly
    on 3rd August 2014 the former first Appellant  died.   A  copy  of  his
    death certificate is produced to me.  In such  circumstances  I  accept
    representations by his solicitors (not challenged by the  Secretary  of
    State) that his appeal be marked abandoned.

 5. The remaining Appellant  appeared  in  person  and  by  her  instructed
    solicitor Mr Sarwar.  The Secretary  of  State  appeared  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mrs Petterson.  The issue  was  to  determine
    whether there was a material error of law in decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

 6. When finding that there was a material change to the scenario that  was
    originally before the court when the Appellant  had  applied  with  her
    former husband I noted that one of the arguments that had been forcibly
    previously raised by the Secretary of  State  was  that  the  Appellant
    along with her late husband could return  together  to  Pakistan  where
    they could provide  mutual  support.   I  had  acknowledged  that  that
    clearly was not the current position following the death of Mr Jan  and
    that Mrs Akhtar's claim remained extant pursuant to Article  8  of  the
    European Convention of Human Rights.

 7. In finding a material error of law I noted that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge had erred  in  failing  to  assess  the  then  Appellants'  cases
    adequately under Article 8 on  the  basis  of  family  life  where  the
    Appellants were clearly dependent on their family members in the UK and
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge should have considered that  if  the
    Appellants were returned to Pakistan whether they would  be  forced  to
    live in the  most  exceptional  compelling  circumstances  and  whether
    additional support could or could not be offered by siblings  and  that
    the judge had failed to follow the "notwithstanding" test  set  out  in
    Mohamed v The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 331.

 8. However I also noted that there was a material change due to the  death
    of Mr Jan in the whole basis upon which the appeal was presented and  I
    gave directions that there be leave to the Appellant  (Mrs  Akhtar)  to
    adduce additional evidence both by way of witness statement and medical
    evidence relating to her change of  circumstances  and  to  her  appeal
    pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention of  Human  Rights.   I
    reserved the case to myself and it is on that  basis  that  the  appeal
    comes back before me.

 9. In this instance the Secretary of State  is  represented  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr McVeety.  The Appellant  continues  to  be
    represented by her instructed Counsel Mr  Sarwar.   In  addition  I  am
    provided with a supplemental bundle served  by  the  Appellant's  legal
    representatives  and  an  additional  statement  outside  that   bundle
    provided by the Appellant's daughter Rahila Khan.

Evidence

10. Albeit that the Appellant is in attendance  and  whilst  I  acknowledge
    that appearances can be deceptive it appears that the Appellant  is  in
    poor health and it is not the wish of either Mr Sarwar  or  Mr  McVeety
    that she gives any further evidence other  than  adopting  her  witness
    statement.  The evidence therefore that is extant before the  court  is
    that of her children.

11. Evidence was initially provided by Mrs Rahila Khan.  She  confirms  and
    adopts her witness statement of 15th January 2015.  She  confirms  that
    she is the Appellant's daughter and probably spends the largest  amount
    of time within the family caring for her mother although  her  brothers
    and sisters do help with the day-to-day care  that  is  provided.   She
    emphasises that she has noticed a decline  in  the  Appellant's  health
    since she has been in the UK  and  that  this  has  unfortunately  been
    accelerated since the death of her father.  It is her belief her mother
    will need constant care for the rest of her life.   She  advises  there
    are days when the Appellant does not want to eat and that it is for the
    family to ensure that she eats and drinks regularly.   She  points  out
    that the Appellant is diabetic and it is important to ensure  that  her
    sugar levels are kept  safe.   She  states  that  the  Appellant  needs
    constant reminding to take her medication and that family members  have
    to stand in front of her to ensure that this takes place.  She believes
    that it is very important for the Appellant to have her  family  around
    her and they do their best to stop her from dwelling on the  fact  that
    their father is no longer alive.  She believes that the Appellant needs
    people around her who she trusts and to  do  everything  for  her  best
    interests and that as her children she and other close  family  members
    are in the best place to do that.  She advises that if her mother  were
    forced to return to Pakistan it is her belief she does  not  think  her
    mother would live for very long and points out that they no longer have
    a family home and  land  because  that  has  been  taken  over  by  the
    expansion of the Mangla dam.  She further emphasises that none  of  the
    family are in a position to return to Pakistan with her mother as  they
    all have jobs, children and mortgages to pay in the UK.  She asks  that
    her mother be allowed to remain in the UK.

12. Mrs Khan is asked by Mr Sarwar of the location of family members.   She
    points out that the Appellant came to the UK on 12th January  2010  and
    that the only close family member she has in Pakistan is a  much  older
    brother who is aged over 85.  As to her family members in  the  UK  she
    has six children, four sons and two  daughters  all  of  whom  are  now
    British citizens and eighteen grandchildren.  In  addition  one  sister
    and one brother also reside in the UK.

13. Mr Sarwar draws to my attention the letter  from  Dr  Ahmed  from  Mach
    Healthcare Limited at the Sun Valley Medical  Practice,  Oldham.   That
    medical report states that the Appellant suffers with diabetes and  has
    "poor control."  It indicates that an attempt is being made to  improve
    this with input from the family but that  the  Appellant  also  suffers
    with depression and possible dementia.  Dr Ahmed's report  states  that
    this is a complex case scenario  aggravated  by  the  Appellant's  PTSD
    problems which have arisen due to the death of her husband.  He  points
    out that the Appellant is  currently  awaiting  an  assessment  from  a
    memory clinic in order to confirm a diagnosis and possibly  set  out  a
    care plan.  His  letter  states  that  the  Appellant  receives  active
    medical care and that the family is providing essential social care.

14. Mrs Khan confirms this scenario pointing out that her  mother  has  her
    own room but lives with her brother Noeeb Quasim and that  she  is  not
    capable of conducting her own affairs and requires 24 hour family care.
     She points out that the Appellant would forget to cook or eat or  take
    drugs without family support and that she cooks for her  and  that  the
    family run a rota of close family members who spend 24 hours a day with
    her so as to ensure permanent care.  She  confirms  that  the  hospital
    appointment she is waiting is with a consultant in order to assess  the
    Appellant's mental state.

15. The other principal witness is the Appellant's son Mr Moneeb Qasim.  He
    confirms and adopts his witness statement of  15th  January  2015.   He
    states that he lives with his mother in Oldham and that he  is  one  of
    the carers alongside his brothers and sisters and that the family  have
    taken it upon themselves to look after the  Appellant.   He  reiterates
    the Appellant's declining health and her inability to remember to  take
    her medicines.  He confirms that it is in his  house  that  his  mother
    resides and that it is a two bedroomed property.  He confirms that  his
    sister when looking after his mother and his mother reside  in  a  back
    room and he lives in the front bedroom.  He  admits  to  being  married
    with two children but that he is separated from his wife and  that  his
    wife and children live in local authority  property.   He  works  in  a
    bakery.

16. Under cross-examination from Mr McVeety Mr Qasim is  asked  what  would
    happen if he and his  wife  were  to  reconcile  bearing  in  mind  the
    overcrowding that would arise in the property.   He  states  that  they
    would all live together and that he would  rent  a  larger  house.   He
    confirms that his mother does not have financial support of her own.

17. Mr McVeety points  out  that  there  was  evidence  that  his  parents'
    property was destroyed by the flooding of a dam in Pakistan and that  a
    substantial sum of compensation was paid.  Mr McVeety  enquires  as  to
    what happened to that compensation.  Mr Qasim responds that he does not
    know what money, if any, was given to his parents but  that  they  were
    not given an  alternative  property.   Mr  McVeety  presses  the  point
    stating that the Secretary of State knows that  compensation  was  paid
    and that displaced families were given alternative accommodation so the
    Secretary of State does not accept Mr Qasim's evidence.   His  response
    is to state that he did not say that there  was  not  any  compensation
    received merely he does not know how much.

18. The final witness was Mr Rehman.  Mr Rehman  confirms  and  adopts  his
    witness statement also signed on 15th January 2015 as his  evidence-in-
    chief.  He is in a slightly different position  in  that  he  lives  in
    Peterborough but advises that he travels at least twice a week  to  see
    his mother.  He points out that each time she sees him she repeats  the
    same questions asking why he cannot stay longer with her.  His response
    is that he comes to visit as often as he can but  his  job  and  family
    commitments restrict the  length  and  frequency  of  his  visits.   He
    advises that he has seen his mother's health deteriorate over the  past
    year particularly since the death of his father and  he  confirms  that
    she needs round the clock care in order to ensure that  she  eats,  has
    the correct clothes and takes her medication.  It is  his  belief  that
    his mother could not survive alone  in  Pakistan  and  that  no  family
    members are in a position to move there to look after her.

19. Under cross-examination from Mr McVeety Mr Rehman confirms that  he  is
    the executor of his father's estate  and  when  asked  as  to  what  is
    happening to his father's money he confirms that there will be a  small
    payment made but he does not know the exact amount but that there is no
    large pot likely to appear.

Submissions/Discussions

20. Mr McVeety points out that  the  Appellant  cannot  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and that there is  no  evidence  of  private  medical
    treatment being available in the UK.  He submits that  any  application
    made has to be pursuant to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules  and
    Mr Sarwar agrees and acknowledges this point.   He  relies  on  Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  which  came
    into force on 28th July  2014  relying  in  particular  on  the  public
    interest grounds therein so far as  it  relates  to  NHS  funding.   He
    acknowledges that the case is completely different from that  that  was
    previously expounded before the court and he asked  me  to  refuse  the
    appeal.

21. Mr Sarwar submits that this is the unique case based on its own  facts.
    He acknowledges that the case has to be considered pursuant to  Article
    8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  but  that  basically  this  is  an
    application for settlement.  He reminds me that the Appellant has  been
    here since 2010 and that she is now aged 60 and that the whole  of  her
    family is in the UK, all of whom are British citizens and that she  has
    no immediate family in Pakistan who would be  in  a  position  to  look
    after her.  He submits that  the  proportionality  balance  has  to  be
    considered and that this is a case where such balance would clearly lie
    with the Appellant and that it is for the court to ask the question "is
    it reasonable for them (family members) to  relocate  to  Pakistan  for
    family life?"  He points out that the family members  are  EU  citizens
    and that it would not be reasonable for them  to  relocate  relying  on
    such well-known authorities as Sanade and Dereci.  He submits that this
    is a case that should be allowed pursuant  to  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and he asked me to allow the appeal.

Findings

22. As has been said previously this  appeal  now  takes  on  a  completely
    different format to that that has previously been before  the  Tribunal
    and before the Secretary of State.  The sad death  of  the  Appellant's
    husband has cast her application in  a  new  light.   I  have  had  the
    benefit of hearing from three of the Appellant's children.  Mrs Khan is
    impressive.  Mr Qasim is not.  However I take that very much to reflect
    the fact that the care of the Appellant lies very largely in Mrs Khan's
    hands.  What is clear is that although not being in modern terms "aged"
    the Appellant regrettably portrayed herself as being extremely old  and
    fragile and her health is clearly a matter of concern not just  to  her
    family but to her GP.  She has been referred to a clinic to see if  she
    has the onset of the early  signs  of  dementia.   She  also  has  been
    diagnosed as suffering from PTSD following the  loss  of  her  husband.
    Evidence has been provided to me that she requires  24  hour  care.   I
    remain a long way from being satisfied that the conditions in which she
    is being looked after are satisfactory.  After all whilst Mr Qasim  may
    be  separated  from  his  wife  it  would  clearly  be  impossible  and
    impractical for his family to return to their home and at the same time
    for the Appellant to remain there.

23. I accept the view expressed by Mrs Khan that they  seek  continuity  of
    accommodation and support for her mother.  Again the situation by which
    Mrs Khan has to spend time looking after her mother when in fact it  is
    not at her own home is far from ideal but the outcome I am satisfied is
    that this is an  elderly  lady  who  requires  round  the  clock  care.
    Further I am satisfied that save for an aged brother she has no  family
    members living in Pakistan and that all her family have migrated to the
    UK and that she has a substantial number of children and  grandchildren
    who are able to provide care for her.  In such circumstances I have  to
    look at the case pursuant to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

24. The law is constantly developing.  In any consideration of an Article 8
    claim the starting point is the law itself.  Article 8 states:

      a) everyone has the right to respect for his private and family  life,
         his home and his correspondence;

      b) there should be no interference by a public body with the  exercise
         of this right except such as is in accordance with the law  and  is
         necessary in a democratic  society  in  the  interest  of  national
         security, public safety or the economic wellbeing of  the  country,
         for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the  protection  of
         health or morals, or for the protection of the rights  and  freedom
         of others.

25. The general approach to Article 8 cases is that in Nhundu  and  Chiwera
    (01/TH/00613).  In those cases the  Tribunal  said  that,  in  deciding
    claims under Article 8, there is  a  five  stage  test  which  must  be
    applied in order to determine whether a breach has occurred:

      1) does family life, private life, home or correspondence exist within
         the meaning of Article 8;

      2) if so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with;

      3) if so, was the interference in accordance with the law;

      4) if so, was the interference in pursuit of  one  of  the  legitimate
         aims set out in Article 8(2); and

      5) if so, is the interference proportionate  to  the  pursuit  of  the
         legitimate aim?

    Those were essentially the five questions  endorsed  by  the  House  of
    Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

26. The Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraph 128 went on to state:

         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate save for  the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  Rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside  the  Rule
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the  Rules.   I  cannot  see  much
         utility  in  imposing  this  further  intermediary  test.   If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined  by
         the relevant decision maker."

27. In Haleemudeen v the Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 558 Beatson LJ held at paragraph 17 that where the  Article  8
    ECHR element of  the  Immigration  Rules  is  not  met,  refusal  would
    normally  be  appropriate,  "but  that  leave  can  be  granted   where
    exceptional  circumstances,  in  the  result  of  'unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences' for the individual, would result".

28. There is a requirement to look at the  evidence  to  see  if  there  is
    anything which has not already been adequately  considered  within  the
    context of the Rules which could lead to a successful Article 8  claim.
    The further intermediary test as a preliminary to a consideration of an
    Article 8 claim beyond the relevant criterion based  Rules  is  now  no
    longer appropriate and in Ganesabalan, R (on the application of) v SSHD
    [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin), there was no prior threshold  which  dictates
    whether the exercise of discretion should  be  considered;  rather  the
    nature of the assessment and the reasoning which were called  for  were
    informed by threshold considerations.

29. It is against that general background that it is necessary to  consider
    this claim.  It is also necessary to consider Section 117B of the  2002
    Immigration Act which was brought into force by  the  2014  Immigration
    Act.  Section 117B makes public interest considerations  applicable  to
    all cases.  I appreciate that as the public interest provisions are now
    contained in primary legislation they override existing case  law,  and
    while Section 117A(2) requires me to have regard to the  considerations
    listed in Section 117B and 117C, there is no duty upon me to reach  any
    specific conclusions or findings if the factors listed  are  ones  that
    would normally have always  been  taken  into  account.   I  am  though
    conscious of my statutory duty to take these factors into account  when
    coming to my conclusions.  I am also aware that Section 117A(3) imposes
    upon me a requirement to  carry  out  a  balancing  exercise  where  an
    Appellant's circumstances engage Article 8(1) in deciding  whether  the
    proposed interference is proportionate in all  the  circumstances.   In
    doing so I remind  myself  of  the  guidance  contained  within  Razgar
    (mentioned  above).   Section  117B  states  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control is in the public interest and  it  is  in
    the interests and in particular the interests of the economic wellbeing
    of the United Kingdom that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
    United Kingdom are able to  speak  English.   I  do  accept  that  this
    threshold is not met by the Appellant.   She  speaks  Mirpuri  but  she
    communicates in that language  with  other  family  members  and  other
    family members do speak English.

30. This  is  an  unusual  case.   The  Appellant's  circumstances  changed
    dramatically while she was in this country.  She has now been  in  this
    country for some five years.  She is in poor health and  I  acknowledge
    does not have private medical insurance.  However this is a case that I
    consider to be so exceptional as to one that should be allowed  outside
    the Immigration Rules pursuant to Article 8.  In reaching my conclusion
    I have weighed up the public  interest  and  assessed  the  concept  of
    proportionality.   This  is  an  elderly  lady  in  poor  health  whose
    extensive family all reside in the United Kingdom.  It  was  never  her
    intention when she came here  to  remain  permanently.   That  scenario
    changed dramatically with the death of her husband.  I accept that  she
    needs and receives round the  clock  care  from  family  members.   The
    family has shown signs of being a close-knit family and there are  many
    of them all of whom are prepared to help.  It cannot be in  the  public
    interest to return an elderly frail lady who cannot look after  herself
    to Pakistan when all her family are here and able to assist and provide
    for her support.

31. I make one final comment because Mr McVeety on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State has made  reference  to  monies  received  by  families  whose
    properties were compulsorily purchased due to the flooding of  a  river
    and the forming of a dam.  It is accepted by family members  that  this
    took place but there is no evidence of finance being available although
    Mr Rehman has stated that his father's estate is  being  wound  up  and
    that there is some money albeit that it is not extensive.   It  is  not
    really an issue in this matter save for the fact that if the  Appellant
    is to remain in this country  and  if  under  the  terms  of  her  late
    husband's estate she is to be a beneficiary then I would hope that such
    monies fall into that estate and are used for  her  financial  support.
    It is not however, I am satisfied,  a  pre-requisite  that  that  takes
    place for her succeeding in her claim pursuant to Article 8.   For  all
    the above reasons in this very exceptional case the Appellant's  appeal
    is allowed outside the Immigration Rules pursuant to Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The  Appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  under  Article  8  of  the   European
Convention of Human Rights.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 10th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 10th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

