





UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11499/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 11 September 2014                         |On 8 October 2014            |
|Prepared:  2 October 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                       Ms Odinachi Jane-Frances Okwara
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr C Emezie, Chipatiso Associates LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on  9th  June  1971.  Her
      appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 15th February 2014
      refusing her application for indefinite leave to remain in the  UK  on
      the basis of domestic violence was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Fox in a determination promulgated on 23rd May 2014.


   2. The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  asserting
      that it was not in accordance  with  the  law  and  that  it  breached
      Articles 3 and 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


   3. At the commencement of the hearing before Judge  Fox  the  appellant's
      counsel, Mr Karim,  accepted  that  the  safeguards  against  domestic
      violence did not apply to this appellant as she was dependent  upon  a
      temporary migrant.


   4. It was however contended before the First-tier Tribunal that  although
      she did not qualify for consideration in  terms  of  the  respondent's
      approach to domestic violence, it still needed  to  be  assessed  when
      considering the reasonableness of the appellant's return to Nigeria.


   5. Judge Fox noted that in cross examination, the appellant  stated  that
      she was granted three years' leave to remain in 2008 on the basis of a
      relationship  with  her  ex-husband  which  had  ended  in  2007.  She
      confirmed that she had ceased cohabiting with her ex-husband in 2007.


   6. However, she did not inform the respondent of this material fact.  She
      did not  know  that  she  needed  to  tell  the  respondent  that  her
      relationship was no longer subsisting [16].


   7. She contacted the respondent in  2009  as  she  needed  to  return  to
      Nigeria to attend  her  father's  funeral.  She  did  not  inform  the
      respondent of the change in her circumstances. She believed  that  she
      might reconcile with her ex-husband. She did not know that  a  genuine
      and subsisting marriage with her ex-husband was  a  condition  of  her
      continued immigration status.


   8. Judge Fox noted that the appellant's father was named Peter. Reference
      to the name Tony on the appellant's  marriage  certificate  'signifies
      her pseudo-father is in fact her uncle'  [18].  When  the  appellant's
      attention was drawn to the death certificate which  demonstrated  that
      her father died in 2010, she denied  that  she  had  stated  that  she
      approached the respondent in 2009 to facilitate her attendance at  her
      father's funeral. She stated that her father was sick in 2009 [19].


   9. The appellant and her partner were unaware of the possibility that the
      appellant may be required to return to Nigeria as  the  appellant  did
      not give "this possibility any thought" [20]. Her partner  has  always
      been aware of her immigration status.


  10. Her partner gave evidence and confirmed his name, address and date  of
      birth. He provided details of his  relationship  with  the  appellant,
      their marriage in accordance  with  Nigerian  customary  law  and  his
      inability to continue his marriage in  Nigeria  should  the  appellant
      return there.


  11. In his examination in chief, her partner stated that he cannot  return
      to Nigeria as he has lived in the UK for more than 20  years.  He  has
      integrated into the UK culture and his friends and employment  are  in
      the UK.


  12. The appellant stated that she began IVF treatment with her partner  in
      2007 (paragraph 10 of her witness statement) although she claimed that
      her marriage did not  end  until  2009.  It  was  submitted  that  the
      appellant and her partner were aware  of  the  appellant's  precarious
      immigration status.


  13. It was submitted on her behalf that she had  clarified  the  confusion
      relating to the evidence concerning her father's death.  Her  cultural
      explanation has been provided when  referring  to  her  uncle  as  her
      father.


  14. It was also submitted by counsel on her behalf  that  the  appellant's
      partner is a British citizen and it would be difficult for him to  re-
      integrate into Nigerian society. He has been resident in  the  UK  for
      more than 20 years which elevates his right to remain in the UK.


  15. It was also submitted that as the appellant and her partner are having
      IVF treatment on a privately funded basis, relocation was unreasonable
      and Exception EX.1 had been accordingly satisfied.


  16. Reliance was also had on  the  social  worker  report  supporting  the
      contention that the appellant should continue to reside in the UK.


  17. Judge Fox found that the appellant  was  a  dishonest  witness[1].  He
      found that the 'discrepancy'  regarding  the  communication  with  the
      respondent in 2009  to  facilitate  her  attendance  at  her  father's
      funeral in Nigeria with the death certificate itself which stated that
      he died in 2010, damaged her credibility. The  record  of  proceedings
      clearly demonstrated that she provided oral evidence that  she  wished
      to attend her father's funeral in 2009 [36].


  18. She had also stated that she believes she may reconcile with  her  ex-
      partner, notwithstanding her decision to cohabit  and  engage  in  IVF
      treatment with her current partner [37].


  19. Judge Fox found that the evidence demonstrated that she obtained leave
      to remain by deception. She applied for further  leave  to  remain  in
      2008  when  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  she  entered   into   a
      relationship with her partner in 2007 and was receiving IVF treatment.
      It was reasonable to conclude that the appellant applied for leave  to
      remain on the basis of a marriage which no longer existed [38].


  20. The Judge thus concluded that when the evidence is considered  in  the
      round, it is reasonable to conclude that the appellant is a  dishonest
      individual who cannot be relied upon to provide a reliable account  of
      her circumstances [39].


  21. She moreover failed to discharge the burden of proof that she was  the
      victim of domestic violence. She cannot  be  relied  upon  to  produce
      honest evidence. The report was of  no  probative  value,  being  self
      serving, generic and lacking objective reasoning [41].


  22. The Judge did not accept that the  appellant  should  be  entitled  to
      resist return to Nigeria because  she  was  infertile.  There  was  no
      evidence  that  she  would  be  unable  to  live  in  Nigeria  in  the
      circumstances.  This  constituted  'weak  attempts'  to   resist   her
      departure from the UK [42].


  23. Judge Fox considered Article 8 and applied the five stage test set out
      in Razgar.  He found that the appellant is not entitled to  remain  in
      the UK under the rules. He applied Gulshan (Article 8 -  New  Rules  -
      correct approach) [2013 UKUT 640 (IAC). Nor was she entitled  to  rely
      upon family or private life whilst resident lawfully  to  establish  a
      claim under Article 8 outside the rules [44].


  24. The appellant had resided in the UK as a temporary migrant and had  no
      legitimate expectation that she would be entitled to settle in the UK.
      Nor has her partner any legitimate expectation that  the  relationship
      should be facilitated in the UK [45].


  25. It did not assist the appellant that she is paying for  IVF  privately
      [46].


  26. There was no reliable evidence demonstrating that her partner had lost
      cultural and social ties with Nigeria. The personal convenience of his
      residence in the UK is not a matter which causes the balance  to  fall
      in favour of the appellant [47].


  27. Judge Fox then found that for the reasons  given,  the  appellant  has
      conducted herself in a manner which makes her departure  from  the  UK
      "an imperative." Nor was there any reliable evidence showing that  her
      partner cannot be expected  to  conduct  his  relationships  with  the
      appellant in Nigeria [47].


  28. He found that the appellant's departure from the UK would not  have  a
      detrimental impact on wider  society.  Accordingly,  the  interference
      proposed was proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued. There was no
      reliable evidence demonstrating that here moral or physical  integrity
      would be compromised by her return  to  Nigeria.  Nor  was  there  any
      reliable evidence demonstrating that the UK is the only country  where
      the appellant can obtain access to IVF [53].


  29. In the circumstances, the appeal was dismissed.


  30. On 23rd July 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill  granted  the  appellant
      permission to appeal. She expressly confined permission as limited  to
      paragraphs 4(i) and (ii) of the original grounds and paragraph 3.


  31. Judge Gill stated at paragraph 2 of her  grant  that  under  paragraph
      276ADE (iii),  a person is to be granted leave if he or she has  lived
      continuously in the UK  for  at  least  20  years.  If  this  20  year
      residence requirement is sufficient, in the view of the respondent, to
      merit the grant of leave to an individual on the basis of  Article  8,
      it is arguably a relevant consideration in  assessing  whether  it  is
      reasonable to expect the partner of an appellant to relocate where the
      partner has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years but the
      appellant has not.


  32. At the hearing on  11th  September  2014,  Mr  Emezie  relied  on  the
      relevant grounds of appeal, submitting that there is "a simple point".
      He referred to paragraphs 3 and 4 of the grounds prepared  by  counsel
      who represented the appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal.  It  is
      contended that whilst the Judge made credibility findings  in  respect
      of the appellant, he did not make  any  findings  in  respect  of  her
      partner, who also gave evidence, especially on important  issues  such
      as relocation and IVF treatment. The Judge erred in failing to set out
      and make  reasoned  findings  in  respect  of  that  evidence.  It  is
      axiomatic that a determination should disclose clearly the reasons for
      a Tribunal decision.


  33. He submitted that in assessing whether it is reasonable  to  relocate,
      the Judge placed the most emphasis on the  appellant's  circumstances.
      He made one reference to the partner and concluded that there  was  no
      reliable evidence that he cannot relocate. In so doing, he erred.


  34. The partner provided "numerous reasons" why  he  could  not  relocate,
      including his employment, lawful residence and ties  to  the  UK.  The
      Judge appeared to have ignored this.


  35. Further, the evidence was that he had been in the UK for more than  20
      years. The new rules themselves recognise that 20 years' residence  is
      worthy of protection. The rules constitute the respondent's policy and
      they are said to be Article 8 compliant, which means that great weight
      should have been given to the partner's lawful residence and length of
      residence of some 20 years plus in the UK.


  36. Further,  evidence  was  advanced  that  any  disruption  to  the  IVF
      treatment at this stage would be undesirable. The Judge failed to give
      "adequate weight" to this factor.


  37. Mr Emezie asked whether it would be  reasonable  for  the  sponsor,  a
      British citizen, to relocate. He submitted  that  the  Judge  had  not
      properly looked at the partner's interests. He had been in the UK  for
      22 years. This is  evident  from  his  witness  statement  before  the
      Tribunal at paragraph 2 of his statement.


  38. The witness statement of Mr Olubamidele Akindele referred to the  fact
      that he is a security officer and that he has been resident in the  UK
      since 1992. He is a British national born on  10th  October  1965.  He
      confirmed that "I am a Nigeria by heritage (sic)."


  39. He has known the appellant for over five years  and  they  decided  to
      marry and live together as man and wife. He refers to his  familiarity
      with  Nigerian  culture  and  practice  regarding  the  importance  of
      children in marriage relationships. This could prove traumatic  for  a
      married  woman  who  is  unable  to  bear  children  for  her  husband
      (paragraph 6).


  40. He also referred to Nigerian culture in the  context  of  reporting  a
      husband  to  the  authorities  when  there  are  "problematic  marital
      relations." That is "deeply frowned upon."


  41. They have both attended the fertility clinic at Guy's  Hospital.  They
      commenced procedures for IVF treatment. When the appellant's  previous
      husband was informed that he was the new partner, the  former  resumed
      threats against the appellant. As a result, he "ceased  to  relate  to
      the appellant for some time" for fear of his own safety.


  42. He resumed relations with her in 2010 when they were studying together
      at the same university. They  moved  in  together  in  2012  and  they
      married under Nigerian custom in February 2013.


  43. Her application to regularise her stay was made on her behalf via  the
      partner route but the application was refused.  She  did  not  have  a
      right  of  appeal  against  the  decision.  She  then  made  a   fresh
      application which was refused but she was given  a  right  of  appeal,
      which is the current appeal.


  44. He stated in his witness statement that if  his  wife  were  asked  to
      return to Nigeria  at  this  time,  he  would  be  devastated.  He  is
      concerned about her health.


  45. He stated that he would not be able to relocate to Nigeria "due to  my
      commitments here." He has been staying with  his  wife  for  over  two
      years. If his wife were asked  to  return  to  Nigeria,  it  would  be
      difficult for her to come back to the UK  as  he  will  not  meet  the
      income  threshold.  This  will  mean  that  they  will  be   separated
      indefinitely and that would affect her IVF treatment.  He  is  not  in
      the position to afford two homes, one here and one in Nigeria.


  46. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Kandola submitted that  the  appellant
      is "barking up the wrong tree."


  47. There is no basis for referring to a reasonableness test when applying
      the provisions of EX.1. That paragraph applies where the applicant has
      a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the  UK
      and  is  a  British  citizen,  settled  in  the  UK  and   there   are
      insurmountable obstacles to family life with that  partner  continuing
      outside the UK.


  48. Mr Kandola referred to the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      and particularly at paragraph 37, 38, 39 and 46. He  was  entitled  to
      have regard to the appellant's deception. This constitutes  a  weighty
      factor in an Article 8 assessment.


  49. The Judge stated that he applied  Gulshan  and  went  on  to  consider
      Article 8 pursuant to the "traditional" five stage  test  set  out  in
      Razgar. Long  residence  in  this  case  was  a  factor  but  was  not
      determinative. The finding of deception which has not been challenged,
      constitutes a factor that would have to be  weighed  as  part  of  the
      proportionality exercise.


  50. The Judge went  on  to  find  that  there  was  no  reliable  evidence
      demonstrating that the partner had lost cultural and  social  ties  in
      Nigeria. The mere fact that he is a British citizen was not in  itself
      capable of constituting a determinative factor.


     Assessment


  51. I have set out in detail the evidence and the findings of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge.


  52. On the evidence before him Judge Fox was entitled to conclude that the
      appellant had obtained leave by  deception.  Further,  proper  reasons
      were given for giving no weight to the social worker's report.


  53. In effect the appellant contends that the Judge erred  in  failing  to
      take into consideration the appellant's partner's Article 8 rights. Mr
      Emezie submitted that Beoku-Betts should  have  been  considered.  The
      criticism is that the Judge failed  to  take  into  account  that  her
      current partner's length of residency has been over 20 years. That  is
      seen by the respondent as  constituting  a  relevant  and  significant
      period for those who have no status.


  54. However, the Judge had to consider whether the provisions of  EX.1  of
      Appendix FM were applicable in this case. In that  regard,  the  Judge
      was required to consider whether there were  insurmountable  obstacles
      to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK. That is in
      contrast to paragraph (a) of EX.1 which applies  in  the  case  of  an
      applicant having a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
      child who is a British citizen or who has lived in the UK continuously
      for at least seven years, and that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
      expect the child to leave the UK.


  55.  The  Judge  has  considered  and  taken  account  of  the   sponsor's
      circumstances and interests in this case. He has noted and  considered
      the sponsor's evidence that he has integrated into UK culture and that
      his friends and employment are in the UK.


  56. He has also had regard to the submission that it  would  be  difficult
      for the partner to re-integrate into Nigerian  society.  He  had  been
      resident here for more than 20  years.  He  also  had  regard  to  the
      submission  that  the  appellant  and  her  partner  are  having   IVF
      treatment. It was submitted that "relocation is unreasonable" and that
      EX.1 has been satisfied.


  57. Judge Fox found that there was no reliable evidence that the appellant
      would be unable to live in Nigeria in the circumstances. He  also  had
      regard to the need to strike a  fair  balance  between  the  competing
      interests of the individual and the needs of wider  society  [43].  He
      considered that the appellant's partner had no legitimate  expectation
      that the relationship should be facilitated in the UK.


  58. Finally, the Judge found  that  there  was  no  reliable  evidence  to
      demonstrate that the partner had lost cultural and  social  ties  with
      Nigeria. The personal convenience of  his  residence  here  is  not  a
      matter which causes the balance to fall in favour  of  the  appellant.
      There was no reliable evidence demonstrating that  her  partner  could
      not be expected to conduct his  relationship  with  the  appellant  in
      Nigeria.


  59. The Judge had regard to the evidence from the appellant's partner.  It
      is evident that he is a Nigerian by origin. Furthermore, he stated  at
      paragraph 6 of his witness statement that he is familiar with Nigerian
      culture and practice, both in the  context  of  children  in  marriage
      relations and when it comes to problematic marital relations.  He  was
      27 years old before he came to the UK. He  had  also  stated  that  he
      would not be able to relocate to Nigeria on account of his commitments
      here. He is not able to afford two homes.


  60. Although the Judge might  have  given  a  more  detailed  analysis  in
      arriving at his findings and conclusions, he  has  nevertheless  taken
      into account the appellant's partner's interests, finding  that  there
      was no reliable evidence demonstrating that he could not  be  expected
      to conduct his relationship with the appellant in Nigeria.


  61. The Judge has  in  effect  found  that  there  are  no  insurmountable
      obstacles  to  relocation.  In  arriving  at  his  conclusion  he  has
      considered the  appellant's  poor  immigration  history  and  personal
      credibility, stating that it is correct in the circumstances to expect
      her to return to Nigeria.


  62. I find that that was a decision that the Judge was entitled to  arrive
      at on the evidence before him.  The  findings  are  not  shown  to  be
      irrational or perverse.


     Decisions


    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not involve  the
    making of any material errors of law. The decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall accordingly stand.


     No anonymity direction made

                               Signed                     Date: 2/10/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
-----------------------
[1]  At paragraph 34 of the determination, the Judge stated that "the
appellant is not a dishonest witness." In fact, as agreed by both parties
before me, it is evident from the determination that the Judge clearly
intended to find that the appellant is indeed a dishonest witness. This was
an obvious typographical error.

