

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11574/2014
                                                               IA/11579/2014
                                                               IA/11581/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Phoenix House, Bradford              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6th November 2014                          |On 7th November 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                             CHRISTOPHER ERAZUA
                          ILOBEKEMEN JUSTINA ERAZUA
                         OSEKHUENMEN BLESSING ERAZUA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr D Amgbah of UK Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellants appeal a decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  which
         dismissed their appeal against a decision to refuse to grant  leave
         to remain and to remove them pursuant to s47 Immigration Asylum and
         Nationality Act 2006.  The first  appellant  had  sought  leave  to
         remain as a Tier 1 (General Migrant) and the other  two  appellants
         were his wife and child as dependants.  The  application  had  been
         refused on the grounds that the respondent was not  satisfied  that
         the evidence the  appellant  produced  of  his  clamed  income  was
         reliable.


      2. The judge, during the hearing stated that  the  presenting  officer
         had made available to him and to  the  appellants'  representative,
         copies  of  company  records.  The  judge  also   stated   at   the
         commencement of the hearing that  he  had  undertaken  an  Internet
         search and had found no evidence that one of the companies existed.
         The appellants' representative took instructions and said that  the
         first appellant had an explanation but  sought  an  adjournment  so
         that the parties in question who ran those two companies could come
         to give oral evidence. The judge refused  the  adjournment  on  the
         grounds that the appellant could provide whatever  explanation  was
         required.


      3. The judge then rejected the explanation given by the applicant and,
         also referring to the inadequacies  of  the  documentary  evidence,
         dismissed the appeal.


      4. Mr Diwyncz submitted, as did the Rule 24 response, that even though
         the judge may have erred in failing to grant  an  adjournment,  the
         error was immaterial because the appeal would have  failed  in  any
         event because of the  significant  problems  with  the  documentary
         evidence relied upon by the appellants.


      5. Although it may well be that  this  appeal  would  in  the  end  be
         unsuccessful because of documentary evidence problems, the research
         done by the judge, upon which he relied in major part to reach  his
         decision and the failure of the judge to grant  an  adjournment  to
         enable the parties whose vires were under challenge to come to give
         evidence, results in a perception that the judge was assisting  the
         respondent and  had  acted  in  a  manner  capable  of  giving  the
         appearance of bias. The weight placed by the judge on the  research
         he undertook appears  to  have  contributed  significantly  to  his
         adverse credibility findings overall. It cannot be  said  that  had
         the judge permitted an adjournment and had credible  evidence  been
         called then it would not have made a significant difference to  his
         final conclusions. The perception that justice has not been done is
         overwhelming in this case.


      6. In the circumstances of this appeal and the failure of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal to approach the  evidence  properly  means  that  the
         appropriate approach is to remit this  case  for  hearing  de  novo
         before the First-tier Tribunal, in  accordance  with  the  Practice
         statement dated 25th September 2012 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
         Chamber First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal.


      Conclusions:


      The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law.


      I set aside the decision and  remit  the  hearing  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.




                                         Date 6th November 2014
      Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
