
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11246/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st December 2015                 |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               emmanuel ayeni
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hawkin, Counsel, instructed by Paul John &
Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated on 23rd February 2015.  In that decision  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowed the claimant's appeal  against  removal  on
    the basis that although he did not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules falling foul of the suitability requirements set  out
    at the Article 8 provisions in Appendix FM at S-LTR1.5 and S-LTR1.6 his
    removal was nonetheless disproportionate in the context of the  factors
    set out at Section 117B of the 2002 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 as amended by the 2014 Act.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that the claimant's  enjoyment  of  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, a
    British national who could not reasonably  be  expected  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom, meant that even though effective immigration control is
    in the public interest that in the circumstances the provisions of  the
    statute were prescribing their considerations to the point that  phrase
    "he public interest does not require the claimant's removal" meant that
    the interests of the child outweighed the public interest in removal.

 3. The grounds complain that in making the assessment  the  matters  which
    formed the basis of the failure to meet the suitability requirements of
    the Immigration Rules, namely the claimant's persistent use of cannabis
    and his association with drug dealers in that context, and his choosing
    to associate with people who carry weapons, fell out of the equation or
    proportionality mix, to the point  that  the  weighing  of  the  public
    interest has been incorrectly conducted.  The Respondent also refers to
    the  claimant's  inability  to  be   financially   self-sufficient   or
    financially independent in the context of Section  117B,  as  a  matter
    which should have counted against him.

 4. Mr Hawkin for the claimant points out that the Tribunal had taken  into
    account the claimant's history. They had also taken account of his poor
    financial position because it is set out  quite  clearly  at  paragraph
    216, but in any event the decision was correctly made with reference to
    s117.

 5. The difficulty with the Secretary of State's argument is  that  in  the
    context of Section 117 the suitability requirements as set out  in  the
    Immigration Rules are not replicated, and on the face of the  statutory
    wording I am satisfied that there is no  ambit  for  reintroducing  the
    provisions of the Rules as a gloss on  the  statutory  provisions.   In
    that regard the  references  to  ZH  (Tanzania)  and  the  ability  for
    countervailing factors including for example conduct  of  an  Appellant
    and poor immigration history to outweigh the best interests of a  child
    are of no avail to the Respondent's arguments because the test  is  not
    that test.  The test is that which is set out at 117B(6).

 6. In those circumstances I am satisfied that the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal reveals no material error of law; it follows correct self
    direction in the context of the statute.

Notice of Decision

 7.  There is no error of law, and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    allowing the Appellant's appeal stands.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
