
[pic]
IAC-FH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/11232/2014
     IA/11239/2014
     ia/11262/2014
     IA/11263/2014
     IA/11264/2014
     ia/11265/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 11th February 2015                        |On 18th February 2015         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                  Mr Muhammad Qasim Kamal (first Appellant)
                    Mrs nashmia kiani (second Appellant)
                  Mr muhammad yasir aziz (third Appellant)
                     miss saima yasir (fourth Appellant)
                  miss shahzil dua yasir (fifth Appellant)
                      miss rida yasir (sixth Appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Parkin, David Wyld & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants are all citizens of  Pakistan.   The  first  and  second
    Appellants are husband and wife.  The third  to  sixth  Appellants  are
    husband, wife and children.  The first and  third  Appellants  are  the
    lead Appellants in this combined appeal,  the  other  Appellants  being
    their respective dependants. It is acknowledged that the appeals of the
    dependants stand or fall with the appeals of the two lead Appellants.

2.   The lead Appellants form an entrepreneurial team and made  applications
    for further leave to remain in the UK, after periods  as  students  and
    then Post-Study Work Migrants, as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants. Their
    applications were refused by the  Respondent  on  24th  February  2014.
    Their appeals against the refusals to vary leave and the  decisions  to
    remove them was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on  1st  September
    2014.   I  shall  refer  to  the  lead  Appellants  as  the  Appellants
    throughout this appeal.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey on  the
    ground that it was arguable that the  Judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    consideration to paragraph 245AA of the Immigration  Rules.  The  Upper
    Tribunal Judge directed that the Respondent produce a paginated  bundle
    of a full set of documents, which she received in respect of the Tier 1
    applications by both lead Appellants. The Respondent in compliance with
    this direction produced a bundle and submitted it to  the  Tribunal  on
    28th January 2015.

4.    At  the  hearing,  the  Respondent  produced  the  original  documents
    contained in that bundle. It was  agreed  that  in  addition  to  those
    documents the Appellants had also submitted the business  cards,  which
    appeared at pages 19 and 20 of the Appellants' bundle.

5.    Mr  Parkin  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants  submitted  that  the  two
    contracts, (pages 22 to 27 of the Appellants' bundle), the two  letters
    from Companies House (pages 10 to 11 of the Appellants' bundle)  and  a
    certificate of incorporation and accompanying documents (pages 12 to 18
    of the Appellants' bundle) were also submitted  with  the  application.
    The Respondent accepted that two pages of one  contract  and  the  last
    page of the other contract were submitted, but that the certificate  of
    incorporation and accompanying documents were not  submitted  with  the
    application. Having confirmed the relevant documentation it was  agreed
    that the relevant applicable Immigration Rules were those  set  out  in
    the Appellants' skeleton argument.

6.   Mr Parkin accepted that there was  no  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    finding that the Appellants had not submitted advertising  flyers  with
    his application. He submitted that paragraph 245AA(d) applied  and  the
    business cards  were  sufficient  evidence  of  marketing  material  to
    satisfy paragraph 41-SD(iii). The only missing  element  was  "business
    activity", but this was evident from the business plan  submitted  with
    the application and the Appellants' website.

7.   Paragraph 245AA(d) states  that  "If  the  applicant  has  submitted  a
    specified document which does not contain all the specified information
    but  the  missing  information  is  verifiable  from  other   documents
    submitted with the application or the website of the  organisation  who
    issued the documents  the  application  may  be  granted  exceptionally
    provided the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Immigration  Officer  or  the
    Secretary of State  is  satisfied  that  the  specified  documents  are
    genuine and the applicant meets all the requirements."

8.   In relation to the contracts, Mr  Parkin  submitted  that  the  Judge's
    finding that the contracts had been submitted in a "mixed-up" state, as
    produced in the Respondent's bundle, was open to him on  the  evidence.
    The Appellants contend that they submitted two full contracts.  In  any
    event, what was submitted complied with the Immigration  Rules  because
    there was no requirement that the person making the contract signed it.
    The Judge's finding that the wrong parts of the contract were sent with
    the application implied that  he  recognised  that  the  two  contracts
    existed and since  the  documents  submitted  satisfied  the  technical
    requirements of paragraph 41-SD, paragraph 245AA was not relevant.

9.   Mr Parkin submitted that paragraph 41-SD(e) required the Appellants  to
    submit a current appointment report dated no earlier than three  months
    before the date of application listing the applicant as the director of
    the company and confirming the date of his  appointment.   The  company
    must be actively trading and not dissolved or in liquidation. Directors
    who were on the list of disqualified Directors  provided  by  Companies
    House would not be awarded points.

10.  Instead of submitting  a  current  appointment  report  the  Appellants
    produced a certificate of incorporation of a private company dated 18th
    December 2013 issued by Companies House.  It listed the main Appellants
    as  directors  and  confirmed  the  date  of  their  appointments.   It
    contained the same information as that which would have been  contained
    in the current  appointment  report.  Accordingly,  the  Appellant  had
    submitted a document in the wrong format and paragraph  245AA  applied.
    The Judge erred in law in finding that the Appellants had submitted the
    wrong document altogether.  The document from the correct  source  with
    the correct information with the incorrect  title  was  not  the  wrong
    document.

11.  In any event, the  information  remained  available  on  the  Companies
    House Webcheck website throughout. The Respondent should have  followed
    the procedure outlined in  245AA(b)  or  (d)  and  either  requested  a
    Companies House current appointment report or exceptionally allowed the
    application  having  regard  to  the  material  publicly  available  at
    Companies House.

12.  Mr Parkin submitted that  if  the  Appellant  succeeded  on  the  three
    points he had raised then the matter should go back to the Secretary of
    State and the appeal should be allowed insofar as the decision was  not
    in accordance with the law.

13.  Mr Shilliday  submitted  that  the  final  point  in  relation  to  the
    certificate of incorporation was fatal to the appeal.  The document was
    the wrong document and the First-tier Tribunal's findings at  paragraph
    16 of the determination were correct.  It may well be that the document
    produced had the same information that would have been on  the  current
    appointment report, but the situation could have changed.

14.  In relation to the contracts, the Appellants had produced parts of  two
    contracts and not a full contract.  They were  two  partial  documents.
    They could have produced the correct document but they  did  not.   The
    Appellants could not  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  in  respect  of
    evidence demonstrating that the business was  actively  trading.     Mr
    Shilliday submitted that the business cards did not amount to marketing
    material and that information could not  be  obtained  from  the  other
    documents submitted in the bundle.

15.  In relation to paragraph 245AA, he submitted that  documents  were  not
    requested by the Respondent because addressing the area would not  have
    led to  a  grant  of  leave.   There  were  too  much  wrong  with  the
    application  for  paragraph  245AA  to  apply.   The  application   was
    defective in that the Appellants had failed to  produce  the  specified
    documents. They failed to produce a schedule of the documents submitted
    and therefore there was no evidence that the  required  documents  were
    before the Respondent prior to the decision of 24th February 2014.   It
    was for the Appellants to prove that such documents had been  submitted
    and they had failed to do so.

Discussion and Conclusions

16.  I find that the Appellants had failed to show that the  certificate  of
    incorporation and letters from Companies House were submitted with  the
    application because they were  not  referred  to  in  the  schedule  of
    documents annexed to the application and they were not in the bundle of
    original documents on the Home Office file.  There was no reference  to
    these documents in the refusal letter which refers  to  business  cards
    and contracts but then states "you have  therefore  not  submitted  the
    evidence specified in paragraph 41-SD(e) of Appendix A".

17.  Mr Parkin submitted that the Judge accepted the  Appellants'  claim  in
    their witness' statements that the documents were  produced,  but  they
    were not the correct documents.  He submitted that the  Respondent  had
    taken a similar position in the refusal letter.  I am not persuaded  by
    Mr Parkin's submission that these documents from Companies  House  were
    before the Respondent because they were not explicitly referred  to  in
    the refusal letter.  They first  appeared  in  the  Appellants'  bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal submitted by fax on 19th august 2014.

18.  In any event, the First-tier  Tribunal  considered  the  documents  and
    found that they did not comply with the specified documents required by
    paragraph 41-SD(e)(v). The Rules require the  Appellants  to  submit  a
    current appointment report. The Appellants had submitted a  certificate
    of incorporation.

19.  Mr Parkin submitted that the documents contained the  same  information
    and therefore  paragraph  245AA  applied  because  the  Appellants  had
    submitted a document in the wrong format.  I am not persuaded  by  this
    submission because  the  Rules  clearly  state  the  type  of  document
    required. A current appointment report was different to  a  certificate
    of incorporation. Although in  this  particular  case  the  information
    contained in them may well be the same, the  documents  have  different
    purposes and  the  information  could  change  over  time.   Mr  Parkin
    accepted  that  the  Appellant  would  not  be  able  to  rely  on  the
    certificate of incorporation if the application was made today.

20.  I find that the failure to submit  a  current  appointment  report  was
    fatal to the application and therefore the Appellants  have  failed  to
    show that  they  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  41-SD  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Accordingly, they have failed  to  demonstrate  that
    they were entitled to the points awarded under provision (4) of table 4
    of Appendix A.

21.  Paragraph 245AA does not  assist  the  Appellants  in  respect  of  the
    certificate of incorporation because the Appellants have failed to show
    that it was submitted with the application and, in  any  event,  it  is
    clearly the wrong document. It is not a document in the wrong format as
    envisaged under the Immigration Rules.

22.  For the  sake  of  completeness,  I  am  persuaded  by  Mr  Shilliday's
    submission that the contracts submitted were incomplete  and  therefore
    were insufficient to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 41-SD and to
    demonstrate that the Appellants were actively trading.  In relation  to
    the business  cards  these  clearly  were  before  the  Respondent  and
    considered in the refusal letter.  I find that these documents and  the
    business plan were insufficient evidence to show  that  the  Appellants
    were actively trading.

23.  Accordingly, I find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal determination dated 28th August 2014 and I  dismiss
    the Appellants' appeals. The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The Appellants' appeals are dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 17th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 17th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
