
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11416/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th February 2015                         |On 5th March 2015             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           IFEANYE ONENESS ADIKWU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Easty, Counsel, for Waterstone, Solicitors London


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 20th November  1970.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 16th January 2014
    refusing  him  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under   the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended.  His appeal was heard by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Majid on 31st October  2014.   The  appeal  was
    allowed in a determination promulgated on 6th November 2014.

 3. An application for permission to appeal  was  lodged.   Permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Chambers  on  5th  January
    2015.  The application states  that  the  grounds  submit  that  it  is
    unclear on what basis the appeal was allowed and that the judge  failed
    to give adequate reasons. First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers found that
    these grounds are arguable and granted permission.

Determination

 4. The Presenting Officer submitted that  the  Respondent  is  challenging
    Judge Majid's decision because he gave no adequate reasons for  finding
    that the Home Office made a serious error in refusing  the  Appellant's
    application.  He submitted that nowhere in the determination  does  the
    judge say what this error is or why he is allowing the appeal.

 5. The Presenting Officer referred to paragraph 17  of  the  determination
    which refers to the case of Chahal [1996] ECHR 54 submitting that  this
    is irrelevant.

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that it is trite law  that  the  judge
    has  to  explain  his  reasons  in  his  determination  and   in   this
    determination the judge does not say what his decision is, why he  made
    his decision  and  why  he  disagrees  with  the  refusal  letter.   He
    submitted that none of the points made by the judge are explained.

 7. He referred to Article 8 and the Article 8 case law and submitted  that
    the judge has not indicated  that  he  has  allowed  the  appeal  under
    Article 8, so the decision cannot stand. He submitted that the decision
    is not reasonable. The judge  has  not  addressed  the  issues  and  no
    reasons have been given.  He submitted  that  the  judge  has  made  no
    findings of fact to back up his decision.

 8. He submitted that there has been no fair hearing and the appeal  should
    be remitted back to the First-tier to be heard  before  another  judge,
    other than Judge Majid.

 9. The Appellant's representative submitted  that  the  error  application
    relating to paragraph 17 is incorrect as although this paragraph may be
    irrelevant there is no error of law.  I accepted that.

10. The representative  submitted  that  with  regard  to  the  substantive
    decision it is clear that  the  judge  has  allowed  the  appeal  under
    Article  8  of  ECHR.   I  was  referred  to  paragraph   10   of   the
    determination. She submitted that the Appellant's first appeal  was  in
    2013. This was allowed and remitted to the Respondent  for  failing  to
    exercise her discretion properly.   She  submitted  that  a  fraud  was
    perpetrated on the Appellant's bank account and money was taken out  of
    the account without the Appellant's knowledge which meant that when the
    Respondent paid the cheque with the Appellant's  application  into  her
    account there were not sufficient funds to  cover  it.   She  submitted
    that had the Respondent presented the cheque when it was first received
    by her this would not have happened, so the delay on the  part  of  the
    Respondent meant that this application was refused.

11. She submitted that the Appellant has been here  for  twelve  years  and
    when he applied for leave to remain he had  been  here  for  ten  years
    lawfully.  She submitted  that  had  the  fraud  not  taken  place  his
    application would have been accepted.  She referred me to  the  refusal
    letter and submitted that this fraud has been accepted as true  by  the
    Respondent.  She referred me to paragraph 10 of the determination which
    refers to this and states  that  the  Respondent  made  an  error  when
    dealing with the Appellant's case and has treated the Appellant  badly.



12. I was referred to the refusal letter at paragraph 3  on  page  3  which
    deals with this matter.  This paragraph refers to the matter but points
    out that the Appellant  had  a  period  of  28  days  to  resubmit  the
    application which he did.  This second application was rejected because
    the cheque was not endorsed by the Appellant.  The letter  states  that
    it was because of this that the Secretary of State was not prepared  to
    exercise her discretion and waive the breach.  The Respondent  accepted
    the situation relating to the first application.

13. I was then referred by  the  representative  to  paragraph  18  of  the
    determination in  which  the  judge  deals  with  Article  8.   At  18A
    compelling circumstances are considered and at 18D the case  of  Izuazu
    is referred to.  She submitted that it is clear from the  determination
    that the judge allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  This is  again
    referred to at paragraph 19.  The representative  submitted  that  when
    the background is considered the  determination  can  be  assessed  and
    understood. She submitted that the  Record  of  Proceedings  should  be
    looked at,  as  this  as  well  as  the  refusal  letter  explains  the
    background of this claim. She pointed out that the judge does not refer
    to the Record of Proceedings anywhere in the determination. However  it
    cannot be said that if the judge had referred to it matters would  have
    been explained.

14. The representative submitted that the Respondent  is  saying  that  the
    determination is unsatisfactory because it is not clear what  Rule  the
    judge was making his decision under but she submitted it is clear  that
    he is allowing the appeal under Article 8.

15. The representative submitted that the Respondent has not exercised  her
    discretion properly, did not take payment promptly and  has  not  dealt
    with the defrauding of the Appellant's  bank  account.   She  submitted
    that but for the administrative error and the fact that  there  was  no
    money in  the  account  because  of  the  fraudulent  withdrawal,  this
    Appellant's application would have been accepted.  She  submitted  that
    even if I find there is an error in  the  determination  it  is  not  a
    material error.

16. The Presenting Officer submitted that the determination is  not  clear.
    The judge has not made clear findings. He has not said that the  appeal
    should be allowed under Article 8 of ECHR and what the Appellant  seems
    to be saying is that the appellant should be allowed to stay because of
    his long residence but the Rules now state that  twenty  years  is  the
    period for long residence to be successful.   He  submitted  that  this
    applies to this Appellant's claim.

17. The Presenting Officer submitted that the determination cannot stand as
    it is and that proper findings are required.  He submitted that it also
    has to be decided whether this claim can  succeed  under  the  ten-year
    rule or under Article 8 of the Human Rights Act.

DECISION

18. I have taken into account the submissions of both parties. I find  that
    when I read the determination I am unable to follow it and am unable to
    understand what the Respondent is accused of doing wrong. I do not know
    why the judge has allowed the appeal or under what Rule the  appeal  is
    allowed or if it is allowed under Article 8 of ECHR.

19. There is no doubt that the judge has not made  clear  findings  in  the
    determination and has not given  adequate  reasons  for  his  decision.
    There are no findings of fact backing up his decision and although  the
    determination states that the Respondent was at fault it is  not  clear
    how she was at fault.

Notice of Decision

20. Because of inadequate reasoning I find that the Appellant has not had a
    fair hearing and I am  remitting  this  case  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a substantive hearing on all grounds.

21. Judge Majid's decision is set aside.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 04/03/2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray

