
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11520/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2016                   |On 27 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Miah, counsel instructed by Sony, Sadaf &
Haroon Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Abebrese, promulgated on  28  April  2016.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge PJM Hollingworth on  16  September
    2016.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously  and  no  application  was  made,
    however owing to the fact that the respondent is a victim  of  domestic
    violence, I consider it prudent to make such an order.

Background

 3. On 22 March 2012, the respondent arrived in  the  Republic  of  Ireland
    with leave to remain until 5 May 2012 as a spouse. On 3 July 2013,  she
    first entered the United Kingdom with leave to enter as a visitor until
    30 January 2014. The respondent returned to the  United  Kingdom,  from
    Dublin, on 15 September 2014 and was once more granted leave  to  enter
    as a visitor until 29 December 2014.

 4. On 27 December 2014, the respondent applied to vary her leave to  enter
    the United Kingdom. In a  covering  letter  to  that  application,  she
    explained that she was seeking leave to remain outside the Rules on  an
    exceptional basis. In the application it was said that  the  respondent
    was divorced in Bangladesh and in 2011 underwent an  arranged  marriage
    with an Irish national. After the respondent's arrival in Ireland,  her
    spouse subjected her to violence, leading her to complain to the  Irish
    authorities. The respondent  left  Ireland  to  be  reunited  with  her
    elderly father and adult siblings in the  United  Kingdom.  She  stated
    that she has no family remaining in Bangladesh.

 5.  The  aforementioned  application  was  refused  on   6   March   2015.
    Essentially, the Secretary of State noted that none of the requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE (1) were met and noted  discrepancies  between  the
    account the respondent gave when seeking entry to the United Kingdom as
    a visitor and the account she was now providing. It  was  not  accepted
    that the  respondent  had  provided  any  compelling  or  compassionate
    reasons why she should be granted leave to remain outside the Rules.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the respondent  and  her
    brother, a Mr Rahman, gave evidence. The judge allowed the appeal under
    the Rules, concluding that there would be very significant obstacles to
    the  respondent's  integration  into  Bangladesh  because  she  had  no
    relatives there and all  her  family  members  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

The grounds of appeal

 7. The sole ground of appeal in support of this application is that  there
    was a failure to give adequate reasons or to consider  material  facts.
    It was submitted that the judge  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons
    which identified the obstacles the respondent would face on  return  to
    Bangladesh. It was noted that the respondent had spent the majority  of
    her life in Bangladesh without the presence of her father, siblings and
    other relatives. That was said to be a material factor  not  considered
    by the judge.



 8. Furthermore, while  the  judge  had  considered  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended), he failed to
    apply and consider the various factors which were relevant in  view  of
    the respondent's precarious residence in the United Kingdom.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

10. No Rule 24 response was received by the Tribunal.

The hearing

11. Mr Armstrong handed up the cases  of  Forman  (s117A-C  considerations)
    [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC), Rajendran (s.117B - family life)  [2016]  UKUT
    00138 (IAC) and Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT  00025  (IAC).
    He relied on the grounds and explained that the judge had not said  why
    the respondent could not go back to live in  Bangladesh.  Mr  Armstrong
    submitted that the  only  reason  given  by  the  judge  was  that  the
    respondent had no family there, however he asked me to  note  that  the
    respondent only left Bangladesh in 2012 for Ireland and was  a  41-year
    old adult. He argued that it was irrelevant  whether  or  not  she  had
    family members in Bangladesh. With regard to  the  respondent's  family
    members in the United Kingdom, there was nothing to  indicate  anything
    other than normal emotional ties between them and  the  respondent.  In
    view of the authorities referred to above, Mr Armstrong submitted  that
    the weight placed on the respondent's private life should  be  limited.
    He urged me to find that the judge made a material error of law.

12. Mr Miah argued that the judge's  findings  regarding  very  significant
    obstacles did not relate only to the respondent's  lack  of  family  in
    Bangladesh. At [17]  the  judge  had  noted  that  the  respondent  was
    "tortured mentally and physically" during her marriage in Ireland. This
    experience of  domestic  violence  was  relevant  to  the  respondent's
    private life. Furthermore, the judge had reached findings that all  the
    family members were now in the United Kingdom. Mr Miah  submitted  that
    the judge's findings, while concise, were sufficient and  that  he  was
    entitled to arrive at them. With regard to the judge's treatment of the
    considerations in section 117B of the 2002 Act, Mr Miah said  that  the
    judge adopted his findings in the preceding paragraphs. In response  to
    my query as to the link between the respondent's experience of domestic
    violence and very significant obstacles,  Mr  Miah  accepted  that  the
    judge did not spell it out. Nonetheless, he drew my  attention  to  the
    mention of domestic violence at [17] and at  [11]  to  the  mention  of
    medical evidence from a general practitioner. Mr  Miah  confirmed  that
    there was no psychological or psychiatric evidence before the judge.

13. In reply, Mr Armstrong argued that it  was  the  Secretary  of  State's
    submission that the respondent, who left Bangladesh aged 37,  was  able
    to return. He argued that at the time the  respondent  left  Bangladesh
    the majority of her family had left the country. He maintained that the
    judge gave inadequate reasons for finding very significant obstacles in
    that he did not explore the respondent's life in Bangladesh such as who
    she lived with, whether she worked or whether her family could  support
    her on return or whether they did so before.

14. Mr Armstrong argued that the respondent's  application  had  been  made
    outside the Rules because she knew  she  could  not  satisfy  paragraph
    276ADE(1). There was no psychiatric evidence  and  nor  was  there  any
    evidence of physical injuries when she was examined  by  a  doctor.  At
    this point Mr Miah  confirmed  that  the  respondent's  case  had  been
    presented before the judge as one under the Rules.

Decision on error of law

15. At the conclusion of the hearing, I announced that  the  judge  made  a
    material error of law in giving inadequate reasons for his finding that
    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   the   respondent's
    integration in Bangladesh. My reasons are set out below.

16. At [17] of the decision  and  reasons,  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    respondent had resided in Bangladesh for a "significant  part"  of  her
    life, that all of her family were British  citizens  residing  in  this
    country and that her married life with her Irish  husband  had  been  a
    "living hell" owing  to  his  violence.  There  is  not,  however,  any
    analysis of these factors in relation to the  respondent's  ability  to
    reintegrate in Bangladesh. Elsewhere in the same  paragraph  the  judge
    states as follows, "I do find on the evidence that the (respondent) has
    no close ties in Bangladesh and that this would have an effect  on  her
    ability to integrate..."  Firstly, the judge does not state what effect
    the absence of close ties would have on the  respondent  on  the  facts
    before him and secondly, the test is that of very significant obstacles
    rather than  whether  various  factors  would  have  an  effect  on  an
    individual's ability to integrate.

17. As accepted by Mr Miah, the judge's reasons did not refer to any  nexus
    between the domestic violence she suffered  and  the  very  significant
    obstacles to integration required to  be  shown  under  the  Rules.  It
    cannot  be  inferred  that  the  respondent's  experiences  in  Ireland
    rendered her unable to reintegrate into a country where she  had  lived
    for 37 years, including without the presence of close relatives.  There
    was no expert evidence before the judge which indicated  that  she  was
    vulnerable to the extent that she could not be expected  to  return  to
    Bangladesh. The judge's findings amount to a list of facts he accepted,
    however there is little to no assessment of these facts in relation  to
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) or a consideration  of  the
    claim outside the Rules.

18. It is unclear from the judge's decision whether or  not  he  considered
    Article 8 outside the Rules. His mention in [18] of section 117B of the
    2002 Act indicates that he may have done. If he did, his  treatment  of
    these provisions was inadequate in that there was no  consideration  of
    the respondent's precarious immigration status or any number  of  other
    relevant matters which Mr Armstrong highlighted during his submissions.
    The judge does not explain why he concludes that it is  in  the  public
    interest for the respondent to be permitted to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

19. I accordingly set aside the judge's decision but preserved his findings
    of fact, which  were  not  in  dispute.  Those  facts  being  that  the
    respondent was a victim of domestic violence when  she  was  living  in
    Ireland, that her family were residing in the United Kingdom  and  that
    there were no relatives living in Bangladesh.  I  considered  retaining
    the matter in the Upper Tribunal for remaking, however Mr Miah  advised
    me that medical evidence was in the process of being obtained. In these
    circumstances I decided that it was in  the  interests  of  justice  to
    remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for fresh  findings  to  be
    made as to whether the respondent met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Rules  and  whether  her  proposed  removal  to
    Bangladesh was or was not a disproportionate response.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, with findings of facts preserved, to the  First-tier
Tribunal to be reheard at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 2  hours  by
any judge except First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara                  27 October 2016




