
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11573/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th April 2014                               |On 01st May 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD ALI
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss K Currie, Counsel, for Marks and Marks
Solicitors, Harrow
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 9th September 1983.  He
    appealed the decision of the Respondent dated 27th March 2013  refusing
    him leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  student  under  the
    provisions of paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the Immigration Rules, because  by
    the time of the completion of his course he would have spent more  than
    six years in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student  and  the
    provision of the Rules proscribes this.  His appeal was heard by  Judge
    of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Eldridge  and  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds, in a determination promulgated on 17th December 2013.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged  by  the  Respondent
    and permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Pooler
    on 5th March 2014.  The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge
    erred in law by finding that Article 8  was  engaged  or  alternatively
    failing to find that the decision was proportionate.  The grounds  rely
    on Patel and Others v SSHD [2013] 3 WLR 1517 UKSC 72 and go on to state
    that the judge, who relied on CDS Brazil [2010] UKUT 00305 (IAC),  made
    a material misdirection of law in light of the decision in Patel.



The Hearing

 3. There were no preliminary issues and the Presenting  Officer  submitted
    that he is relying on the grounds of application, submitting  that  the
    judge did not approach the private life issue in the correct way.

 4. He submitted that at paragraph 22 the judge stated that the appellant's
    application could not meet the terms of the Immigration Rules and  this
    was accepted by his representative.

 5. At the time of the hearing the appellant had been in the United Kingdom
    for nine years. At paragraph 33 the judge states that the appeal cannot
    succeed in respect of his family life as he has no family life  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that at paragraph 37 the  judge  heads
    into "near miss" territory.  He found that the refusal of further leave
    to remain is an interference with the  Appellant's  private  life.   He
    goes on, at paragraph 38, to refer to the gravity of  the  interference
    being such as potentially to engage the protection of  Article  8.   At
    paragraphs 41 and 42 the  judge  deals  with  proportionality  and  the
    balancing act.  He found that the Appellant's  private  life  outweighs
    public interest and the necessity for effective immigration control.

 7. I was referred to the said case of Patel at paragraphs 56 and  57.   In
    these paragraphs  it  is  stated  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
    dispensing power  and  the  opportunity  for  a  promising  student  to
    complete his course in this country however desirable in general terms,
    is not in itself a right protected  under  Article  8.  The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the judge should have looked at the  appellant's
    moral and physical integrity.  He submitted that there  is  nothing  in
    the evidence about any other aspects of the  appellant's  private  life
    apart from his studies, which would be interfered with.   He  submitted
    that the Grounds of Appeal relating to the First-tier  hearing  do  not
    set out any private life; all they do  is  state  that  to  remove  the
    appellant would be contrary to his human rights.

 8. I was referred to the appellant's witness statement in which he  states
    "I also request the Tribunal to consider the appeal under Article 8  if
    not under the Immigration Rules."  What the appellant seems to be doing
    is relying on the fact that he has no criminal record and is a  genuine
    student.  The Presenting Officer submitted that the case law has  moved
    on in this respect and I was referred to the case of Nasim  and  Others
    [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC).  Patel and Others is referred to in this  case
    and in the headnote it  refers  to  Article  8's  limited  utility  and
    private life cases that are far  removed  from  the  protection  of  an
    individual's moral and physical integrity.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is nothing  in  this  claim
    which raises it to the threshold  required  for  it  to  succeed  under
    Article 8 of ECHR.  In the case of Nasim it is stated that  a  person's
    human rights are not enhanced by not committing  criminal  offences  or
    not relying on public funds.  He submitted that the core  of  Nasim  is
    addressed at paragraph 20 thereof and that unless there are  particular
    reasons to reduce the public interest of enforcing immigration control,
    that interest will consequently prevail in striking  a  proportionality
    balance.

10. He submitted that the public interest in immigration  control  in  this
    case,  must  have  greater  weight  than  the  circumstances  in   this
    appellant's case.  The fact that the appellant has accrued  time  as  a
    student is not enough for this claim to succeed under Article  8.   The
    appellant was always in the United Kingdom for a limited period.

11. The Presenting Officer submitted that this is an error of  law  on  the
    part of the judge.

12. The appellant's representative made  her  submissions  relying  on  her
    grounds of application.  She referred to the fact that the Tribunal had
    found that Article 8 was engaged and she submitted that CDS  Brazil  is
    relevant.

13. She submitted that there was no material error made  by  the  judge  in
    referring to CDS (Brazil) and referred me to paragraph 41 of  the  said
    case of Nasim and Others which refers to CDS Brazil.  This states  that
    it would be going too far to find that the  remarks  in  CDS  regarding
    Article 8 were no longer good law and it would be wrong to say that the
    point has been reached where an adverse immigration  decision,  in  the
    case of a person who is here for study or other temporary purposes, can
    never be found to be disproportionate.   The  headnote  in  CDS  Brazil
    states that a person who is admitted to follow a course  that  has  not
    ended, may build up a private life that deserves respect and the public
    interest in removal before the end of the course, may be reduced  where
    there are ample financial resources available.  She submitted that  the
    Presenting Officer saying that CDS is no longer good law is taking this
    point at too high a level.  She submitted that there is no  longer  any
    "near miss" but in any case, this would not be a "near miss" situation.
     The judge has not argued that this application nearly meets the Rules.



14. She submitted that the appellant's case has to be decided  outside  the
    Rules and all his circumstances have to be considered.

15. The representative submitted that  in  exceptional  cases  a  student's
    Article 8 claim can succeed and although the judge did not specifically
    refer to the case of Patel he understood  the  principles  therein  and
    that is clear from the determination.

16. I was referred to paragraphs 42 and 43  of  the  determination.   These
    paragraphs deal with public interest and effective immigration  control
    versus a student who can show that he is genuine in his intentions  and
    can meet the financial requirements. They state  that  a  student  with
    this criteria should have  his  private  life  considered  and  weighed
    against  public  interest,  when  proportionality  is  assessed.    She
    submitted that the judge was aware of the importance and the difficulty
    of establishing private life and that he was  aware  of  the  cases  of
    Patel and Nasim and Others.  At paragraph 38 the judge states that  the
    gravity of the interference  is  such  as  potentially  to  engage  the
    protection of Article 8.  He stresses that the appellant has a wish  to
    follow an academic career and that this Masters Degree will help him to
    achieve this aim and that he has ten years of study and working  behind
    him and this gives him a strong private life  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    sufficient for Article 8  to  be  engaged.   She  submitted  that  this
    appellant's private life circumstances are exceptional compared to many
    other students' circumstances.

17. With regard to proportionality the appellant's representative submitted
    that  the  Home  Office  has  not  argued  that  the  judge  has  given
    insufficient weight to certain matters.  The Secretary of State has not
    argued  that  the  appellant's  private  life  is  insignificant.   She
    submitted that the judge has given sufficient weight to public interest
    and immigration control and has balanced this against  the  appellant's
    private life interests and found that the weight must fall in favour of
    the appellant.  She submitted that the judge has  weighed  up  all  the
    circumstances properly and proportionally  and  there  is  no  material
    error of law in the determination.



Determination

18. The judge and the appellant's representative have  accepted  that  this
    appellant's  application  does  not  meet  the  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules and that at the conclusion of his course he will have
    studied at Degree level or above, for seven  and  a  half  years.   The
    Rules state that a student cannot spend more than six years as a Tier 4
    (General) Student.  The judge has  found  that  the  appellant  has  no
    family life in the United Kingdom.

19. At paragraph 34 onwards the judge deals with  the  appellant's  private
    life under Article 8 of ECHR.  He refers to the case of  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL  27,  finding  that  the  gravity  of  the  interference  to   the
    Appellant's private life, potentially engages the protection of Article
    8, particularly in view of the fact that the appellant wishes to pursue
    an  academic  career,  rather  than  a  professional  career,   as   an
    accountant.

20. At paragraph 44 the judge refers to the case of CDS Brazil.   When  the
    Presenting Officer submitted that this case  can  no  longer  represent
    good law this is taking its findings at too high a level but the  judge
    has not considered the said cases of Patel and Nasim and Others.

21. Based on what was before him, the only evidence  there  is  of  private
    life is the appellant's studies.  It is clear that  he  is  a  diligent
    student, has been here lawfully for ten years and is able  to  maintain
    himself  but  this  is  the  only  information  we   have   about   his
    circumstances. When this is weighed against public interest,  based  on
    the relevant case law, the Appellant's claim cannot succeed.  The  case
    of CDS is dated before the cases of Patel and  Nasim  and  Others.  The
    judge has not considered the most  recent  case  law  when  making  his
    decision. He does not refer to these cases and his  decision  does  not
    follow their guidance.  This claim is directly against the terms of the
    Rules.  For the appellant to complete his MSc, will mean that  he  will
    have been in the United Kingdom studying at Degree level or above,  for
    seven and a half years.   There is nothing exceptional  in  this  case.
    The case of Patel refers to the weight to be given to  the  maintenance
    of immigration control and refers to there being no "near miss"  policy
    but this has never been a "near miss" claim.  As  stated  in  Patel  "A
    Rule  is  a  Rule".   Rules  have  to  be  treated   as   such.    When
    proportionality is assessed the terms of the Rules cannot  be  met  and
    this must weigh against the appellant.  The case of Patel  states  that
    Article 8 has  to  be  distinguished  from  the  Secretary  of  State's
    discretion to allow leave to remain outside the  Rules,  which  may  be
    unrelated to any protected human right.  It  refers  to  graduates  who
    have been studying in the UK  for  some  years  and  states  that  this
    consideration does not, by itself,  provide  grounds  of  appeal  under
    Article 8, which is concerned with private life, not education as such.
     The opportunity for a promising student to complete his course in this
    country, however desirable in general terms, is not in itself  a  right
    protected under Article 8.  This is the guidance which should have been
    followed by the judge and was not.

22. The case of Nasim and Others refers to Article 8's limited  utility  in
    private life cases that are far  removed  from  the  protection  of  an
    individual's  moral  and  physical  integrity.   The  judge   has   not
    considered the appellant's moral  and  physical  integrity.   The  only
    private life that we are aware of is his leave in the United Kingdom as
    a student.  What the Appellant has in his favour is the  fact  that  he
    has no criminal record and is  able  to  pay  for  his  course  without
    relying on public funds.  This is not sufficient for the assessment  of
    proportionality to fall on the side  of  the  Appellant  when  all  the
    circumstances are taken into account.  Public  interest  must  outweigh
    this Appellant's Article 8 claim.  The case of Nasim and Others  refers
    to the said case of Patel and at paragraphs 41 and  42  refers  to  the
    said case of CDS Brazil.  It states that it is unlikely that  a  person
    would be able to show an Article  8  right  by  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom for temporary purposes.  That is what this Appellant did. Under
    the law as it stands, there  is  no  justification  for  extending  the
    obiter findings of CDS so as to equate a person, whose course of  study
    has not yet ended, or who, having finished their course,  is  precluded
    by the Immigration Rules from staying on to do something else.

23. The judge in this case  has  made  a  material  error  of  law  by  not
    considering the relevant country guidance cases and making  a  decision
    against the guidance in these cases.

Decision

24. There are material errors of law in the judge's determination.

25. The appeal cannot  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  cannot
    succeed under Article 8 of ECHR.

26. I uphold  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Eldridge's  decision  under  the
    Immigration Rules but set aside her decision on human rights grounds.

27. No anonymity direction has been made.






Signed                              Date


Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

