
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/11160/2015
                                                               IA/11163/2015
                                                               IA/11168/2015
                                                               IA/11171/2015
                                                               IA/11175/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 September 2017                  |On 2 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                               1) Martins [A]
                               2) Kikelomo [A]
                               3) Dorothy [A]
                                  4) [D A1]
                                  5) [D A2]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Gilbert, Counsel, instructed by Lighthouse
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the  remaking  of  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Geraint Jones QC, promulgated on 4 July  of  2016.   After  a  somewhat
    complex process, the decision was set aside by me on 16 June 2017.  For
    convenience  my  decision  on  error  of  law  is   annexed   to   this
    determination.

     Background

2.   I can take the background briefly as the factual findings of the First-
    tier Tribunal have been preserved and I incorporate them  by  reference
    herein. The five appellants comprise a family unit: the first appellant
    being the father, the second  appellant  the  mother,  and  the  third,
    fourth and fifth appellants their three daughters.  The third appellant
    was aged 8 when she arrived in the United Kingdom and is now  18.   The
    fourth appellant was 6 on arrival and the fifth appellant was  4.   All
    three daughters were born in Washington DC and I am told  are  entitled
    to American citizenship.

3.   The immigration history of the first and  second  appellants  does  not
    make happy reading and is recorded in full in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The first appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 18
    September 2007 with a student visa valid until  30  May  of  2009.  The
    second appellant joined the first appellant as  his  wife/dependant  in
    September of 2007  bringing  with  her  the  three  daughters.  At  the
    expiration of his visa, the first appellant applied for  further  leave
    to remain, such application being rejected on 3 September  2009.  On  8
    September 2009 he submitted a further application to remain as a Tier 4
    Student which was refused on 13 October of 2009.  He remained  in  the
    United Kingdom illegally notwithstanding these refusals.

4.   On 8 March 2010 a  pre-action  Protocol  letter  was  sent  threatening
    judicial review and on 5 May 2010 the first  appellant  asked  for  his
    application to be reconsidered.  It was and the refusal was  maintained
    on 26 May 2010.  On 9 December 2010 the  first  appellant  submitted  a
    further  student  visa  application.   This  was  granted  after   some
    considerable delay on 7 July of 2013 with a resultant visa valid  until
    1 November 2013.

5.   On the expiry  of  that  student  visa  the  first  appellant  made  an
    application for leave to remain as an entrepreneur.  That  was  refused
    on 31 March of 2014 with no right of appeal. Both  the  first  and  the
    second appellants have remained in this  country  notwithstanding  this
    catalogue  of  adverse  determinations  of   a   succession   on   visa
    applications and, subsequently, a removal direction. On 29 January 2015
    each appellant made an application for leave to  remain  on  the  basis
    that their human rights would be breached  if  they  were  required  to
    leave.

     Updating evidence

6.   In the light of the preservation of the factual findings of the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the additional evidence was  limited  to  some  updating
    material from the appellants. It was  served  late  in  breach  of  the
    directions made at the error of law hearing, but no objection was taken
    on the part of the Secretary of State.

7.   I heard from the third, fourth  and  fifth  appellants,  each  of  whom
    adopted their written statements, all dated 14 September of 2017. Those
    statements deposed to the level of integration of  each  of  the  three
    daughters in the United Kingdom through education and  community  ties.
    They gave oral evidence  supplementing  what  was  contained  in  their
    written statements and were briefly cross-examined.

8.   The third  appellant  indicated  that  she  had  found  the  last  year
    particularly stressful. Although she had been predicted  securing  four
    grade A's at A level, she in fact achieved grades A, B, D  and  E.   In
    consequence she was unable to take up her place for a degree course  in
    engineering at Surrey University.  She was offered  instead  an  access
    course  involving  mathematics  and  physics  which  she  turned  down,
    preferring instead to remain at school, retake two modules and  reapply
    to university.   She  described  being  disappointed  and  sad  at  the
    prospect of going to Nigeria having lived in the United Kingdom for  as
    long as she can remember. All her friends are here and most are  moving
    on to university. She finds it really hard that she is not  heading  to
    university with them. She says she has  no  contacts  with  anybody  in
    Nigeria.

9.    In  cross-examination  she  suggested  the  poor  performance  in  not
    achieving her potential in her A levels resulted from stress but she is
    confident she can achieve better results in the two modules  which  she
    is retaking. She spoke of having bad headaches since July of last  year
    which developed into migraines and that continued into the exam  season
    this spring.  She stated  she  takes  codeine  and  when  the  pain  is
    particularly bad attends the accident and  emergency  department.   She
    accepted that there is no  medical  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  to
    support those claims.  She is too young to remember her early years  in
    Nigeria and has not  investigated  the  education  system  in  Nigeria,
    particularly the  university  teaching  of  engineering.  She  has  not
    explored it because she did not want to  contemplate  the  prospect  of
    having to go to Nigeria.

10.  The fourth  appellant  describes  her  feelings  of  being  scared  and
    nervous at going to Nigeria.  She said her whole life is in England and
    she has her social life and her friends here. Recently  attending  open
    evenings at other sixth form colleges she was troubled at the  prospect
    that she might not still be in the country when the time comes for  her
    to take up a place.  She is confident she can do well academically  and
    socially.  She wants to build her life here.  She said  she  loves  her
    country, has a British accent and  entirely  British  friends.  She  is
    comfortable here and she says this is the place for her to be.

11.  In cross-examination she  indicated  that  she  wished  to  move  to  a
    separate sixth form college for her A level study.  She indicated  that
    today was her 16th birthday and that she would be taking her  GCSEs  in
    May and June of 2018 with the intention of changing schools thereafter.
     She thinks it is better for her not to be at Sacred Heart  School  but
    somewhere which will teach economics and biology. She wants  to  become
    fully independent and believes herself to be somewhat sheltered  at  an
    all-girls school.  She indicated that several of her friends  are  also
    looking to move school but hopes that they will still  stay  in  touch.
    She says she knows of no members of her extended family in Nigeria  and
    cannot remember when last she was there.

12.  The fifth appellant stated that  virtually  her  entire  childhood  has
    been in this country.  She was  raised  here  and  she  would  be  very
    distraught to leave.  She had built up her character here and she would
    be leaving a  bit  of  herself  behind.  She  says  she  cherishes  her
    friendships and it would be very sad for her to go.   She  is  building
    towards GCSEs, she speaks of her life plan which she  has  set  herself
    and that she would feel diminished if that were taken  away:  it  would
    upset her very much.  She set herself goals from key stage one,  moving
    through to GCSEs, sixth form college and university.  If  she  were  to
    leave she would miss out  on  all  the  prospects  which  she  has  set
    herself.

13.  I received written submissions  in  advance  from  Mr  Melvin  for  the
    Secretary of  State  and  on  the  morning  from  Mr  Gilbert  for  the
    appellants.  The each made brief supplemental submissions orally.

     Secretary of State's submissions

14.  Mr Melvin submitted that in adopting  the  approach  commended  by  the
    Court of Appeal in MA Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705, the Tribunal should
    look first at the best interests of each  child  and  secondly  at  the
    reasonableness of the proposed return to  Nigeria,  the  second  matter
    being in the form of a proportionality assessment.

15.  Mr Melvin made particular reference to the following paragraphs  of  MA
    Pakistan:


         [54] There are issues which arise in these cases  relating  to  the
         best interests of the children.  First  as  I  have  said  Mr  Gill
         submits that once the best  interests  have  been  determined  that
         necessarily resolves the reasonableness question.   For  reasons  I
         have  given  I  reject   that   submission.    There   is   nothing
         intrinsically illogical in the notion that whilst the child's  best
         interests are for him or her to stay, it  is  not  unreasonable  to
         expect him or her to go.  That is so  even  if  the  reasonableness
         test  should  be  applied  so  as  to   exclude   public   interest
         considerations bearing upon the parties.


         [88] The second ground was this: having established that  it  would
         be in the children's best interest to stay in the  UK  the  judge's
         findings are entirely contrary to the guidance in the Supreme Court
         case of Zoumbas at paragraph 10.7 that a "child must not be  blamed
         for matters for which he or she is  not  responsible  such  as  the
         conduct of a parent."  I would accept that the judge did contradict
         that principle when he treated the children's status as precarious,
         but reading the judgment as a whole it is plain that this was not a
         significant element in his  reasoning.   He  focused  on  the  very
         powerful  public  interest  in  removing  the  fathers  and   their
         precarious status certainly was  material  to  the  proportionality
         analysis.  For reasons I have explained above paragraphs 41  to  42
         the conduct of the parents is relevant to their own situation which
         bears upon the wider public interest and does not amount to blaming
         the children even if they may be prejudiced as a result.


         [101]    But for reasons I have given that is not  the  test.   The
         court can have regard to the wider public  interest  including  the
         immigration history of the applicant and his parents.  The question
         therefore is whether the judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  having
         regard to these considerations and all other aspects of the  public
         interest that it would not be unreasonable to require the child  to
         return to Pakistan.


         [114]     As  to  the  reasonableness  question,  the   appellant's
         principal submission was that the judge did not focus as he  should
         have done on the position of the child but instead looked at  wider
         public interest considerations including the immigration history of
         the parents and the fact that as a consequence the  child's  status
         was precarious.  For reasons I have given the  application  of  the
         reasonableness test requires the judge to have regard to the  wider
         public interests and they require consideration of the  immigration
         history and status of the parents.  The judge was not therefore  in
         error in applying the reasonableness test with a broad brush  in  a
         manner akin to an Article 8 proportionality test.

16.  Mr Melvin made reference to the decision  in  EV  Philippines  and  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874.   In
    particular

         [36] In a sense the Tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
         answer falls to be  given  to  the  question  is  it  in  the  best
         interests of the child to remain?  The longer the  child  has  been
         here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of  his  education,
         the looser his ties with the  country  in  question  and  the  more
         deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater the  weight
         that falls into one side of the scales.  If it is overwhelmingly in
         the child's best interests that he should not return  the  need  to
         maintain immigration control may well  not  tip  the  balance.   By
         contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain but  only
         on balance (with some factors pointing the other  way)  the  result
         may be the opposite.
         [37] In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
         account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the  economic  wellbeing  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex  hypothesi  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain.  The immigration history of the parents  may
         also be relevant for example if they are overstayers or have  acted
         deceitfully.


         [60] That is a long way from the facts of our case.   In  our  case
         none of the family is a British citizen.  None  has  the  right  to
         remain in this country.  If the mother is removed the father has no
         independent right to remain.  If the parents are removed then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them.  As the
         Immigration Judge found it is obviously in their best interests  to
         remain with their parents.  Although it is of course a question  of
         fact for the Tribunal I cannot see that the desirability  of  being
         educated at public expense in the United Kingdom can  outweigh  the
         benefit to the children of remaining with their parents.   Just  as
         we cannot provide medical treatment for  the  world  so  we  cannot
         educate the world.

17.  Mr Melvin also referred me to Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part  5A
    compelling circumstances test)  [2017]  UKUT  00013  (IAC),  which,  he
    submitted, was substantially similar on its facts to the  present  one.
    He took me to the third point in the head  note  which  indicates  that
    mere hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles, mere  upheaval  and  mere
    inconvenience even where multiplied are unlikely to satisfy the test of
    very significant hurdles in paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules.
    More particularly, he cited paragraphs 50 and 51


         [50] Next we are mandated by Section 59 of the Borders, Citizenship
         and Immigration Act 2009 to give primacy to the best  interests  of
         the third, fourth and fifth appellants as  all  are  children.   We
         consider that the best interests of these children  will  primarily
         be served by the maintenance of the family unit, as  already  noted
         this will predictably occur.  The second dimension of  these  three
         appellants' best interests is that on balance they would be  better
         off in certain respects in particular economically  if  the  family
         were to remain in the United  Kingdom.   This  we  must  take  into
         account in the balancing exercise as a primary consideration.
         [51] Our balancing of the salient features of the appellants' cases
         with the public interests engaged, all as set forth  above,  yields
         the  conclusion  that  the  public  interests  must  prevail.   The
         appellants' cases in combination unquestionably possess  a  certain
         appeal and various attractions.  No reasonable or humane  court  or
         Tribunal could, in our judgment consider otherwise.  Furthermore we
         must accord a primacy of importance to that aspect of the third  to
         fifth appellants' best  interests  identified  above.   However  we
         consider that the effect of contemporary immigration  law  is  that
         this superficially seductive case  falls  short  measurably  so  of
         overcoming   the   threshold    necessary    to    demonstrate    a
         disproportionate  interference  with  private  life  rights   under
         Article 8 ECHR.  The  most  sympathetic  view  of  the  appellants'
         combined cases - which we have adopted -  does  not  warrant  any
         different conclusion in law.  While we are mindful that the Article
         8  private  life  claim  of  each  of  these  appellants  has   its
         distinctive personal  features,  given  their  different  ages  and
         circumstances we find nothing to warrant a different conclusion  in
         respect of any of the appellants individually [emphasis added].

18.  Mr Melvin drew my attention to  the  tremendous  cost  to  the  British
    public in having to house, feed, clothe and educate this family and  in
    providing medical treatment as and when required.  He  placed  emphasis
    on the immigration history and the contempt which the adult  appellants
    have shown.  He referred me also to the case of Kaur  (children's  best
    interests/public interest  interface)  [2017]  UKUT  14  (IAC)  and  in
    particular to paragraphs 12, 18 and 41:


         [12] The Tribunal next gave consideration to the  strength  of  the
         children's ties with the United Kingdom, noting in particular  that
         the older child had lived here for the seven  years  of  her  life.
         The Judge made the conclusion in my judgment both  unavoidable  and
         unremarkable that the best interests of these  two  young  children
         lie in remaining with their parents.  The question  of  whether  it
         would be reasonable to expect the children to accompany the parents
         to the country of origin was then examined.  Following  an  outline
         of material aspects of the evidence this yielded the conclusion  at
         65 "having considered all the evidence in the round I do  not  find
         that it would be unreasonable to expect the children to  leave  the
         UK with their  parents".   Finally  in  considering  the  issue  of
         proportionality, the Tribunal recognised  the  established  private
         life in  the  United  Kingdom  of  all  four  family  members.   In
         concluding that the impugned decision represented  an  interference
         with the private life protected by Article  8  ECHR,  the  Tribunal
         stated at 73 "any private life the Appellant has established in the
         UK should be given little weight because it was  established  at  a
         time when she remained as an overstayer and the  children  have  no
         rights to remain.

         [18] Secondly the assessment of a child's best interests must focus
         on the child, while simultaneously evaluating the  reality  of  the
         child's life situation and circumstances.  Factors such as parental
         immigration misconduct must not intrude  at  this  stage.   See  EV
         Philippines at 33.  This requires care and discipline on  the  part
         of decision makers and judges.  The child's  best  interests,  once
         assessed, are an important component of the overall proportionality
         balancing exercise.  However, they have a  freestanding  character.
         Avoidance of error is likely to be promoted if the  best  interests
         assessment is carried out  first.   Parental  misconduct  typically
         takes the form of illegal entry, unlawful  overstaying  or  illegal
         working.  Factors of this kind may legitimately enter the  equation
         at a later stage of the overall proportionality balancing  exercise
         as they  are  clearly  embraced  by  the  public  interest  in  the
         maintenance of immigration control.  This is the stage at  which  a
         child's  best  interests,  though  a   consideration   of   primary
         importance can potentially be outweighed by the public interest.


         [41] Ultimately I accept the submission of Ms Patry  that  properly
         and fairly analysed the decision of the FtT neither  infringes  the
         seventh principle of the Zoumbas code nor contravenes the  approach
         espoused in MA Pakistan.  As the passages quoted in  paragraphs  11
         to 12 above make clear the judge focused particularly on the issues
         of where  the  children  had  been  born,  their  lack  of  British
         citizenship, the strength of their ties with the United Kingdom and
         whether it would be reasonable to expect them  to  accompany  their
         parents  upon  departing  the  United   Kingdom.    There   is   no
         identifiable blemish in this approach.  The burden of the  argument
         underpinning the draft amended ground of appeal is  expressed  thus
         in Mr Alam's written submissions 'it  is  submitted  that  the  FtT
         focused heavily upon the  precarious  immigration  history  of  the
         children which in effect penalises the children for their  parent's
         behaviour'.  For the reasons explained above I  consider  that  the
         analysis of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  untenable.
         In the judicial exercise being conducted the principal error of law
         to be  avoided  was  that  of  permitting  the  issue  of  parental
         misconduct to intrude at the stage of assessing the  parents'  best
         interests.  I consider that this error was indeed avoided.

19.  In concluding, Mr Melvin drew attention to  the  fact  that  the  first
    appellant is a wealthy businessman with resources both in  Nigeria  and
    elsewhere as was found to be the case in the First-tier Tribunal.  Such
    facts having been preserved he indicates there can be little difficulty
    relating to finding accommodation and schooling. He  submits  that  the
    appeal should be  dismissed  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  when
    Article 8 is considered outside the Rules.

     The appellants' submissions

20.  Turning then to the submissions of Mr Gilbert on  behalf  of  all  five
    appellants, he agrees that the two-stage approach is appropriate: first
    looking at the best interests of the children;  and  secondly  what  is
    reasonable.

 21. He submitted that regard should he had  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    policy. Such arguments may carry less  force  when  children  are  very
    young, but here all three appellants have been in  the  United  Kingdom
    for the greater part of their lives  and are at  a  more  advanced  and
    crucial stage of their schooling.  Mr Gilbert further cited he decision
    in the case of Azimi-Moayed &  Others  (decisions  affecting  children:
    onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197  (IAT),  particularly  the  observation
    that seven years from age four is likely to be more  significant  to  a
    child than the first seven years of life.  Mr  Gilbert  submitted  that
    all three children are "fully formed British" in substance and outlook.
    He also referred me to EV Philippines at paragraph 33:

         ... the best interests  of  the  child  are  to  be  determined  by
         reference to the child alone without reference to  the  immigration
         history or status of either parent.

22.  Next Mr Gilbert took me to PD and Others (Article  8  conjoined  family
    claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC) and to paragraph 39

         [39] We remind ourselves that the test to be  applied  is  that  of
         reasonableness.  Other legal tests which have gained much  currency
         in this sphere during  recent  years -  insurmountable  obstacles,
         exceptional  circumstances,  very  compelling  reasons -  have  no
         application in the exercise we are performing.  Self-evidently  the
         test  of  reasonableness  poses  a  less  exacting  and   demanding
         threshold than that posed by the other tests mentioned.

23.  Mr Gilbert also took me to the decision in MA Pakistan (above)  and  in
    particular  to  paragraph  46,  under  the  sub-heading  "Applying  the
    reasonableness test", and  paragraph  49  in  which  Elias  LJ  states:




         [46] Even on the approach of the Secretary of State the fact that a
         child has been here for  seven  years  must  be  given  significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise.  Indeed  the
         Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of
         Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled  family  life  (as  a
         partner or parent) and private life: ten year routes in which it is
         expressly stated that once the seven years'  residence  requirement
         is satisfied there need to be strong reasons  for  refusing  leave,
         para 11.2.4.  These instructions were not in force when  the  cases
         now subject to appeal were determined but in my  mind  they  merely
         confirm what is implicit in  adopting  a  policy  of  this  nature.
         After such a period of time the child will have put down roots  and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK.  That may be less so when the  children  are  very
         young because the focus of their lives will be  on  their  families
         but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
         Moreover in these cases there must be  a  very  strong  expectation
         that the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
         his parents as part of a family  unit  and  that  must  rank  as  a
         primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.  [emphasis
         added]

         [49] Although this was not in fact a seven year case, on the  wider
         construction of Section 117B(6) the same principles would apply  in
         such a case.  However the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK
         for seven years would need to be given significant  weight  in  the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first because  of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests and second because  it  establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary.

24.  Mr Gilbert says the  third,  fourth  and  fifth  appellants  are  well-
    adjusted, fully integrated young women; they are at important -  indeed
    crucial - stages of their  education  and  removal  now  would  have  a
    significant and disruptive influence in their lives returning them to a
    country with which they have no meaningful connection. They  have  been
    in the United Kingdom since the early stages of their childhood.

25.  Mr Gilbert  refers  me  to  certain  aspects  of  their  education,  in
    particular that the third  appellant,  having  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom at the age of 8 attained 11 GCSEs with three A*, seven  As  and
    one B, she was designated as gifted and talented. She won a place at  a
    selective sixth form and was predicted to get four As in  her  A  level
    maths, physics, English and art. She had an offer of a university place
    to study engineering.   She  believes  that  the  disruption  of  these
    proceedings has hampered her progress. She is  retaking  her  exams  to
    achieve higher marks.  School reports describe her as  a  superb  young
    woman  with  enormous  potential;  she  excels  academically,   is   an
    outstanding student, and a role model to younger students.

26.  It is submitted that removal would have a  significant  adverse  impact
    on the third appellant's emotional wellbeing.  A letter from her school
    states that if she were to be uprooted at this stage it  would  have  a
    profound  impact  on  her  future  due  to  her  social  and   academic
    progression.  It points to her being  involved  in  the  school  choir,
    netball and ruby teams and indicates that she was founder and president
    of the engineering society at her school.

27.  Similarly, Mr Gilbert submits that there is much in  the  documentation
    to support the contention that the  fourth  and  fifth  appellants  are
    equally academically gifted, and strong in competitive sports and other
    activities.  He observes that their formative years having  been  spent
    entirely in the United Kingdom and there is  nothing  to  suggest  they
    will return to a stable home in Nigeria.

28.  Mr Gilbert also took me to the  case  of  Kaur  which  I  have  already
    cited.  He makes the distinction between the ages of  the  children  in
    Kaur and the ages of the third to fifth appellants in  this  case.   He
    further makes the point that there  is  not  a  natural  break  in  the
    children's education notwithstanding the fact that the third  appellant
    intends to go to university next year and the fourth appellant  intends
    to move to a sixth form college at the  end  of  the  current  academic
    year.

29.  In Mr Gilbert's submission, Nigeria is an entirely  foreign  place  for
    these three children and it would be wholly unreasonable to expect them
    to relocate.

30.  Mr Gilbert says that in making the  separate  and  distinct  Article  8
    assessment  a  factor  to  be  considered  and  given  weight  in   the
    proportionality assessment is that since the date of  application,  the
    third appellant  has  obtained  her  majority  and  would  now  satisfy
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(v), being a person "aged  18  years  or  above  and
    under 25 years  and  has  spent  at  least  half  of  her  life  living
    continuously in the United Kingdom".  He submits this is a  factor  the
    Tribunal should  take  into  account  when  looked  at  in  the  family
    situation as a whole.

31.  Mr Melvin indicated that in the event that this appeal were to fail  it
    would be open to any of the appellants (but the  third  and  fourth  in
    particular) to apply to the Secretary of State to defer removal to  the
    end of the academic year. I invited Mr Gilbert's  submissions  on  this
    discrete point.  He said it would be speculation as to whether  or  not
    any application would be made (he had no specific instructions) or,  if
    made, whether one would be granted.  He did not, however, dissent  from
    the proposition that such a course would be open to the appellants.

     Assessment






32.  Although Mr Melvin and Mr Gilbert cited case law at some  length,  they
    were broadly agreed on the relevant principles, differing  only  as  to
    its application to the particular facts of  this  case.  The  Court  of
    Appeal decision in MA Pakistan, which has helped clarify  the  approach
    to be adopted, was handed down some three  days  after  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the present case was promulgated.

33.  It is common ground that the claims of the first  and  second  claimant
    are individually without merit and Mr Gilbert does  not  challenge  the
    clear and robust language adopted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  its
    fact-findings in this regard. The claims  are  parasitic  on  those  of
    their three children, the third  to  fifth  appellants,  which  require
    prior determination.

34.  Turning first to the Immigration  Rules,  the  relevant  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1) state that  leave  to  remain  on  the  grounds  of
    private life in the United Kingdom will be  granted  if  the  applicant
    "(iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the UK
    for at least 7 years ... and it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
    applicant to leave the UK".  It  was  accepted  that  at  the  time  of
    application all three children were under 18 and  satisfied  the  seven
    year condition. Whilst the third appellant  has  subsequently  obtained
    her majority, Mr Melvin and Mr Gilbert were both in agreement that  the
    matter falls to be determined on the facts as they were at the date  of
    application.

35.  In relation to the best interests of the children,  while  I  recognise
    that each must be considered separately, the evidence  in  relation  to
    them is very similar in nature  and  content  and  leads  to  the  same
    conclusions. In my  judgment  these  three  children  are  intelligent,
    articulate, well-presented young women who are ambitious for themselves
    and worldly-wise. They have undoubtedly  settled  well  in  the  United
    Kingdom. They have made a  significant  contribution  to  their  school
    lives and their various other activities. They will doubtless  be  high
    achievers in the future.  They  have  little  in  terms  of  continuing
    connections with Nigeria. Virtually their entire  life  experience  has
    been gained living in England.  In my judgment,  their  best  interests
    individually - and collectively as a trio - are that they remain in the
    United Kingdom.

36.  The next matter to be addressed in this two-stage  process  is  whether
    it is reasonable for each of the third to fifth appellants to leave the
    United Kingdom. There are factors pointing both for and against. Whilst
    I have made a finding that their best interests  are  served  in  their
    remaining in the United Kingdom, I do not consider that this is a  case
    where that is overwhelmingly the case.  The very fact  that  these  are
    articulate high performing individuals suggests that they are likely to
    adjust well to a new and challenging environment  and  that  they  have
    both the emotional and financial resources to ensure that they will  do
    so. There is no suggestion that educational opportunities at  secondary
    or tertiary level would be inadequate. There is no argument that any of
    the third to fifth appellants have special educational needs or  health
    concerns which cannot be met in Nigeria. For example,  it  is  open  to
    them, should they wish to attend particular British universities, to do
    so as overseas students

37.  Mr Gilbert did not  pursue  the  suggestion  in  paragraph  29  of  his
    skeleton argument that the family would  have  no  home  or  assets  to
    return to in Nigeria,  the  first  appellant  having  relinquished  his
    business before leaving Nigeria. It is of significance that  solicitors
    acting for all the appellants wrote  to  the  UK  Border  Agency  on  9
    December 2010 stating in clear  terms  that  the  first  appellant  had
    businesses in Nigeria and had acquired  property  in  the  United  Arab
    Emirates. A recurring feature of this case has been the capacity of the
    first appellant to advance mutually contradictory arguments at  various
    times in the past  in  the  hope  that  he  and  his  family  might  be
    advantaged by his dishonesty. An example of this trait was picked up in
    the First-tier Tribunal in relation to his  claim  that  the  third  to
    fifth appellants would not be entitled to Nigerian citizenship.

38.  Notwithstanding the ages  of  the  third  to  fifth  appellants,  their
    assimilation  into  British  society,  their  educational  and   social
    achievements, their lack of familiarity with Nigeria, to all of which I
    give considerable weight, I am nonetheless  satisfied  that  there  are
    powerful countervailing reasons why it is reasonable for them to leave.
    There is no problem with  language,  there  are  no  cultural,  ethnic,
    educational or health concerns. The family seems to be entirely reliant
    on state benefits, and financial support from  the  London  Borough  of
    Ealing, notwithstanding the first appellant's apparent  wealth,  assets
    and businesses overseas. Whilst not seeking to visit the  sins  of  the
    father on his daughters, the appalling immigration history in this case
    is a relevant consideration in balancing what is  reasonable.  So  also
    are the implications for the public purse, past, present and future, in
    supporting  the  family,  and  funding  the  educational,  social   and
    healthcare needs of the various appellants.

39.  Although Mr Gilbert made much of what he considered to be the  critical
    stage of the education of the appellants, I do not consider this to  be
    a decisive factor. It is not uncommon  for  children  to  move  at  key
    points in their schooling. It is inconvenient and challenging but it is
    one of the vicissitudes of life which are to be  faced  stoically.  All
    three children are articulate, robust and self-assured. They  presented
    at the hearing with enormous poise, self-confidence and  assertiveness.
    I am in no doubt that they will cope well with changes  in  their  life
    style and education which will result from leaving the United  Kingdom,
    whether it is to Nigeria or onwards to the  United  States  of  America
    should they prefer.

40.  Turning finally to Article 8 outside of the Rules, I note  that  family
    life will be promoted and preserved by all five appellants leaving  the
    country together as a family unit.  To  the  extent  that  there  is  a
    separate free-standing private life  claim,  whilst  undoubtedly  there
    would be some disruption to that social or private life by  relocation,
    when regard is had  to  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control the proportionality assessment comes down, for  the
    reasons already discussed, in favour of removal.

41.  I do not consider that the fact that the third appellant may  now  have
    accrued an alternative basis of advancing a claim for leave  to  remain
    under paragraph 276ADE (1)(v) on the basis that she "is aged  18  years
    or above and under 25 years and has spent at least half of  [her]  life
    living continuously in the UK" is such as to affect the outcome of  the
    proportionality assessment. It is not an exceptional  circumstance  for
    granting leave outside the Rules, whether the third appellant alone, or
    all the appellants collectively.

42.  In all the circumstances of the appellants' appeals fail  bother  under
    the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 outside the Rules.

Notice of Decision

    (1)  Upon the decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set aside
         it is remade as follows.


    (2)  The appeal of each of the five appellants is dismissed  under  the
         Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.


    (3)  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     29 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
                                   ANNEXE

                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-ck-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/11160/2015
                                                               IA/11163/2015
                                                               IA/11168/2015
                                                               IA/11171/2015
                                                               IA/11175/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 June 2017                              |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                 Martins [A]
                                Kikelomo [A]
                                 Dorothy [A]
                                   [D A1]
                                   [D A2]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Gilbert, Counsel, instructed by Lighthouse
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Geraint Jones QC, promulgated on 4 July 2016.  This  particular  matter
    has a lengthy and complex procedural history which I do not propose  to
    rehearse for the purposes of  this  determination.   It  relates  to  a
    family unit, mother, father and three children all of  whom  come  from
    Nigeria.  The first and second  appellants,  namely  the  parents,  are
    citizens of Nigeria and it would appear that the children,  the  third,
    fourth and fifth appellants, are citizens of the United States.

2.   Although permission to appeal  was  refused  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Allen on  19  December  2016,  that  decision  became  the  subject  of
    proceedings in the Administrative Court. On 14 March  2017,  permission
    to proceed by way of judicial review  was  granted  by  HHJ  Jarman  QC
    sitting as a Judge of the High Court and  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal was subsequently quashed on 7 April 2017. Thereafter the  Vice
    President of the Upper Tribunal formally granted permission  to  appeal
    on 10 May 2017.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal decision is a lengthy one running  to  some  39
    paragraphs but ultimately coming to the view that both  the  children's
    appeals under Article 8, and the parasitic appeals of  the  parents  be
    dismissed.

4.   The judge recognised that each of the children was a  "relevant  child"
    for the purpose of the relevant legislation. The  difficulty,  however,
    as I raised in argument is the lack of clarity and apparent  conflation
    of legal issues in addressing and reconciling (1) the best interests of
    the children under the section 55 considerations; (2)     the weight to
    be afforded in the balancing exercise the seven year residence  of  the
    children and (3) the poor immigration history of the parents.

5.   I have been taken at some  length  to  the  now  familiar  case  of  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and in particular to  the  clarification
    which  the  Court  of  Appeal  gave  to  its  earlier  judgment  in  EV
    (Philippines) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874 and an apparent dissonance between the  approach  Lord  Justice
    Lewison and Lord Justice Christopher Clarke.  In  paragraph  53  of  MA
    (Pakistan), adopting the language of Lord Justice Christopher Clarke in
    EV (Philippines), it is clearly stated by Lord Justice Elias  that  the
    best interests of the child are to be determined by  reference  to  the
    child alone without reference to the immigration history or  status  of
    either parent. This approach was either misstated or misapplied by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge in this  instance,  whose  decision  predated
    that of MA by some  three  days.  Paragraph  27  of  the  determination
    recorded  that  stated  that  the  Section   55   considerations   must
    necessarily be considered  on  the  basis  of  the  background  of  the
    immigration status of the child's parents.

6.   However one  looks  at  this  case,  a  reviewing  Tribunal  cannot  be
    satisfied that the judge properly identified  and  applied  the  proper
    test when determining the matter. Mr  Armstrong,  for  the  respondent,
    submits that had the tests been properly applied or been  applied  with
    greater clarity and transparency then the end result  would  have  been
    exactly the same.  That is of course a distinct possibility and  it  is
    important that the appellants, all of whom are present  today,  realise
    that that may very well be the eventual outcome of the appeal. But they
    are entitled to have this aspect of the decision remade  in  the  clear
    and transparent way which was denied them in the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   It therefore follows that, having found an error of law,  I  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and order that  the  Article  8
    assessment be remade in this Tribunal. The underlying factual findings,
    which were largely uncontentious, can be preserved.

7.   If the matter can  be  re-listed  before  me,  that  would  perhaps  be
    preferable, but it is not essential and I do not reserve it to  myself.
    I will direct that an entire day be  allocated.  This  may  well  prove
    excessive, but I wish to avoid the possibility of the matter going part
    heard.  I make the following directions  in  relation  to  the  resumed
    hearing.


Notice of Decision

   1) Having found an error of law, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
      is set aside.


   2) The matter is retained in the Upper  Tribunal  and  adjourned  to  the
      first open date after 3 weeks for the  decision  to  be  remade.  Time
      estimate of 1 day.


   3) The adjourned hearing is to be listed  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Hill QC, if available, but not reserved.


   4) The appellants are to be at liberty to put before the  Upper  Tribunal
      any updating evidence provided it is filed and served at least 14 days
      prior to the resumed hearing date and there will  be  an  opportunity,
      should the Secretary of State so wish,  for  the  deponents  of  those
      statements to be cross-examined.


   5) Both parties to produce skeleton arguments on the  law  together  with
      copies of all decision to be relied upon at least 3 clear  days  prior
      to that resumed hearing.


   6) No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     16 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
