
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11034/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th November 2018                         |On 29th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                         oyinkan onyeka isizix-xsz-i
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Eldridge promulgated on 19 December  2017,  in  which  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the decision to refuse  her  application  for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds dated 10 May 2015 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 28 July 1999.   She  was
    first granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a family  member  of
    an EEA national from 21 August 2014 to 21 February 2015 and entered the
    United Kingdom pursuant to that on 20 September 2014.  On  18  February
    2015, the Appellant made an application for leave to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 10 March 2015  on  the  basis
    that she could not satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules in
    Appendix FM as a dependent child because neither  her  father  nor  her
    step-mother had the requisite leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The Respondent also decided that the Appellant did not meet any of  the
    requirements for leave to remain on the basis of private life  set  out
    in paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules because she had only lived
    in the United Kingdom for a period  of  four  months  at  the  date  of
    application and there would be no very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    reintegration into Nigeria.  Having  regard  to  the  Appellant's  best
    interests as a child under section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009, there were no  exceptional  circumstances  for  a
    grant of leave  to  remain  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Respondent noted at that point that the Appellant may  be  eligible  to
    apply for an EEA family permit on the basis of being the step-child  of
    an EEA national.

 4. Judge Ripley allow the appeal in a decision promulgated on 18 May  2016
    on the basis that it was accepted that the Appellant's father  was  the
    spouse of a qualified person  and  that  he  and  the  Appellant  would
    therefore have a right to reside pursuant to regulation  14(2)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as at the date of
    hearing.  That was a  finding  despite  the  imminent  divorce  of  the
    Appellant's father and lack of corroborative documents and evidence  to
    show satisfaction  of  the  requirements  of  that  regulation.   Those
    findings combined with an assessment of the Appellant's best  interests
    and her private life in the United Kingdom led to the  conclusion  that
    removal would be a disproportionate interference with  the  Appellant's
    right to respect for private and family life.

 5. The decision of Judge Ripley was set aside  by  Judge  Mahmoud  in  the
    Upper Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 12 April 2017, primarily on
    the basis of findings made by the First-tier Tribunal were speculative.
     The appeal was remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing.

 6.  The  appeal  then  came  before  Judge  Eldridge  who  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 19 December 2017 dismissed the Appellant's  appeal.   As
    at the date of that hearing, the Appellant's father's  application  for
    an EEA Residence Card in recognition of a permanent right of  residence
    on the  basis  of  his  former  marriage  had  recently  been  refused.
    Although reference is made to the European aspect  of  the  Appellant's
    appeal, it was in fact determined  on  the  basis  only  of  Article  8
    without any detailed consideration of her  claim  under  EU  law.   The
    Appellant's father was noted to have no leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom and could therefore return to Nigeria with the  Appellant  with
    no breach of family life.  In relation to private  life  it  was  noted
    that the Appellant's status in  the  United  Kingdom  has  always  been
    precarious and there was  nothing  to  demonstrate  that  she  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for a grant of leave to remain on
    that basis.  Taking into account the factors in  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, it was found that removal
    would not be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  Appellant's
    rights under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The
    proportionality assessment did not include any reference to either  the
    Appellant's or her father's possible retained rights of residence under
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

The appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals  on  the  following  grounds.   First,  that  the
    proceedings before the First-tier  Tribunal  were  unfair  due  to  the
    service during the course of the  hearing  of  the  refusal  letter  in
    respect of the Appellant's father's application for  an  EEA  Residence
    Card  which  had  not  previously  been  served.   Secondly,  that  the
    Appellant's father was lawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
    section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 as he was within the period  for
    appealing against the refusal of his application for an  EEA  Residence
    Card.  Finally, the Appellant relied again her circumstances and family
    life with her father in support of her appeal.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Plimmer on 27  June  2018  on
    all grounds, with the reasons given that it is arguable  that  the  key
    issue for the FTT was the proportionality of removing the appellant  if
    she had her father were entitled to an  EEA  residence  card.   It  was
    further considered arguable that the FTT erred in law when finding that
    they were unable to meet these requirements, in circumstances where the
    father was refused residence, which was subject to  an  appeal  to  the
    FTT.

 9. At the oral hearing, the Appellant sought an adjournment on  the  basis
    that her father's appeal before the First-tier Tribunal had been  heard
    on 25 October 2018 and although there was an indication of  a  positive
    outcome for him  in  that,  the  written  decision  had  not  yet  been
    received.  The Appellant  confirmed  that  she  was  not  listed  as  a
    dependent on her father's application.

10. I refused the application for an adjournment  on  the  basis  that  the
    outcome of the Appellant's father's appeal  was  not  relevant  to  the
    initial issue to be determined in her appeal as to whether  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law.

11. The Appellant confirmed that she had not made any  application  for  an
    EEA Residence Card whilst in the  United  Kingdom  but  had  originally
    entered the United Kingdom with an EEA  family  permit  issued  on  the
    basis of  her  relationship  with  her  step-mother,  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant has  now
    been in the United Kingdom for four years which has had a very positive
    impact on her life.  However, due to her immigration  issues,  she  has
    not been able to start university and states that she  has  nowhere  to
    return to in Nigeria and wishes to remain with her father in the United
    Kingdom.

12. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Melvin submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was constrained to deal with  the  facts  of  the  application
    before them and the fact that the Appellant's father had an outstanding
    application before the Respondent and/or outstanding appeal before  the
    First-tier Tribunal is not relevant  to  her  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.  It was not accepted that the EEA issue was a core  issue  nor
    that it needed to be determined before  the  human  rights  application
    could be decided.  However, it was suggested that  if  the  Appellant's
    father's appeal was successful in that  he  had  a  retained  right  of
    residence, then it remains open to the Appellant to make an application
    for an EEA Residence Card on the basis of dependency on her father.

13. In relation to the human rights appeal specifically, it  was  submitted
    that there was no reason why the Appellant and  her  father  could  not
    return to Nigeria together to continue their family life there and  for
    the Appellant to pursue further education there.

Findings and reasons

 1. As confirmed most recently by the Court of Appeal in TZ (Pakistan)  and
    PG (India) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ
    1109, where a person satisfies  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules,  whether  or  not  by  reference  to  an  article   8   informed
    requirement,  then  this  will  be  positively  determinative  of  that
    person's article 8 appeal, provided their case  engages  article  8(1),
    for the very reason that it would then  be  disproportionate  for  that
    person to be removed.  I would add the obvious reason for this is  that
    there can be little, if any, public interest in removing a  person  who
    meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 2. By analogy the same must be the case for a  person  who  satisfies  the
    requirements of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2016 for the recognition of a right of residence on one of the  grounds
    set out therein, that there would be little or no  public  interest  in
    their removal and provided article  8(1)  is  engaged,  that  would  be
    positively determinative of that person's article 8 appeal.

 3. For these reasons I find an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  is
    decision for the failure to consider whether or not the Appellant had a
    retained right of residence under the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area)  Regulations  2016,  as  a  matter  which  was  relevant  to  the
    assessment required following the five stage  approach  to  Article  8,
    including the final balancing  exercise.   However,  there  remains  an
    issue in the present case as to whether the error was material.

 4. The Appellant has claimed consistently throughout her appeal  that  she
    was originally badly advised to put in the  application  for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds as opposed to making an application  for
    an EEA Residence Card.  The Respondent's  refusal  of  her  application
    expressly notes that she may be able to apply for an EEA family permit,
    but no such application  has  been  made  to  the  Respondent  and  the
    Appellant has  not  been  included  as  a  dependent  in  her  father's
    application for an EEA Residence Card.  It would appear  that  that  is
    still the most appropriate course of action for the Appellant to follow
    and may possibly have different consequences for her, on the assumption
    that she could meet those requirements, for her immigration status.

 5. In the course of her appeal, the Appellant has maintained that both she
    and her father have a right to reside in the United Kingdom,  initially
    as family members of an  EEA  national  (the  Appellant's  step-mother)
    exercising treaty rights in the United  Kingdom  and  subsequently,  in
    respect specifically of the Appellant's father, with a  retained  right
    of residence following divorce from the EEA national  and  a  permanent
    right of residence given the length of  his  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom in accordance with the relevant regulations.  The Appellant has
    not specifically identified the basis upon which she claims a right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom under EU law, but this would have to be on
    the basis of a retained  right  of  residence  following  her  father's
    divorce from the EEA national, her step-mother.

 6. The Appellant would have therefore needed to  have  established  before
    the First-tier Tribunal firstly  that  she  falls  within  one  of  the
    requirements of Regulation 10 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016 (the most recent  Regulations  being  applicable
    given the repeal of the 2006 Regulations under which no application was
    made for an EEA Residence Card by the Appellant) and secondly  that  on
    the evidence she meets  the  criteria  set  out  therein.   This  could
    potentially only be on the basis of Regulation  10(5)  for  a  retained
    right of residence following termination of  a  marriage,  albeit  this
    provision itself is only expressly  directed  to  a  spouse  (or  civil
    partner in the cases of a  civil  partnership)  rather  than  a  family
    member.  It is at least arguable that it should be read to include  the
    latter by reference to the text of  Article  13  of  Directive  2004/38
    which refers to the retention of  the  right  of  residence  by  family
    members in the event of divorce, annulment of marriage  or  termination
    of registered partnership  and  not  expressly  restricted  only  to  a
    spouse.  It would also be illogical for a retained right  of  residence
    to be available to a spouse but not his or her children.

 7. In any event, the  Appellant  would  also  need  to  establish  on  the
    evidence that  she  met  the  requirements  for  a  retained  right  of
    residence and it is not possible to see how she could have done  so  on
    the basis of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  even  if  she
    fell within regulation 10(5).  Although there was evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of the Appellant's father's  marriage  to  the  EEA
    national and subsequent divorce, the marriage having  lasted  for  more
    than three years with residence in the United Kingdom for more  than  a
    year during its duration  (such  that  Regulation  10(5)(d)(i)  may  be
    satisfied) and evidence of the Appellant studying prior  to  and  after
    that the date of divorce; there is  a  lack  of  evidence  of  the  EEA
    sponsor's exercise of treaty rights to  show  that  the  Appellant  was
    residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with  regulations  at  the
    date of termination of the marriage (for  the  purposes  of  Regulation
    10(5)(b)) and that either she  was,  if  an  EEA  national,  exercising
    treaty rights is a qualified person under regulation 6 or that she is a
    family member of such a person (for the purposes of Regulation  10(6)).



 8. In the circumstances, I do not find that the Appellant would have  been
    able to establish, on  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (although there is a legal issue to be determined as well as to whether
    Regulation 10(5)  includes  family  members  other  than  spouses/civil
    partners),  a  right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  under   the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 such that the she
    could then show that there would be no public interest in  her  removal
    from the United Kingdom.  For this reason, I do not find the  error  of
    law by the First-tier Tribunal to be material, as even if  the  EU  law
    issue was considered in detail as part of the Article 8 assessment, the
    outcome of the appeal could not have been any different.

 9. As at the date of hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, although  the
    Appellant's father was within the time for appealing the refusal of his
    application for an EEA Residence Card, the situation was  that  he  had
    been refused this and there  was  no  application  for  an  adjournment
    pending that appeal and no indication in any event as to the  relevance
    of a successful outcome in such a case would assist the Appellant.   At
    its highest, if successful and the Appellant's father had  a  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom, that would  slightly  alter  the  factual
    matrix considered for the purposes of Article 8 but the  findings  that
    there is no reason why the Appellant's father could not return with her
    to Nigeria would in any  event  stand  such  that  there  would  be  no
    possible difference to the outcome of the appeal.

10. There is nothing in the  other  grounds  of  appeal  submitted  by  the
    Appellant as to the service of the refusal letter  in  respect  of  her
    father during the course of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
    and section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971  does  not  apply  in  these
    circumstances.  The First-tier Tribunal's assessment of the Appellant's
    human rights in accordance with Article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights does not (save for the EU law point which is not  material
    for the reasons set out above) disclose any error of law.   The  appeal
    is therefore dismissed on all grounds.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]         Date         23rd November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

