
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11312/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th December 2013                            |On 9th December 2013       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                          Mr TASHFEEN QADOOS SAIGOL
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah (instructed by Lee Valley Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Ong (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal  by  the  Appellant  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Zahed) promulgated  on  15th
    October 2013. The determination followed a hearing at Hatton  Cross  on
    13th September when  the  Appellant  was  represented  by  Counsel  and
    Secretary of State by a Home Office Presenting Officer.

 2. The Appellant, a Pakistani national born on 23rd April  1982,  made  an
    application on 26th October 2012 for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant.  In  a  decision  dated  18th  March  2013  the
    Respondent rejected his application and it was his appeal against  that
    decision which came before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted and Mr Miah acknowledged that the only
    ground upon which permission was granted  was  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had failed to request missing information in accordance with  the
    evidential flexibility policy and Rodriguez (Flexibility Policy) [2013]
    UKUT 00042 (IAC) and that the Judge had  misdirected  himself  on  that
    basis.

 4. The Secretary of State in this case had  rejected  the  application  in
    relation to funds on the basis that the documentation concerning third-
    party money was not in the required format and thus did not demonstrate
    that the Appellant  had  access  to  the  requisite  funds.  The  Judge
    referred himself at paragraph 6 to Rodriguez and at  paragraph  7  said
    that  Rodriguez  indicated  that  an  applicant  should  be  given   an
    opportunity by the Secretary of State to produce any missing  documents
    such as a bank statement missing from a sequence a bank statements.  In
    addition to Rodriguez there is  the  Secretary  of  State's  evidential
    flexibility policy setting  out  the  circumstances  in  which  further
    enquiries will be made; one of which being that there has to be  reason
    to believe that the required document is in existence.

 5. At paragraph 8 of the determination the Judge noted  that  the  missing
    documentation in this case was not one of a series of documents and the
    document in fact did not exist.

 6. The requirement  of  the  Rules  is  that  an  applicant  must  produce
    specified documents in a specified format.  The  requirements  are  set
    out in the Letter of Refusal. An applicant must produce:

      i) A letter from each financial institution  holding  the  applicant's
         funds, to confirm the amount of money available to  the  applicant,
         or the two applicants if they have formed an entrepreneurial team.

         Each letter must also confirm each of the following details.

    (i)  A letter from each financial institution  holding  the  funds,  to
    confirm the  amount  of  money  available  to  the  applicant  (or  the
    entrepreneurial team if applying under the provisions in  paragraph  52
    of this Appendix). Each letter must:

    (1)  be an original document and not a copy,

    (2)  be on the institution's official headed paper,

    (3)  have been issued by an authorised official of that institution,

    (4)  have been produced within three months immediately before the date
    of your application

    (5)   confirm that institution is regulated by the appropriate body,

    (6)  state the applicant's name and his  team  partner's  name  if  the
    applicant is  applying  under  the  provisions  in  paragraph  52  this
    Appendix,

    (7)  state the date of the document,

    (8)  confirm the amount of money available  from  the  applicant's  own
    funds (if applicable) that are held in that institution,

    (9)  confirm the amount of money provided to  the  applicant  from  any
    third party (if applicable) that is held in that institution,

    (10) confirm the name of each third-party and  their  contact  details,
    including their full address including postcode, landline phone  number
    and any e-mail address, and

    (11) confirm that if the money is not in an  institution  regulated  by
    the FSA, the money can be transferred to the UK.

 7. It was the Appellant's case and remains  his  case  that  the  required
    document cannot be provided. The Judge therefore correctly  noted  that
    the document did not exist and  therefore  the  evidential  flexibility
    policy could not have been applicable. There is no error of law in that
    finding.

 8. Mr Miah  then  sought  to  argue  that  the  Immigration  Rule  itself,
    requiring specified documents when such documents cannot  be  obtained,
    is inherently unfair. That however was  not  an  argument  advanced  by
    experienced Counsel before the First-tier Tribunal.  An  argument  that
    the Immigration Rules are inherently unfair is a very significant issue
    and if it was to be raised should have been argued  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. A Judge cannot be criticised for failing to deal with  a
    point not raised in the grounds of  appeal  or  before  him  and  which
    cannot be said to be Robinson obvious.

 9.  Having  read  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  and   the
    determination with care and hearing oral submissions  from  Mr  Miah  I
    find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  err  in  law  in   its
    determination of this appeal and the First-tier Tribunal having made no
    error of law,  its  determination  stands.  The  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is therefore dismissed.


Signed                              Date 4th December 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


