

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/11339/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|                                              |Determination promulgated    |
|                                              |On 7th June 2013             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                      ml
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the appellant: Mr D Balroop, instructed by Whitehorse solicitors
For the respondent: Ms H Horsley, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity direction in this appeal.  There is evidence before
    me to the effect that the appellant is a vulnerable  person.  Whilst  I
    make no findings in relation  to  this  evidence,  it  is  nevertheless
    appropriate that the appellant be granted anonymity unless and until  a
    relevant Court or Tribunal directs otherwise. The appellant  is  to  be
    referred to as ML throughout these proceedings.   No  report  of  these
    proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.
    Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  a  contempt  of
    court.


 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. He arrived in the United Kingdom
    in 2004 and in July 2005 he claimed asylum, in a different name to that
    which he now claims. This application was refused on 27 July 2005  and,
    although the appellant appealed against this refusal,  he  subsequently
    withdrew that appeal, admitting his claim to be false.  In August  2005
    he was removed to Nigeria.  The appellant then  re-entered  the  United
    Kingdom in January 2006 using a passport in a third  identity.  He  was
    arrested on 11 March 2009 for a  sexual  assault  committed  against  a
    woman, and was convicted of such an offence in 12 November 2010. He was
    sentenced to 6 month's imprisonment.

 3. On 8 June 2009 (i.e. after his arrest) the appellant made human  rights
    representations, claiming to be at risk in Nigeria as a consequence  of
    being homosexual. This application was refused on 22  April  2010.  The
    appellant made a further claim on the same basis on 10 March 2011. Such
    application was refused on 16 March 2011 and, on the following  day,  a
    decision was made to remove him to Nigeria.

 4. The appellant appealed this decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan on  the  17  May
    2011 and dismissed in a determination dated 19 May 2011. The  appellant
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal against this determination.  The  appeal
    was heard by Upper Tribunal Judges Allen and  Waumsley  on  5  December
    2012 and, in a decision of 13 January 2013, they declined to set  aside
    the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Khan;  concluding  that
    whilst  his  determination  contained   errors   which   were   to   be
    'deprecated', such errors were not  material  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

 5. The appellant appealed this decision to the Court of Appeal,  with  the
    permission of Sir Richard Buxton granted on 1  June  2012.  After  oral
    hearing, Maurice Kay and Moses LJJ, sitting with Sir  Stanley  Burnton,
    allowed the appellant's appeal to the extent that it  was  remitted  to
    the Upper Tribunal 'to be reheard'.

 6. Although a transcript of the court's judgment has yet to be drawn up, a
    case analysis relaying the judgment is to be found on Westlaw. I handed
    this to the parties at the outset of the hearing. Mr Balroop  acted  as
    junior Counsel in the Court of Appeal. Neither he, nor Ms Horsley, took
    objection to the tribunal  treating  the  aforementioned  Westlaw  case
    analysis as providing a materially  accurate  summary  of  the  Court's
    judgment. The Westlaw case analysis details  the  Court  of  Appeal  as
    having given the following reasons for remitting the appellant's appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal:

         (1) M's case was an unfortunate example of the First-tier  Tribunal
          judge displaying an  absence  of  care  regarding  the  facts  and
          arguments advanced in an asylum claim. He made several errors:  he
          referred in his judgment to counsel's skeletons,  yet  there  were
          not any, and to screening and  asylum  interviews  which  did  not
          happen in relation to the case M was advancing. His judgment  also
          referred to events in Sri Lanka, which had nothing to do with  M's
          case, and to a  "record  of  proceedings"  which  did  not  exist.
          However  difficult  a  claimant's  case   was,   however   falsely
          optimistic, he was entitled to have his submissions deployed.  The
          judgment referred to counsel, wrongly named, seeking  to  rely  on
          written submissions, yet there were none, and it purported to have
          taken them into account. The Upper Tribunal misdirected itself:  a
          series of factual errors could amount to an error of law.  Factual
          errors, if significant to the court's conclusion, could amount  to
          an error of law. Taking account of written  submissions  that  did
          not exist was an error of law. In M's case the factual errors made
          by the judge in the First-tier Tribunal  plainly  amounted  to  an
          error of law. The essential question for the  Upper  Tribunal  was
          whether M had had the fair hearing to which he was entitled before
          adverse findings were made against him. However poor a  claimant's
          case was, and M's was poor, he was entitled  to  a  fair  hearing,
          Singh v Belgium (33210/11) applied. The Upper Tribunal and/or  the
          Court of Appeal should judge whether a claimant  had  had  a  fair
          hearing by looking at the determination and  procedures  by  which
          the judge had reached conclusions adverse to him. In M's case  the
          judge had taken account of skeletons and interviews that  did  not
          exist. In that context, the carelessness of referring to Sri Lanka
          took on a more sinister timbre. It could  not  be  said  that  the
          judge had given serious consideration to M's case before  deciding
          against him, R. (on the application of YH Iraq) v SSHD [2010] EWCA
          116,  followed.  The  procedure  was   very   flawed.   In   those
          circumstances the only conclusion the Upper Tribunal  should  have
          reached was to set aside the judge's decision and retry  or  remit
          the matter. (2) It would be wrong to judge M's chances of  success
          based on the judge's decision. His case appeared to  contain  many
          contradictions and inconsistencies,  and  he  might  have  a  very
          difficult run, but he could not be denied a fair opportunity.  The
          reputation of the courts was at stake; that could not be preserved
          and protected if a decision such as the  judge's  was  allowed  to
          stand.

 7. It is plain from the above reasoning that,  insofar  as  the  Court  of
    Appeal has  not  already  done  so,  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Khan is to be set aside. Both parties agreed  that  this
    was so.


 8. Both parties also agreed, and I so direct, that paragraphs 23 to 34  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's determination should  remain  standing  as  a
    record of evidence  given  before  that  tribunal.  The  weight  to  be
    attached to such evidence will, of  course,  be  a  matter  for  future
    consideration.

 9. I next turn to the issue of whether the decision on the appeal ought to
    be re-made in the Upper Tribunal or whether the First-tier Tribunal  is
    a more appropriate forum. It was agreed between the  parties  that  the
    most appropriate forum for a de novo consideration of  the  appellant's
    appeal would be the First-tier Tribunal. I also agree that this is  so,
    for the following reasons.

10. The Senior President of  the  Tribunals'  Practice  Statement  of  25th
    September 2012 provides as follows:

              "7. "Disposal of appeals in Upper Tribunal

             Where under section 12(1) of  the  2007  Act  (proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of the decision concerned involved the making of an
             error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside  the
             decision and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the
             First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2)(b)(i) or  proceed  (in
             accordance with relevant Practice Directions) to  re-make  the
             decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii).


              [7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each occasion to proceed
             to re-make the decision instead of remitting the case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:-


                  (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party
                      before the First-tier Tribunal  of a fair hearing  or
                      other opportunity for that party's case to be put  to
                      and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


                  (b)  the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding
                      which is necessary in order for the decision  in  the
                      appeal to be re-made is such that, having  regard  to
                      the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate
                      to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."


  11. It is clear from any reading of the Court of Appeal's judgment that it
      concluded that the effect of the errors in Judge Khan's  determination
      was to deprive the appellant  of  a  fair  hearing.  Consequently  the
      requirements of paragraph 7.2 (a) of the Senior  President's  Practice
      Statement are met.


  12. In addition  it  is  equally  plain  that  the  requirements  set  out
      paragraph 7.2 (b) of the Practice Statement are also met.  Substantial
      fact-finding will be  required  in  re-making  the  decision  in  this
      appeal. The nature and extent of this fact finding has only been added
      to by the production by the appellant,  at  2pm  of  the  day  of  the
      hearing before the Upper Tribunal, of a detailed medical report  going
      to his ability to accurately recall  historic  events,  amongst  other
      things. I was provided with no explanation  as  to  why  this  report,
      dated as long ago as March 2012, was only produced on the day  of  the
      hearing, but whilst this reflects extremely poorly on the  appellant's
      solicitors it was agreed that such document should be admitted.

  13. In all these circumstances  I  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for the decision on it to be re-made.  Whilst  deployment  of
      judicial resources is a matter for the First-tier Tribunal, it may  be
      thought that it is appropriate for a  Designated  Judge  to  determine
      this appeal, given its history.

  14. A hearing date of 26 July 2013 at Hatton Cross  has  been  fixed  and,
      subject to any further directions  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
      appellant is directed to file  and  serve  a  consolidated  bundle  of
      documents  to  be  relied  upon,  save  for  those  documents  already
      contained within the Secretary of State's Rule 13 bundle, so  that  it
      is received no later than 12 July 2013. He is, at the  same  time,  to
      file and serve a skeleton argument setting out all lines  of  argument
      to be relied upon, with appropriate cross referencing to the documents
      before the First-tier Tribunal. The consequences  of  any  failure  to
      adhere to these  directions  will  be  a  matter  for  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


   Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The Upper
      Tribunal allows the appellant's appeal to the limited extent that it
      is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard de novo.


    Signed: M O'Connor
    [pic]
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal                      Dated: 5 June 2013
