
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11485/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 October 2013                               |On 20 December 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            TIMOTHY richard WINEY
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, instructed by Gulbenkian Andonian,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Timothy Richard Winey, was born on 3 August 1966 and  is
    a male citizen of the United  States  of  America.   He  was  initially
    granted leave to enter the United Kingdom on 28 August 1999 as an Armed
    Forces Member not exempt  from  immigration  control.   His  leave  was
    subsequently extended upon application until  24  August  2016.   On  8
    April 2013, a decision was made to curtail the appellant's leave as  at
    that date.  The respondent had received, on 26 February 2013, a  letter
    from the appellant's employers (US Department  of  Defense)  indicating
    that the appellant had been dismissed from employment on  16  September
    2011.  The appellant appealed against that decision to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Stott) which, in a determination promulgated on 27 June
    2013,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. This was a "paper" appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  Although the
    appellant now has the assistance provided by legal representatives,  he
    acted in person in his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  His  grounds
    of appeal read as follows:

         "In paragraph 2 of the decision it states that I was granted  leave
         until 24 August  2016.   In  paragraph  3  it  states  that  I  was
         dismissed from my  employment  on  16  September  2011.   What  the
         Department of Defense failed to mention was that my  dismissal  was
         fraudulent, that I had effectively resigned  several  months  prior
         due to the criminal retaliation I  suffered  at  work,  retaliation
         resulting in my permanent disability (I am now medically  retired),
         I wrote the Home Office extensively about my mistreatment  and  had
         been seeking the extradition of my tormentors for 2 years  now.   I
         only raise these points to provide  some  background  about  why  I
         remain in the UK and to clarify how  I  became  separated  from  my
         employment with the Department of  Defense.   I  am  appealing  the
         decision on the grounds that I am an EU  citizen  (Portuguese),  my
         wife and son are also EU citizens, we have been and continue to be,
         model residents who are financially  self-sufficient.   My  son  is
         studying  mechanical  engineering  (on  scholarship)  at  Newcastle
         University; I have recently been accepted on a Masters programme in
         Psychology at Goldsmiths, and we deeply love our  adopted  country,
         which we have made our home by choice."

 3. Responding to the grant of permission under  Rule  24,  the  respondent
    wrote:

         "It is clear that the appeal was  based  on  paper  evidence.   The
         appellant did not appear to make good his  subsequent  claim.   His
         nationality all along was divulged as being a citizen of  USA,  and
         furthermore it is also not clear from the papers that  he  included
         in the grounds  he  submitted  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision that he is entitled to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of
         long residence.  It is submitted that it is open for the  appellant
         to make the appropriate applications  to  the  Secretary  of  State
         anytime with the relevant evidence.  This would enable the evidence
         to be appropriately scrutinised and facilitate a relevant  decision
         to be made."

 4. We shall deal with the grounds of appeal in the  order  in  which  they
    appear in the application for permission.

EEA Regulations

 5. The appellant asserts that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  by
    failing to engage with the appellant's claim in his grounds  of  appeal
    that he is a Portuguese citizen.  On the papers before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were photocopies of a Portuguese identity  card  and  passport
    both showing the photograph of the appellant bearing his name and  date
    of birth

 6. Dismissing the appeal, Judge Stott wrote:

         "The  appellant  has  provided  material  clearly  indicating   his
         dissatisfaction with the manner in which he has  been  treated  [by
         his employers] and the reasons, in his opinion, for that course  of
         action against him.  The  respondent  however  has  received  clear
         notification of his dismissal from the service and consequently due
         to the fundamental change in the appellant's situation I find  that
         he no longer has leave in his current capacity  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom and that the respondent's curtailment of  his  leave
         was justified."

 7. Judge Stott made no mention of  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  an  EU
    citizen nor does he refer to the identity card or  passport.   We  find
    that the judge should have engaged  with  the  appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal.  The immigration decision which was served on the appellant  on
    10 April 2013 told him that he "must now inform us of any  reasons  why
    you think you should be allowed to stay in this country.  This includes
    why you wish to stay here and any  grounds  where  you  should  not  be
    removed or required to leave".  The appellant did exactly that  in  his
    grounds of appeal.  This was not a case in which the  appellant  sought
    to raise entirely new grounds  for  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom
    having  submitted  an  application  for  leave  to  remain  which   the
    respondent had rejected; the  appellant  believed  that  he  had  leave
    through until 2016.  We are sure  that  the  respondent's  decision  to
    curtail that leave came as a surprise to him.  We  consider  also  that
    the judge should have had regard to AS (Afghanistan)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
    1076.  At [86], the Court of Appeal held:

         "If  the  interpretation  of  section  85(2)  put  forward  by  the
         appellants were invariably at odds with the provisions  of  section
         3C(4) Mr. Beer's argument would have more force, but section  3C(4)
         only applies to those whose existing leave to enter  or  remain  is
         extended by statute and has no application to those who make  their
         applications  well  before  their  existing  leave  expires.   More
         important, however, is the fact that the service of a notice  under
         section 120 is entirely in the option of the Secretary of State. He
         can choose not to serve a notice, in which case the  appellant  who
         falls within section 3C(4)  is  restricted  to  the  scope  of  his
         original application. If, however, the Secretary of  State  chooses
         to serve a notice under section 120, he invites  and  requires  the
         appellant to  put  forward  any  additional  grounds  that  may  be
         available to him. I do not think that section 3C(4) of the 1971 Act
         is inconsistent with the appellants' interpretation of section  85:
         taken as a whole the statutory scheme gives the Secretary of  State
         the power either to rely  on  the  restrictive  effect  of  section
         3C(4), with the prospect of further proceedings at a later date, or
         to ensure that grounds for  seeking  the  same  relief  that  would
         otherwise have to be pursued in those further  proceedings  can  be
         swept  up  into,  and  considered  as   part   of,   the   existing
         proceedings."

 8. Having found the judge had erred in law by failing to consider an issue
    raised in the grounds of appeal, it was considered whether the error is
    such that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal falls to be  set
    aside.  We found that it does not.  We have borne in  mind  that  Judge
    Stott did not have the advantage of  hearing  oral  evidence  or  legal
    argument.  All that he had before him was the appellant's assertion  in
    the grounds of appeal that he  was  an  EU  citizen  together  with  an
    identity card and a passport  for  which  no  interpretation  had  been
    provided by the appellant.  He had no evidence whatever to support  the
    appellant's assertion that he and his family  were  "financially  self-
    sufficient" beyond what the appellant said in the notice of appeal  and
    the same is true of the appellant's assertion that he and his son  were
    students.  Had Judge Stott considered the appellant's  claim  to  be  a
    Portuguese citizen, we find that he would not have allowed  the  appeal
    on that basis since there was no evidence to justify doing so.

The Immigration Rules: Long Residence

 9. Mr Bazini submitted that by August 2009, the  appellant  had  completed
    ten years of lawful residence in the United Kingdom.  He submitted that
    the judge had erred by failing to consider the appeal  on  that  basis.
    We reject that submission.  Whilst the appellant had  clearly  asserted
    that he was a Portuguese  citizen,  he  did  not  tell  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in his notice of appeal that he sought to remain in the United
    Kingdom on  the  basis  of  long  residence.   He  makes  reference  to
    "permanent resident status" in his application for the Tribunal to make
    an anonymity order.  We consider that statement to refer to his claimed
    Portuguese citizenship rather than to long residence.  It was  open  to
    the appellant to make an application to the respondent to remain on the
    basis of long residence.  Indeed, such an application may still be made
    under paragraph 276B of HC 395 notwithstanding the  amendments  to  the
    Rules which came into force on 9 July 2012.  We find  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was not obliged to consider the appellant's  appeal
    on a ground which the appellant himself had not raised and,  whilst  it
    may have been plain on the face of the papers that  the  appellant  had
    remained in the United Kingdom for more than ten years, it was for  the
    appellant to establish that he met the requirements of  paragraph  276B
    and he made no attempt whatever to do so.

Article 8 ECHR

10. At paragraph [7], the grounds of appeal assert that:

         "It was clear from the appellant's grounds that he and  his  family
         have established a private and family life in the UK, yet like  the
         above matters there was no consideration whatsoever of  this  issue
         and specifically Article  8  ECHR  (see  Section  84(1)(c)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

11. The First-tier Tribunal's determination is silent as to Article 8 ECHR.
     The judge had correctly allowed the appeal against the decision  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006  to
    remove the appellant in the light of Adamally  &  Jafferi  (Section  47
    removal decisions; Tribunal  Procedures)  [2012]  UKUT  414.   However,
    there was no  suggestion  in  the  determination  that  the  judge  had
    refrained from dealing with  Article  8  ECHR  simply  because  he  had
    allowed the appeal against the removal decision.  Section  84(1)(g)  of
    the 2002 Act provides that an appeal against  an  immigration  decision
    may be brought on the ground that "the removal of  the  appellant  from
    the United Kingdom in consequence of  the  immigration  decision  would
    breach the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or
    would be unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as being
    incompatible with the appellant's Convention  rights."   As  Mr  Deller
    pointed out Section 84(1)(g) provided that the appellant raise  Article
    8 ECHR in his appeal  notwithstanding  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    removal decision was not in accordance with the law.

12. Not surprisingly, given that the appellant did not have the  assistance
    of legal advice, the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal makes
    no mention of Article 8 ECHR.  The grounds do, however,  refer  to  the
    appellant and his family's "love of our adopted country which  we  have
    made our home by choice".  We find that this passage of the grounds  of
    appeal together with the particular facts in this case should have  led
    the judge to consider the appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR.   Given  the
    paucity of evidence he may well have dismissed an appeal on that ground
    but the paucity of evidence (unlike in the  EEA  Regulations  paragraph
    276B appeals, it could only have  succeeded  had  specific  facts  been
    approved) it is conceivable that the judge might have found that in the
    lengthy period during which the appellant and his family lived  in  the
    United Kingdom they  had  established  ties  here  which  it  would  be
    disproportionate to disrupt by their removal.   In  failing  to  engage
    with Article 8 ECHR, we find that the judge erred in law such that  the
    decision needs to be re-made.  We direct that the appeal be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal to re-make that decision, the appellant  having
    been denied complete and proper determination of his  appeal  by  Judge
    Stott.  We would, however, urge both the appellant and  the  respondent
    to address as a matter of urgency, and before the appeal is listed  for
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, the  question  of  the  appellant's
    claim to enjoy permanent residence in the United Kingdom on account  of
    his Portuguese citizenship and his long residence.

DECISION

13. This appeal is allowed.  We direct that the appeal is remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (not  Judge  Stott)  to  re-make  the  decision  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

