
[pic]
IAC-AH-LR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11994/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 11th August 2015                  |On 21st August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                             gemma Santos ebias
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mulvenna, promulgated on 26th June 2014, dismissing
    her appeal against refusal to vary her leave to remain in this  country
    and to remove her.  The Respondent's decision was dated  21st  February
    2014.

 2. The application of the Appellant, who comes from the  Philippines,  had
    been made in November 2013 on the basis of her  relationship  with  her
    daughter, who is a minor and who  it  is  now  accepted  is  a  British
    citizen, and of her relationship with a  British  citizen,  Mr  Stephen
    Read.  Since the date of the decision now under  appeal  the  Appellant
    and Mr Read have married, the date of the marriage being 6th  September
    2014.

 3. The Appellant's application to the Secretary of State had been  refused
    on several bases.  It was  said  that  she  had  failed  to  provide  a
    response in time to questions raised by  the  Secretary  of  State,  in
    contravention of paragraph S-LTR.1.7 of Appendix FM to the  Immigration
    Rules, that she had not established that she and her partner were in  a
    relationship coming within the Rules, that the  Appellant's  child  was
    not British or settled or had been in this country for seven years, and
    it had not been shown that the Appellant had access to the child or was
    involved in negotiations regarding  such.   It  acknowledged  that  the
    Appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship but it was
    said she failed to fulfil the requirements of E-LTRPT2.2 or  E-LTRPT2.4
    of  Appendix  FM.   It  was  also  said  that  she  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of EX.1 to that Appendix nor of paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Rules themselves.   There  were  not  thought  to  be  any  exceptional
    circumstances warranting consideration beyond the Rules.

 4. The Appellant and Mr Read gave evidence at the hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  At that hearing the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  told
    that it was now accepted  that  the  Appellant's  child  was  indeed  a
    British citizen.  With regard to a relationship with a child the  judge
    found (paragraph 21 of the decision) that

         "... there is no  evidence,  other  than  the  normal  parent/child
         relationship, to suggest that the absence of  the  Appellant  would
         cause any inevitable or  insuperable  problem  in  respect  of  the
         child's welfare, development or wellbeing.  There is no independent
         evidence of contact or support.  In these circumstances, I  do  not
         find that there are  any  material  issues  which  would  adversely
         affect the  child  if  the  Appellant  were  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom."

    He expressed the view (at paragraph 17) that  the  only  evidence  with
    regard to a relationship with the  daughter  was  the  Appellant's  own
    testimony and that of Stephen Read and there was a lack  of  supporting
    documentation.  With regard to the relationship with Mr Read he  stated
    (at paragraph 22) that  the  only  evidence  was  their  own  testimony
    supported by a number of photographs and cards and he was not satisfied
    that the Appellant had  discharged  the  burden  of  proof  as  to  the
    existence of the relationship.  He stated (at paragraph 24)

         "I emphasise that my findings in relation to each of  the  elements
         of the Appellant's claim  are  based  on  her  failure  to  produce
         reliable evidence from any independent source.  The burden of proof
         lies with the Appellant and she has not discharged the burden. "

    With regard to the refusal under paragraph S-LTR1.7 of Appendix FM  the
    judge stated (at paragraph 26)  that  the  information  sought  by  the
    Respondent had not been submitted by the time stated or that there  was
    an application for a further extension of time  and  "the  Respondent's
    finding cannot be impugned".   At  paragraph  25  he  stated  that  the
    Respondent's decision did not  breach  the  Article  8  rights  of  the
    Appellant or her daughter or Stephen Read and it was not  necessary  to
    go on to consider the matter beyond the Rules.

 5. In the grounds of application, which stand as the Grounds of Appeal, it
    was contended that in the skeleton argument produced for the hearing it
    had been set out that the Appellant did actually meet the  requirements
    of the parent route under FMR-LTRPT1.1 and there had been no finding on
    that point, that the judge had failed to  apply  established  case  law
    under Article 8, that he had failed to give reasons or to make findings
    of fact and had failed to give adequate reasons  as  to  why  the  best
    interests of the child, who was a British citizen, were best served  by
    her mother being removed when there was a duty to safeguard and promote
    the child's best interests.

 6. In granting permission, on 18th August 2014, First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Kimnell noted, "As the grounds contend E-LTRP2.2 and EX.1 are raised in
    the skeleton argument but  the  determination  does  not  address  that
    argument.  There is no clear finding on the issue  of  the  Appellant's
    relationship with her child, a British citizen.  Paragraph  21  of  the
    determination refers to "the normal parent/child relationship", whereas
    paragraph 16 refers to "not the most effective arrangement in which  to
    foster  and  maintain  a  close  relationship".   There  is  no   clear
    conclusion on the evidence the Appellant presented  on  this  point  in
    paragraph 17 of the determination."

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Howard relied upon the grounds.   Mr  Smart
    for his part submitted that in any  event  a  failure  to  comply  with
    paragraph S-LTR1.7, which had been relied on in the  refusal  decision,
    had led to mandatory refusal under the Rules and the judge had found at
    paragraph 26 that the paragraph of the Appendix had not been  met.   He
    produced a copy of the relevant Section of Appendix FM as at  the  date
    of decision.  Mr Howard said there had been no finding in paragraph  26
    of the judge's decision as to  whether  there  had  been  a  reasonable
    excuse for the failure to comply and he referred to correspondence sent
    to the Respondent as to the difficulties at that particular time  being
    encountered with access to the child and to the steps  being  taken  by
    the Appellant to comply.  Mr Smart pointed out the very specific nature
    of the request for information made by the Respondent.

 8. Having considered the decision of the  judge  at  first  instance,  the
    grounds and the submissions made I came to the  view  that  there  were
    material errors of law in the decision.  It was apparent that the judge
    had heard oral evidence from the Appellant and from Mr Read both as  to
    the Appellant's relationship with Mr Read and as  to  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and her daughter.  There was also  before  him  a
    letter  from  the  daughter.   It  is  apparent  from  the  Record   of
    Proceedings that the evidence given was to the effect  that  there  was
    regular contact with the  child,  who  on  occasions  stayed  with  the
    Appellant.  Whilst it appears to be the case that there was no external
    supporting evidence as to the relationship, beyond the letter from  the
    child, it was for the judge to make findings on the evidence  given  by
    the Appellant and by Mr Read, and if he disbelieved  that  evidence  to
    give reasons why that was the case.  The point is made very clearly  in
    the reported decision of MK (Duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT
    00641 (IAC), a Presidential decision, the head note to which states

         "It is axiomatic that a determination discloses clearly the reasons
         for a Tribunal's decision.  If a Tribunal finds oral evidence to be
         implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document worth no weight
         whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in the determination and  for
         such findings to be supported by reasons.  A bare statement that  a
         witness was not believed or that a document was afforded no  weight
         is unlikely to satisfy the requirement to give reasons."

    There was no express discrete finding upon the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and Mr  Read,  which  was  relevant  both  as  to  their  own
    relationship and as to the Appellant's relationship with her child.

 9. With regard to paragraph S-LTR.1.7 the first  line  of  that  paragraph
    reads "The Appellant has failed without  reasonable  excuse  to  comply
    with a requirement to ...".  At paragraph 26 of his decision the  judge
    made no finding as to whether either on the basis of the correspondence
    or the oral evidence which he heard a reasonable excuse  had  been  put
    forward by the Appellant for failing to supply the specific information
    requested within the time stated.  It was necessary to make  a  finding
    on that point and none was made.  In the circumstances I set aside  the
    decision and reasons with no findings preserved.

10. Having done so I indicated that I had time to hear the case again.   Mr
    Howard asked that  it  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    adjourned for a short period to allow the  representatives  to  discuss
    whether it was practical to proceed immediately or whether  the  better
    route was for remittal to the First-tier.

11. When the hearing resumed Mr Smart indicated that as the matter  was  to
    be heard afresh the Respondent would wish to take issues on whether the
    financial requirements of Appendix FM and FM-SE had  been  met  as  was
    required by the Rules.  I found that he was entitled to do  so  and  Mr
    Howard did not demur.  Bearing in mind the  guidance  in  RM  (Kwok  on
    Tong) [2006] UKAIT 00039 this was clearly correct and  in  fairness  to
    the Appellant and as a wholly new issue had  been  raised  it  was  not
    appropriate to proceed within the Upper Tribunal.  As fresh credibility
    findings were required on all relevant points, including a  new  point,
    and having regard  to  Upper  Tribunal  Practice  Statement  7.2.(b)  I
    decided that the case should be disposed of by remittal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal under  the  provisions  of  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside.

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with the directions below.

No anonymity order was requested and none is made.


Signed   Date 19 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
Directions (Sections 12(3)(a) and 12(3)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007

 1) The members of the First-tier Tribunal who are to reconsider  the  case
    should not include First-tier Tribunal Judge Mulvenna.

 2) None of the findings of Judge Mulvenna are preserved and the appeal  is
    to be heard afresh.  The  Respondent  has  indicated  that  matters  of
    maintenance under Appendices FM and FM-SE to the Immigration Rules  are
    now in issue.

 3) The appropriate hearing  centre  is  Stoke-on-Trent  where  the  appeal
    should be listed not  before  six  weeks  from  today's  date.   If  an
    interpreter is required the  Appellant's  solicitors  must  inform  the
    hearing centre at least fourteen days before the date of hearing.

 4) All witness statements and other documents to be relied upon by  either
    party are to be served upon the other party and upon  the  Tribunal  at
    least fourteen days before the hearing.


Signed   Date 19 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

