
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/11164/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 March 2015                     |On 29 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ARDIT MUSTALI
                         (anonymity ORDER not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Saleem of Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Abebrese promulgated on 29 October  2014  allowing  the  appeal  of  Mr
    Mustali against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department dated 24 February 2014 to refuse to vary leave to remain and
    to remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   Although before me the Secretary of  State  is  the  appellant  and  Mr
    Mustali is the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer  to
    the Secretary of  State  as  the  Respondent  and  Mr  Mustali  as  the
    Appellant.

Background

3.   The Appellant is a national of Albania  born  on  17  April  1981.   He
    entered the United Kingdom illegally in or about July 2000  and  on  26
    July 2000 made an application for asylum.  His application  for  asylum
    was refused on 12 January 2001.  No steps were taken by  the  Appellant
    either to regularise his status or to leave  the  United  Kingdom,  and
    indeed it is said that he absconded to evade immigration enforcement.

4.   In or about 2010 he made an application to the Secretary of  State  for
    discretionary leave to remain and on 24 January  2011  he  was  granted
    three years' discretionary leave up until 23 January  2014.      On  17
    January 2014 the Appellant made an application  for  further  leave  to
    remain which was refused on 24 February 2014 - and it is  that  refusal
    and the removal decision taken in consequence that is  the  subject  of
    the appeal before the Tribunal.

5.   In respect of the immigration history it is to be  noted  that  at  the
    time that the Appellant was seeking discretionary leave to remain which
    resulted in the grant in January 2011 he was in a relationship  with  a
    Polish national, Ms Jolanta Dec.  During the course of the more  recent
    application for further leave  to  remain  made  in  January  2014  the
    Secretary of State wrote to the Appellant requesting information as  to
    his current circumstances including, in particular, his  relation  with
    Ms Dec.  The Appellant  responded  through  representatives  by  letter
    dated 21 February 2014 confirming that the relationship had come to  an
    end upon Ms Dec returning to Poland at the end of 2012.

6.   The Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse to vary leave  to
    remain and to remove him from the United Kingdom was  heard  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese who allowed the appeal for reasons set out
    in his determination on human rights grounds with reference to  Article
    8 of the ECHR.

7.   The Respondent  sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray on 9 December 2014.

Consideration

8.   Although this is the Secretary of State's, appeal  much  of  the  focus
    both today and at a previous hearing before me on 20 January  2015  has
    been in respect of a matter raised on behalf of the Appellant, and that
    is in respect of the exact basis of the  previous  grant  of  leave  in
    January 2011.  Mr Saleem essentially seeks to argue as follows.

9.    It  is  submitted  that  the  Appellant  was  granted   three   years'
    discretionary leave to remain pursuant to the 'Legacy' programme;  that
    the  grant  was  made  after  a  consideration   of   the   Appellant's
    circumstances  against  the  framework  of  paragraph   395C   of   the
    Immigration Rules as they then were; that the application  for  further
    leave to remain fell to be considered in accordance with policy outside
    the Rules and not under the Rules; and that in considering  the  policy
    outside the Rules the similar parameters and framework  in  respect  of
    paragraph 395C should again be applied to the Appellant rather than the
    current (or at least current at the time of the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision) form of the Rules.  It is argued that the  Respondent  failed
    to decide the Appellant's application in accordance with the argued-for
    approach, and in those circumstances the submission is  made  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the law and it
    follows that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  should  have  allowed  the
    appeal on that basis and remitted it  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    consider in accordance with the law.

10.  Although there is  no  cross-appeal  in  this  regard,  or  a  Rule  24
    response, considerable indulgence has been extended  to  the  Appellant
    and his representatives to run the submission because of the  potential
    relevance of this submission to the basis  upon  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge determined the appeal.

11.  To put that submission and indeed the  background  to  the  Appellant's
    case in wider context it is necessary to consider the grant of leave in
    January 2011 and that is best  done  by  consideration  of  the  minute
    prepared by the decision-maker who  determined  the  Appellant's  case.
    The 'minute' is a document which as Ms  Holmes  has  indicated  is  not
    ordinarily disclosed in cases, but was before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge: it sets out the thinking that informed  the  decision-maker  who
    granted leave.

12.  The document is a matter of record on file and so I do not  propose  to
    repeat its full contents  here,  however  I  will  quote  from  certain
    passages.  It starts off  with  a  summation  of  the  history  of  the
    Appellant and the basis of his current claim which is  said  to  be  by
    reference to ten years' residency over which he developed  strong  ties
    and a family life with the Polish national,  Ms  Dec  to  whom  I  have
    already referred.  Under the 'consideration' aspect  the  following  is
    set out:

         "The applicant has submitted  many  documents  in  support  of  his
         relationship  with  Jolanta  Dec  and  the  relationship  has  been
         accepted.  They are in a cohabiting relationship and Jolanta Dec is
         of Polish nationality and so has permission to reside  in  the  UK.
         The applicant has also engaged in employment in the UK.   This  has
         been under a fraudulent name and national insurance number  through
         which he has made tax and national  insurance  contributions.   The
         applicant has continued this employment under these  pretences  for
         seven years and has supported himself through renting accommodation
         and paying for utility services.   The  applicant  has  a  10  year
         residence which has been obtained through his  non-compliance.   He
         stopped reporting on a regular  basis  so  that  he  would  not  be
         removed.  He has frustrated the removals process, gained employment
         under fraudulent pretences and was convicted of a common assault in
         2005.  The UKBA were in  contact  with  the  applicant  after  this
         incident however removal was not pursued.

         It has been accepted that the applicant has  established  a  family
         life in the UK and he has strong connections in the  UK.   However,
         his non-compliance leaves him undesirable to be granted  indefinite
         leave to remain.  It has been considered  that  his  removal  would
         cause disproportionate interference  with  his  established  family
         life and so a grant of three years' discretionary  leave  would  be
         appropriate."

    The decision does indeed state a discretionary grant of  limited  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom for three years.

13.  When the Appellant applied for further leave to  remain  it  is  common
    ground that in the first instance consideration was required to be  had
    to the Secretary of State's policy on discretionary leave.  It is  also
    common ground that the particular form of the policy is  the  one  that
    has been provided in a complete copy by Ms Holmes for  the  purpose  of
    the hearing today and was also cited by reference to  certain  passages
    in the skeleton submissions of Mr Saleem.

14.  The relevant parts of the policy  with  regard  to  applicants  granted
    discretionary leave before 9 July 2012 are as follows:

         "Those who, before 9 July 2012, have been granted leave  under  the
         DL policy in force at the time will normally continue to  be  dealt
         with under that policy through to settlement if they qualify for it
         (normally after accruing 6 years  continuous  DL).   Further  leave
         applications from those granted up to 3 years DL before 9 July 2012
         are subject to an active  review.   Consideration  of  all  further
         leave applications will be subject to a criminality check  and  the
         application of the criminality thresholds including in  respect  of
         cases awaiting a decision on a further period of DL  on  that  date
         (see criminality and exclusion  section  above).   Decision  makers
         must consider whether the circumstances prevailing at the  time  of
         the original grant of leave continue at the date of  the  decision.
         If the circumstances remain the same and the criminality thresholds
         do not apply, a further period of 3 years  DL  should  normally  be
         granted.  Decision makers  must  consider  whether  there  are  any
         circumstances that may warrant departure from the  standard  period
         of leave.  If there have been significant changes or the  applicant
         fails to meet  the  criminality  thresholds  (see  criminality  and
         exclusion section above), the application for further leave  should
         be refused."

15.  In this particular case as  may  be  seen  the  minute  explaining  the
    decision to grant the Appellant  discretionary  leave  to  remain  made
    particular reference to the circumstance of the Appellant  being  in  a
    relationship with a Polish national.  There has been some debate before
    me as to whether this was the only basis upon which leave  was  granted
    or merely one of a number of factors.  In my judgment it is unnecessary
    for me to reach a firm conclusion on that.  Nonetheless it  would  seem
    that all of the other positive features about the  Appellant's  private
    life such as his engagement in employment and business and  so  on  are
    all qualified in the minute by adverse  references  to  non-compliance,
    fraudulent pretences and the frustration of the removals  process.   On
    the face of it, it would appear but for  the  family  relationship  the
    decision-maker might well have made a different decision.

16.   Another  point  that  has  arisen  in  this  context  is,  given   the
    circumstance of the Appellant being in a  relationship  with  a  Polish
    national, that his case should perhaps properly have been referred to a
    different department for a consideration of the issuing of a  residence
    permit pursuant to the EEA  Regulations.   In  this  regard  Ms  Holmes
    observes that whilst it is not  transparent  why  that  was  not  done,
    equally there should be no obscure or suspicious motive  attributed  to
    it and, if anything, it is most likely a matter of oversight.   In  any
    event the Appellant himself did not at any  point  seek  to  request  a
    residence  permit  or  make  any  other  application  under   the   EEA
    Regulations which of course it would  have  been  open  to  him  to  do
    notwithstanding the grant of discretionary leave or even perhaps  ahead
    of the grant of discretionary leave, had he wanted  to  regularise  his
    status at some earlier point.  Be that  as  it  may,  the  Respondent's
    decision-maker considering the current application and  decision  wrote
    the following in the Reasons for Refusal Letter of 24 February 2014:

         "We have considered your application on behalf of the Secretary  of
         State and your application has been refused.  You  were  previously
         granted discretionary leave to remain solely on the basis  of  your
         family life with an EEA national in the UK.  You have  informed  us
         that this relationship is no longer subsisting.   Consequently  the
         circumstances in which you were granted  discretionary  leave  have
         changed and you will not be  granted  further  leave  on  the  same
         basis.  Your application has been considered under Appendix FM."

    and then after that the decision maker set out a consideration  of  the
    Appellant's case by reference to the criteria of  paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules.

17.  It seems to me that the wording of the paragraph just quoted  from  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter is a clear reference and echo of the wording
    of the discretionary leave policy.  The decision-maker identifies  that
    there has been a relevant change of circumstance, that is  to  say  the
    termination of the relationship with the  Appellant's  Polish  partner,
    and under the policy that is something that should result in no further
    discretionary leave being granted.  That does  not  mean  to  say  that
    somebody should not be granted a variation of leave to remain - but  it
    means that they must establish some alternative basis, ordinarily under
    the Rules, to be able to secure further leave.  It is in this area that
    Mr Saleem has argued that any further consideration of the  Appellant's
    case should have been by reference to paragraph 395C.  However  he  has
    been unable to identify any mechanism by  which  paragraph  395C  would
    come into play once it has been established that the basis  upon  which
    discretionary leave was granted has significantly  altered.   In  those
    circumstances I reject the submission that the Secretary of State  and,
    in turn the Immigration Judge, should have had  it  in  mind  that  the
    Appellant's application for variation of leave in  circumstances  where
    there had been a material  change  of  circumstance  then  fell  to  be
    considered by reference to paragraph 395C.  It did not.  It fell to  be
    considered by reference to the current Rules and the Secretary of State
    appropriately had regard to Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE  and  in
    turn the First-tier Tribunal Judge was not at fault in considering  the
    case in the first instance by reference to the Rules, albeit  that  the
    Appellant conceded  that  he  could  not  establish  that  he  met  the
    requirements of the Rules.

18.  That rather long excursion into issues of policy brings us back to  the
    starting point of the Secretary of State's challenge to the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In this  context  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds, as articulated by Ms Holmes before me, essentially argue  that
    the Judge erred in his consideration and application of the factors  of
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act as amended by the  Immigration  Act  2014.
    In this context I have reminded myself of the recent decision  in  Dube
    (sections 117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC) which has  been  helpfully
    included in the  bundle  prepared  by  Mr  Saleem  in  support  of  his
    submissions today.  In particular I bear in mind  that  the  enumerated
    considerations in Sections 117A to 117D are not an 'a la carte' menu of
    consideration.  Judges are duty bound to have regard to  the  specified
    considerations but these are not an exhaustive set  of  considerations,
    nor is it the case that they represent any kind  of  radical  departure
    from the Razgar jurisprudence.

19.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  consideration  of  Section  117B  and
    indeed of the case under Article 8 is set out between paragraphs 11 and
    13 of the decision.  At paragraph 11 the Judge says the following: "the
    Respondents have  a  public  duty  to  ensure  that  they  maintain  an
    effective immigration control".  Ms Holmes has  pointed  out  that  the
    Judge has confined this sentence to a duty on  the  Respondent  whereas
    under Section 117A the duty is on the court or Tribunal to have  regard
    to the relevant factors under 117B.  Nonetheless the language there,  a
    public duty to ensure the maintenance of effective immigration control,
    is an echo of the consideration at Section 117B(1).  I am not  inclined
    to the view that the Judge's use of the word 'Respondent'  rather  than
    an identification that he had a duty to  ensure  effective  immigration
    control amounts to a material error of law.  It seems  to  me  that  in
    substance the Judge had it in mind that the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control was in the public interest and he thereby  properly
    had regard to the consideration at Section 117B(1).

20.  So far as Section 117B(2) is concerned -  that  it  is  in  the  public
    interest that persons seeking to remain are able to speak English  -  I
    do not understand it to have ever been disputed in this case  that  the
    Appellant is able to speak English and so that  does  not  as  it  were
    apply adversely to the Appellant's circumstances.

21.  As regards Section 117B(3), again it is the context of this  particular
    case that the Appellant has advanced his private  life  arguments,  and
    indeed the Judge has evaluated his private life arguments, very largely
    by reference to his economic activity and his setting up and running of
    his own business.  To that extent  it  would  not  appear  that  it  is
    seriously suggested that the Appellant's presence in the United Kingdom
    would be a burden on taxpayers or that he would otherwise be unable  to
    integrate into society because of financial concerns  or  difficulties.
    Those matters it seems to me are explored and identified  in  substance
    across paragraphs 11 and 12 of the decision.

22.  The further factors in 117B are not so clearly cut in  the  Appellant's
    favour.  Under Section 117B(4) little  weight  is  to  be  given  to  a
    private life if it is established at a time when the person is  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully - and it is to be recalled that  for  a  very
    substantial period of time the  Appellant  was  indeed  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully. Indeed it is also to be recalled from the minute of
    the decision-maker back in January 2011 that much  of  the  Appellant's
    economic activities were done by assuming a false  name  and  otherwise
    operating outside the framework of legitimacy, notwithstanding that  he
    nonetheless was paying tax and national insurance.

23.  Section 117B(5) similarly says that little weight  should  be  accorded
    to private life established at  a  time  when  a  person's  immigration
    status is precarious - and in this context  Ms  Holmes  invites  me  to
    consider that 'precarious' essentially means with some form of  limited
    leave.  Certainly at those times when the Appellant had  no  leave  his
    immigration status, without doubt, was precarious.

24.  It is also the case that when he had  limited  leave  pursuant  to  his
    relationship with Ms Dec he must have had it in mind that there was  no
    guarantee that that would lead to settlement.  Moreover, he accepted by
    way of correspondence with the Secretary of State that by  the  end  of
    2012 - so just under two years after the grant of  discretionary  leave
    to remain - that relationship was at an end: the  Appellant  could  not
    have expected that that would avail him,  or  his  discretionary  leave
    would otherwise automatically give rise to some form of settlement.

25.  Section 117B(6) is of no application in the current case.

26.  Notwithstanding what I have just said about Sections  117B(4)  and  (5)
    it is, it seems to me, abundantly clear from a reading of paragraphs 11
    and 12 in particular,  but  also  paragraph  13,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had well in mind that the Appellant had a  discreditable
    immigration  history.   Paragraph  12  in  particular  sets   out   the
    illegality of his presence in the United Kingdom and the illicit nature
    of some of his business activities.  It cannot be said that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge has disregarded the matrix of Sections 117B(5)  and
    (6).  The question really comes down to the amount of weight  that  the
    Judge has accorded the Appellant's private life, given those particular
    provisions.  In this  regard  I  was  troubled  during  the  course  of
    submissions by passages at paragraph 14 where it seemed on one  reading
    that the Judge had ignored the change  of  circumstances  in  that  the
    Appellant was no longer in a relationship with a Polish national.   The
    Judge refers to the Appellant having been granted leave because he  had
    established a family life and  goes  on  to  say  that,  based  on  the
    findings of the Respondent in 2011 and the continuing progress  of  the
    Appellant in this country, it would be disproportionate under Article 8
    for him to be removed.

27.  I am persuaded that the Judge must have had it in mind that the  family
    life had come to an end.  That was at the forefront of the Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter and indeed, as Mr Saleem has pointed out, it was because
    of that that 276ADE was the subject of consideration  rather  than  the
    partner route under Appendix  FM.   It  seems  to  me  that  the  Judge
    appropriately had regard to the fact that the Secretary  of  State  had
    acknowledged in 2011 that the Appellant had strong connections  in  the
    United Kingdom and the Judge was entitled to consider  that  those  had
    been "further cemented" during the period of his legitimate stay in the
    United Kingdom since the grant of discretionary leave to remain.

28.  Ultimately these matters were a matter of  weight  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, and unless it can  be  said  that  he  has  misdirected
    himself in law or has come to  a  perverse  conclusion  in  respect  of
    matters of weight, his decision ought not to be interfered with.  I  am
    satisfied that he has had due regard to the considerations  in  Section
    117 and has accorded the weight that he considered appropriate  in  all
    of the circumstances of the case, including having heard the  Appellant
    give evidence.  I do not consider that his decision is perverse  and  I
    do not consider that it discloses any misdirection of law.

Notice of Decision

29.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains no error of  law
and stands.

30.  No anonymity direction is made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
on 24 March 2015



Signed        Date: 27 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

