
IAC-HX-DML-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11531/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th February 2015                         |On 20th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MRS VALBAI KANJI HIRJI pATEL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shilliday, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dhanji of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Background to this Appeal

 1. On 9th January 2014 Mrs Patel sought leave to remain on  the  basis  of
    private  and  family  life.   The  Secretary  of  State  refused   that
    application and Mrs Patel's appeal came  before  FTTJ  Kimnell  on  9th
    October 2014.  In a decision  promulgated  on  11th  November  2014  he
    recorded  "It  is  accepted  that  the  [respondent]  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules as  regards  dependent  relatives
    and Mr Halligan put his case entirely on classic Article  8  principles
    outside the Rules" before going on to find at paragraph  47  that  this
    was a rare, unusual and exceptional case where the respondent's private
    Article 8 rights outweighed the need to enforce immigration control and
    the  appeal  was  allowed  on  Article  8  grounds.    There   was   no
    consideration of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal and on 9th January 2015  FTTJ
    Colyer granted permission in the following terms:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kimnell) who, in  a
             determination promulgated on 11th November 2014,  allowed  the
             Appellant's appeal against the Respondent decision  to  refuse
             her application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on
             the basis of family and private life here.

         2.   The Grounds for applying to the upper tribunal submit that the
             judge has made a material error of law,  misdirecting  himself
             with reference to article 8 ECHR.  The  judge  fails  to  have
             regard to the substantive  requirements  of  appendix  FM  and
             appendix FM-SE  in  considering  the  appellant's  case.   The
             respondent refers to paragraph 29 of Nagre; and  the  specific
             paragraphs of the  immigration  rules.   The  respondent  then
             submits.

                  "From the foregoing it can be seen that if he had directed
                  himself properly the judge would have had to have grappled
                  with  the  possibility  of  care  being  provided  to  the
                  appellant by the Indian  health  services  or  by  Private
                  health  care  arrangements  paid  for  by  the  UK   based
                  relatives and would be a  lie  to  the  kind  of  evidence
                  required to show that such care is  unavailable  in  cases
                  such as these.  It is likely that had  he  done  so  there
                  could well have been a different outcome."

         3.   The grounds disclose an arguable error of law."

 3. Thus the error of law hearing came before me.

 4. It is settled law that the Immigration  Rules  now  require  Article  8
    claims to be considered under the Immigration Rules.  Where  the  Rules
    provide a complete code for dealing with the  application  in  question
    there is no need then for the Secretary of State to go on and  consider
    the application under Article 8 at large.  This is  an  approach  which
    has been reinforced by a decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  Singh  v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74 in particular at paragraphs 63 and 64  which  I
    set out below:-

         "63. The first case is the decision of this Court in MM  (Lebanon).
             The only substantive judgment is that of Aikens LJ (with  whom
             Vice-President, Maurice Kay LJ, and Treacy LJ  agreed).   Most
             of the issues with which the  case  is  concerned  are  wholly
             remote from those in this appeal, but in one  section  of  his
             judgment Aikens LJ had to consider Nagre.   In  para.  129  he
             refers to Sales J having said that "if a particular person  is
             outside the rule then he has to demonstrate, as a  preliminary
             to a consideration outside the rule, that he  has  a  arguable
             case that there may be good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to
             remain outside the rules": that is evidently a  paraphrase  of
             the second half  of  para.  29  of  Sales  J's  judgment.   He
             continues:

                       "I cannot see much utility in imposing this  further,
                  intermediary, test.  If the applicant cannot  satisfy  the
                  rules, then there either is or  there  is  not  a  further
                  Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined  by  the
                  relevant decision-maker."

             Mr Malik submitted - this being his second ground of appeal in
             Ms Khalid's case - that  this  short  passage  undermined  the
             entirety of Sales J's point about full separate  consideration
             of article 8 not always being necessary.

         64.  In my view that is a mis-reading of Aikens  LJ's  observation.
             He was not questioning the substantial point made by Sales  J.
             He was simply saying that it was unnecessary for the decision-
             maker, in approaching the "second stage", to  have  to  decide
             first whether it was arguable that there was a good article  8
             claim outside the Rules  -  that  being  what  he  calls  "the
             intermediary test" - and then,  if  he  decided  that  it  was
             arguable, to go on to assess  that  claim:  he  should  simply
             decide whether there was a good claim  outside  the  Rules  or
             not.  I am not sure that I would myself have read Sales  J  as
             intending to impose any such intermediary requirement though I
             agree  with  Aikens  LJ  that  if  he  was  it  represents  an
             unnecessary refinement.  But what matters  is  that  there  is
             nothing in Aikens LJ's comment which casts doubt on Sales  J's
             basic point that there is no need to conduct a  full  separate
             examination of article 8  outside  the  Rules  where,  in  the
             circumstances of a particular case, all the issues  have  been
             addressed in the consideration under the Rules."

 5. Through no fault of his own the FTTJ was not invited by the parties  to
    consider the Immigration Rules and the case was solely put  before  him
    on Article 8 grounds.  He thus heard no evidence from the appellant  or
    her relatives about the substantive requirements of the  Rules  for  an
    elderly dependent relative.

 6. The key substantive requirements of the Rules are as  set  out  in  the
    grounds at E-ECDR.2.4 and 2.5 and the specified  evidence  is  set  out
    under Appendix FM-SE.  None of the specified evidence was placed before
    the FTTJ and the issues  were  not  addressed  regarding  care  from  a
    central or local health authority, a local authority, a doctor or other
    health professional in India and if not affordable because of  payments
    previously made the appellant was required to give  an  explanation  of
    why payment could not  continue  and  if  financial  support  had  been
    provided by the sponsor or other close family in the UK  the  applicant
    was required to provide an explanation of why this could  not  continue
    in India.

 7. The judge was required  to  consider  the  possibility  of  care  being
    provided to the appellant by the Indian health service  or  by  private
    health care arrangements paid  for  by  the  UK  based  relatives.   In
    addition the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules set out at
    E-ECDR.3.1 and 3.2 provide that the  applicant  must  provide  evidence
    they can be adequately maintained, accommodated and cared for in the UK
    by the sponsor without recourse to  public  funds.   The  sponsor  must
    confirm the applicant will have no recourse to public  funds  and  that
    the sponsor will be responsible for  their  maintenance,  accommodation
    and care for a period of five years from the date the applicant entered
    the United Kingdom.  Appendix FM-SE sets out how evidence of  financial
    requirements under Appendix FM must be  met  furthermore  in  order  to
    assess the cost of the  appellant's  care  evidence  of  that  is  also
    required.  However because this evidence was not available  before  the
    FTTJ and in the way the appeal proceeded before him it is necessary for
    the decision to be set aside and for the appeal to be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.

 8. Accordingly the appeal will be heard at Taylor  House  on  13th  August
    2015 with a time estimate of two hours and a  Gujarati  interpreter  is
    required.

Summary of Decision

 9. The FTTJ did err in law and his decision is set aside  and  the  appeal
    remitted for a de novo hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal.



Signed        Date 20th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge E B Grant

