
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11320/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination promulgated    |
|On 21 January 2014                            |on  30 January 2014          |
|                                              |                             |
|Approved Ex Tempore Judgment                  |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                 THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                            HARRIS MAHMOOD TARAR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr S Ahmed, instructed by 12 Bridge Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

[1]   In  this  appeal  a  preliminary  issue  has  arisen  which   requires
    determination by the Upper Tribunal.  We  can  describe  the  issue  in
    compact and straightforward terms.  In the history of this  appeal  the
    Appellant was granted limited leave to enter the United Kingdom  on  29
    October 2009.  That was for a period of three years. On the last day of
    this period, 29 October 2012, the Appellant's  solicitors  applied  for
    variation of their client's leave to enter the  United  Kingdom.   This
    generated a refusal decision on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  and
    accompanying removal directions, both dated 22 March 2013.   There  was
    in turn an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

[2]  We have raised with both  parties'  representatives  one  of  the  most
    striking features of the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    namely the repeated unequivocal statements  that  at  the  hearing  the
    Respondent's representative "withdrew" the decision of the Secretary of
    State under appeal.  This is stated in three places.  First of all,  in
    paragraph 13, where we consider with care the context.   The  statement
    at paragraph 13 is located  under  the  heading  "Preliminary  Issues",
    which included an unsuccessful  Respondent's  adjournment  application.
    We  paraphrase  the  following  sentences  thus.   The  basis  of   the
    adjournment was the pending decision in the  case  of  MM.   The  judge
    recorded that the Home Office had sought a stay of appeals pending this
    decision and, furthermore, was not making decisions in cases  where  MM
    has a potential impact.  The judge then  commented  that  to  grant  an
    adjournment or  a  stay  would  be  consistent  with  the  Home  Office
    approach.  The application for an adjournment was contested. The  judge
    refused  the  application  in  that  context.   Paragraph  13  of   the
    determination states:

         "The respondent's representative withdrew the decision".

[3]  Under a later heading in the determination,  namely  "The  Respondent's
    Case", in paragraph 17, the judge stated again:

         "The decision was withdrawn".

    The  structure  of  the  determination  was  one  of  considering   the
    Appellant's  submission,  followed  by  assessing  the   evidence   and
    proceeding to make findings  of  fact.   In  paragraph  34,  the  judge
    considered  the  issue  bearing  on  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.  As an integral part of the judge's reasoning  in  relation
    to the Article 8 issue, the judge repeated for a third  time  that  the
    Respondent's decision had been withdrawn.  The relevant passage  repays
    careful reading. It consists of the following:


         "Here the decision having been withdrawn the Appellant's removal is
         not imminent and it is on that basis as I find that  there  is  not
         currently any interference with the couple's family or private life
          ...  ".

[4]  We would observe that the Upper Tribunal is an appellate Tribunal.   It
    exercises an appellate cum supervisory jurisdiction. We are in no doubt
     that the logically first question to  be  determined  at  this  stage,
    permission to appeal having been granted, is whether, as  a  matter  of
    law, the judge's purported consideration and determination of  all  the
    issues at  first  instance  can  be  sustained.   We  conclude  without
    hesitation that it is  cannot.  We  have  no  reason  to  question  the
    unambiguous  repeated  statements  that  the  representative   of   the
    Secretary of State withdrew the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    under a challenge in the appeal and there is no contrary submission. We
    have been assisted by some candid submissions by Mr Nath on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State today.  Mr Nath  is  unable  to  place  anything
    before us which seriously  calls  into  question  this  analysis.   The
    repeated  statements  by  the  judge  are  consistent  only   with   an
    unequivocal understanding on the part  of  all  concerned,  namely  the
    Tribunal and the two representatives, that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative had withdrawn the Secretary of State's decision.

[5]  The following consequences flow.  The  first  is  that  everything  the
    judge did thereafter was erroneous in law.  The  judge  was  no  longer
    seized of the appeal. That is the effect of Rule 17 of the 2005  Rules.
    The FtT was functus officio. The second analysis which may  be  applied
    is a jurisdictional one.   The  judge,  in  our  view,  no  longer  had
    jurisdiction  to  entertain  and  determine  the  appeal.  Thirdly  and
    finally, bearing in mind that we are operating in the domain of  public
    law, we conclude further that what we find to have been an  unambiguous
    representation by the Secretary of State's representative, namely  that
    the  appeal  was  being  withdrawn,  engendered  in  the  Appellant   a
    substantive   legitimate  expectation  that  that  would  ensue.   What
    happened thereafter, namely the continuation of  the  hearing  and  the
    preparation of a judgment considering, addressing and  determining  all
    of the issues had the effect of frustrating the legitimate  expectation
    in play. There can be no conceivable public interest justification  for
    that course. Thus illegality of this further species is demonstrated.

[6]  It follows that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  cannot  be
    sustained and must be set aside.   The  decision  was  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal.  The logical effect of our analysis and conclusions
    above is that the judge should have taken a particular course at  first
    hearing. Having received what we have found to have been an unambiguous
    statement on behalf of the Secretary of State  that  the  decision  was
    being withdrawn, the judge ought to have made a simple,  formal  ruling
    under Rule 17 that the appeal was treated as withdrawn.

[7]  We proceed to remake the decision in the way in which we  consider  the
    First-tier Tribunal ought to have made it. The  appeal  is  treated  as
    having been withdrawn before the First-tier Tribunal,  under  Rule  17.
    The consequence of this remade decision is that the Secretary of  State
    will reconsider the original decision and make a fresh one.






                           Signed: [pic]
                                    The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey,
                                             President
                                    Dated: 24 January 2014

