
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11947/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2015                            |On 6 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                               mr rajan khanal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  his  leave
    and to remove him from the United Kingdom was dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Blum ("the judge") in a determination promulgated on  30
    October 2014.  There was no attendance  by  the  appellant  or  by  his
    representatives.  The day before the hearing, a fax was  received  from
    the appellant requesting  an  adjournment.   He  claimed  that  he  was
    feeling unwell and suffering from a bad cold and chest pain.  There was
    nothing from his representatives.  A clerk at the hearing centre  noted
    that the appellant had not provided a contact telephone number.

2.   No adjournment was granted and the  judge  recorded  that  neither  the
    appellant nor his representatives received anything from  the  Tribunal
    indicating that an adjournment would be granted.  On the morning of the
    hearing, the judge asked his usher to contact  the  appellant  and  the
    representatives.  Contact could not be established with  the  appellant
    himself, as he provided no number and telephone calls to his solicitors
    produced only a "voicemail" response.  The judge put  the  matter  back
    until he had heard the other cases in his list and asked his  usher  to
    contact the representatives again, at about  midday,  and  to  leave  a
    message indicating that they were to contact  the  Tribunal  about  the
    appeal.  There was no response.

3.   The judge proceeded to determine the appeal.  In  September  2013,  the
    appellant applied for leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Migrant.
    The Secretary of State found that he was not  entitled  to  the  points
    claimed in the maintenance (funds) category as he had provided a  false
    bank statement in support of  his  application.   The  application  was
    refused, the Secretary of State concluding that the ground  of  refusal
    under paragraph 322(1A) of the rules was made out.  The judge took into
    account the appellant's reliance upon Article 8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention and the claims made by him and by his claimed  partner  that
    they were in a  relationship  together.   Noting  the  absence  of  the
    claimed partner, although it appears that she  did  attend  an  earlier
    hearing, the judge observed that as the appellant's core claim was that
    he was living with her, and as the appellant was aware of the  hearing,
    his partner would almost certainly also have  been  aware  of  it.   No
    bundle of evidence was made available by or on behalf of the appellant.
     The claim that he was not feeling well was unsupported by any  medical
    evidence  but,  in  any  event,  the  judge  would  have  expected  the
    appellant's representative to attend.

4.   The judge concluded that the use of a false bank statement,  which  the
    appellant admitted, was fatal to his Tier 4  application.   So  far  as
    Article 8 was concerned, there was a paucity  of  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal and nothing to show that the  couple  could  not  relocate  to
    Nepal  to  continue  their  relationship,  if  it  were  genuine.   The
    relationship was entered into at a time when  the  appellant  only  had
    limited leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and  his  immigration
    history included the use of a false document.  In those  circumstances,
    the judge concluded that the  adverse  decisions  did  not  breach  the
    appellant's Article 8 rights or those of anyone else.

5.   The appellant applied for permission to appeal.   In  his  application,
    he again failed to provide a contact telephone number.  In his grounds,
    he restated his claim that on the day of the hearing he felt unwell and
    was anxious.  He was no longer represented  by  solicitors  and  stated
    that he did not realise that he needed to attend the  Tribunal  to  ask
    for an adjournment.  He tried to get evidence showing that he had  been
    to see his GP on the day but was  told  that  he  could  not  be  given
    anything on the spot.  He attached a compliment slip  in  the  name  of
    Berkshire West NHS Trust, on which were written these words:  "To  Whom
    it may Concern, I can confirm Mr Rajan Khanal visited us on 23  October
    2014.  Unfortunately we cannot book an appointment early enough  for  a
    certificate for one day."  There is a signature (which is unclear)  but
    no description of the signatory's role at the Trust.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted on 16 December 2014.   In  a  Rule  24
    response, the Secretary of State opposed the appeal on the  basis  that
    the judge  directed  himself  appropriately.   There  was  no  adequate
    evidence that the appellant was ill or that he  could  not  attend  the
    Tribunal.  He had no expectation that an adjournment would  be  granted
    and it was entirely open to the judge to proceed.  On  the  facts,  the
    appellant had used deception and could not meet the requirements of the
    rules.

Submission on error of law

7.   There was no appearance by the appellant at the hearing on  28  January
    2015.  As noted above, he provided no contact telephone number  in  his
    application for permission to appeal.  He  had  the  benefit  of  legal
    advice and  assistance  from  a  firm  of  solicitors  earlier  in  the
    proceedings but it appears clear that they were no longer acting by the
    date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in  October  2014.   There  was
    nothing on file indicating when they came off  the  record.   My  usher
    made enquiries at 10:25am and confirmed  that  the  appellant  was  not
    present at Field House and that no messages had been received from  him
    or anyone on his behalf.  I could see from  the  court  file  that  the
    notice of hearing was sent to the appellant at the address he  provided
    in his application for permission to appeal (which was the same address
    as the one given earlier in the proceedings).

8.   Ms Everett relied upon the Rule 24 response.  There was nothing in  the
    judge's reasoning on the adjournment, at  paragraphs  5  to  7  of  the
    written decision, that showed any error.  It was difficult to  see  how
    the judge could have come to a different decision on the facts as  they
    were.

Conclusion on error of law

9.   I conclude that no material error of law has been shown.  As the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge noted, the application made by the appellant for an
    adjournment was received very late in  the  day  (the  day  before  the
    hearing)  and  was  entirely  unsupported  by  evidence.   He  had   no
    expectation that an adjournment would be granted.  There was nothing to
    show that his solicitors had come off the record.  Attempts  were  made
    on the day of the First-tier Tribunal hearing to establish contact with
    the appellant and the representatives, without  success.   The  claimed
    partner he relied upon in the Article 8 context also failed  to  attend
    the hearing.

10.  The appellant also failed to attend his hearing in the Upper  Tribunal.
     The only additional evidence which has emerged is the compliments slip
    from the West Berkshire NHS Trust but  this  falls  woefully  short  of
    showing that the appellant was suffering ill-health on 23 October 2014,
    let alone ill-health which would  have  prevented  him  from  attending
    court.  He admitted using a false bank statement, with  the  inevitable
    result that his application for leave to remain under the rules failed.
     The judge did not err in declining to adjourn the  case,  in  all  the
    circumstances, and no procedural  unfairness  resulted.   Nor  did  the
    judge err in dismissing the appeal.  The requirements of the rules were
    simply not met and the Secretary of State was entitled to find that the
    ground of refusal under paragraph 322(1A) was  made  out.   So  far  as
    Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention  is  concerned,  the  judge's
    succinct analysis was clearly open to him in  the  light  of  the  very
    limited evidence before him.  No error of law has been  shown  in  this
    context.

11.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and shall stand.

DECISION

12.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Signed:       Dated: 5 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


ANONYMITY

There has been no application for anonymity  and  I  make  no  direction  or
order.



Signed:       Dated: 5 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
