
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11492/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th January 2015                          |On 27th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                          MRS Cathy Yamanko Mimbulu
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sadiq, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mrs Cathy Yamanko Mimbulu, date of birth 25th April 1975
    is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an  anonymity  direction.   Taking  all  the
    circumstances into account I do not consider it necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge I F Taylor promulgated  on  25th  June  2014.   The
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant against the decision of the
    Respondent dated 18th February 2014 to refuse the Appellant a permanent
    residence card as evidence that she was entitled to reside  permanently
    in the United Kingdom as the spouse of an EEA national.

 4. By permission granted on  18th  July  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kamara granted permission to appeal.

 5. In essence the Appellant is  seeking  a  permanent  residence  card  as
    evidence of her right to permanently reside as the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights.  It has to  be  noted  that  she  is
    married to a Mr Ilunga Mukuluoabo, who is a citizen of Belgium.

 6. As set out in paragraph 4 of the determination it is not clear when the
    Appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom,  although  it  appears  to  be
    sometime prior to 2004. The judge found  that  the  Appellant  and  her
    sponsor/ husband had been living together from 2004  onward,  initially
    in a relationship akin to marriage but latterly as husband and wife. It
    was found that she married her  Sponsor  on  5th  February  2008.   The
    couple have three children the eldest of whom is now aged 6 or 7.

 7. There is reference in the determination also to the fact that  on  13th
    May 2013 the Appellant's EEA  national  partner  made  application  for
    permanent residence cards  both  for  himself  and  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant and their children.  It appears  that  that  application  was
    refused on 11th October 2013.

 8. The Appellant has been in a durable relationship with her Sponsor since
    2004.  In 2008 the parties married.  The issue appears to be whether or
    not the Sponsor was in point of fact a  qualified  person  during  that
    period of time.

 9. As part of the letter of refusal, dated 18th February 2014,  issue  was
    taken as to whether or not the Sponsor had in  point  of  fact  been  a
    student from 2007 until 2011.  The judge  made  a  clear  finding  with
    regard to the issue in  paragraph  11  of  the  determination.   Having
    looked at the documentation including the EEA national's attendance  at
    the University of Bolton the judge was satisfied that the Sponsor,  the
    EEA national, had been attending at the University of Bolton from  18th
    January 2007 through to 25th June 2010.

10. It was thereafter accepted that the EEA national Sponsor had gone on to
    seek to study an MSc at the  University  of  Birmingham.   That  course
    commenced in the September 2010 and was supposedly to be  completed  in
    2011.

11. The judge accepted that the Appellant was a full-time  student  up  and
    until 10th October 2011.  No issue was taken with regard to the Sponsor
    being a qualified student under the Regulations.  Whilst there may have
    been an issue as to whether he had private medical insurance  to  cover
    him for the relevant period of time that issue was not pursued.  Indeed
    within the letter of refusal it was acknowledged that the  Sponsor  was
    issued with a registration certificate as a student and it was accepted
    in the letter that given all the circumstances no comprehensive medical
    insurance was required.  It appears that that registration  certificate
    was issued in June 2008 after the Sponsor had been a qualified  student
    from January 2007.

12. The argument therefore before me was whether or not  the  Appellant  as
    the spouse of a qualified person was entitled to a permanent  residence
    card by reason of her period of residence from January 2007 through  to
    January 2012.  The period that her  husband  was  a  qualified  student
    under the Regulations was from January 2007  through  to  10th  October
    2011.  There is therefore a period of  about  three  months  after  the
    Masters degree at Birmingham was  complete  when  the  Sponsor  was  no
    longer a student.

13. However the picture thereafter appears to be that post-October  through
    to the period of December 2013 there were periods when the Sponsor  was
    receiving jobseekers allowance,  periods  when  he  was  working  as  a
    cleaner and periods when he was working on a voluntary basis.   However
    for the three months between October 2011 and January 2012  he  appears
    to have been claiming jobseekers allowance.

14. As noted within paragraph 12 a person is entitled under Regulation  (7)
    to the status of a jobseeker for a period of six months only.   However
    that would cover the initial three month period when the Sponsor ceased
    his university degree.

15. Accordingly it is the Appellant's contention that for the  period  from
    January 2007 through to January 2012 she was the  family  member  of  a
    qualified person and as such she should  be  entitled  to  a  permanent
    right of residence.

16. The finding by the judge that a continuous period of  five  years  with
    the end date either being 5th December 2013 the date of the application
    or the date of the hearing ignores the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had
    already acquired a permanent right of residence.

17. It has to be noted  that  this  makes  no  difference  to  the  current
    position of the Appellant.  The Appellant would presently  be  entitled
    to a residence card as the spouse of an EEA qualified person.  The sole
    issue is whether or not she is entitled to a permanent residence  card.
    The right to reside in the United Kingdom would exist whether it  be  a
    residence card or a permanent residence card.  Clearly certain benefits
    accrue to a person that has a permanent  residence  card.   However  it
    would not effect immediately the right of the Appellant to reside.  The
    Sponsor is currently working or self-employed such that he would  be  a
    qualified person and the Appellant would therefore  be  entitled  to  a
    residence card by reason of that.

18. The issue being whether or not the Appellant  has  already  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence.  It is  clear  that  the  Sponsor  was  a
    qualified person from January 2007  through  to  January  2012  and  by
    reason  thereof  the  Appellant  had  already  acquired  the  right  of
    residence by January  2012.   The  judge  in  considering  this  matter
    limited himself merely to considering the period  through  to  December
    2013 or  the  date  of  hearing.   Given  the  circumstances  that  the
    Appellant's Sponsor was at that stage  continuing  to  seek  jobseekers
    allowance the judge concluded  that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had had a continuous period of five years  during  which  the
    Sponsor was a qualified person.

19. However having examined the facts as presented to the judge  there  was
    the period through to January 2012 by which time the Sponsor had been a
    qualified person exercising treaty rights and therefore  the  Appellant
    as a spouse of a qualified person had acquired  a  permanent  right  of
    residence already.

20. For the reasons set out I find that the judge has made a material error
    of law.  I find that the Appellant has acquired a  permanent  right  of
    residence.  That being for the period of January 2007  through  to  the
    period of January 2012.  Accordingly there is a material error  of  law
    and I substitute a decision allowing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

21. There is a material error of law in the original  determination  and  I
    substitute the following decision:-

    I allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

22. No anonymity direction is made.

23. Taking all the circumstance s into account I make no fee award



Signed   Date 12th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

