


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/11049/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |  Decision Promulgated       |
|On 16 December 2015                           |  On 4 January 2016          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN


                                   Between


                          OLUEBUBE CHIZARAM IHEMADU

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr I. Ikeh of counsel, of Moorehouse, solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant appealed against a decision of the respondent,  made  on
      10 March 2015 to refuse her application  for  leave  to  remain,  that
      application being founded upon rights protected by article  8  of  the
      ECHR. By a decision  promulgated  on  12  June  2015  the  appeal  was
      dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson.


   2. In seeking permission to  appeal,  the  appellant  advanced  a  single
      ground of appeal. The appellant says that as an oral hearing had  been
      requested but the appeal was determined on the papers, there has  been
      a procedural irregularity giving rise to such unfairness as to  amount
      to an error of law.


   3. When lodging  notice  of  appeal  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
      appellant indicated that she wished the appeal to be determined on the
      papers, without an oral hearing. This generated the customary response
      form the First-tier Tribunal which was to acknowledge receipt  and  to
      indicate a date by which any documentary material the appellant wished
      to be considered had to be lodged. In this  case,  the  appellant  had
      until 21 May 2015 to lodge any further documents.


   4. The appellant, in consultation with her solicitors, had  a  change  of
      mind and decided that she would, after all, prefer to have the  appeal
      determined after an oral hearing. This request is set out clearly in a
      letter dated 21 May 2015 prepared by Moorehouse solicitors, a copy  of
      which is before me. In that letter they confirm that the  fee  payable
      for an oral hearing would be paid.


   5. In the event, on 8 June 2015 the appeal was determined on  the  papers
      and without an oral hearing. It is clear and  beyond  doubt  that  the
      letter from Moorhouse solicitors, dated 21 May 2015,  was  not  before
      the judge and so he would have been unaware that any  request  for  an
      oral hearing had been made.


   6. In granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McDade
      said this:


           "If indeed the letter was sent in advance of  the  judge  making
           the decision this constitutes an arguable error of law.  At  the
           error of law hearing the representative must be in a position to
           adduce evidence that the letter was posted  rather  than  making
           mere assertions that is was..."


   7. Today, the appellant was represented before the Upper Tribunal  by  Mr
      Ikeh of Moorhouse solicitors. He explained that he could  not  provide
      any evidence at all that the letter had been sent or that it had  been
      delivered to the Tribunal. The letter, he said, had been sent  by  fax
      only to the number typed on the face of the letter. Therefore he could
      provide no proof of posting because the  letter  was  not  posted.  He
      could provide no proof that the letter had actually been sent by  fax.
      This was because the letter itself bore no stamp or endorsement from a
      visit to the fax machine and there  was  no  fax  transmission  report
      available.


   8. For the respondent, Mr Jarvis drew attention to what had been said  in
      the rule 24 response letter. He submitted that in making the assertion
      that there had been a procedural irregularity in failing to  bring  to
      the attention of the judge that a request for an oral hearing had been
      made there was a burden of proof upon the respondent to be discharged.
      There has to be some evidence that the letter had been sent  and  here
      there was none.

   9. That is plainly correct. It cannot be deduced from  the  fact  of  the
      existence of a letter in the hands of the solicitors that it must have
      been sent. Even if there is no stamp upon it from the fax machine  and
      no fax transmission  report  retained,  there  could  at  least  be  a
      statement from the author of the letter explaining the instructions he
      or she had given to ensure that the letter was in fact communicated to
      the Tribunal.  Quite  simply  there  is  nothing  at  all  offered  to
      demonstrate that the letter had  been  sent,  despite  the  clear  and
      unambiguous  requirement  for  that  as  set  out  in  the  grant   of
      permission.


  10. It follows from this that the appellant has not established any  basis
      upon which to disturb the determination of the appeal  by  the  First-
      tier Tribunal.



   Summary of decision:


  11. First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson made no error of  law  and
      his decision, promulgated on 12 June 205, shall stand.


                               Signed


                               [pic]

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                                Date: 16 December 2015



