
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11734/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29 October 2013                              |On 01 November 2013        |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |



                                   Before



                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               MARIYA ALACHEVA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    In person



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Telford,  who  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal against her refusal to  issue  her  with  a  document
    certifying her permanent residence in the United Kingdom on  the  basis
    that she is an EEA national who has resided in the  United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 for a continuous period of  five  years,  pursuant  to  regulation
    15(1)(a) thereof.

 2. The claimant is a Bulgarian citizen, who  is  married  to  one  Vitaliy
    Petrovich Demyrov, also a Bulgarian citizen.  They have  with  them  in
    the United Kingdom their two sons, born in 2005 and 2010.  No anonymity
    direction was made or sought before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal determination refers to a bundle  of  documents
    from the Secretary of State and also to a brown paper envelope  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal file, which included  "UK  bank  statements  dating
    back to July 2007, NHS GP registration in  Maidenhead  dating  back  to
    2008, and Child Benefit documents from the UK state dating back to 2008
    and 2009".  In contrast, the letter of refusal stated  that  there  was
    'barely one year's documentation'.

 4. The reasoning in the First-tier  Tribunal  determination  is  extremely
    brief and is circular.  It is  contained  at  paragraphs  9-11  of  the
    determination and reads as follows:

         "9.  The [claimant] has shown that the decision was  in  breach  of
         EEA Regulations 2006.  The appeal succeeds.  I  do  not  go  on  to
         consider Article 8 ECHR.

         10.  I remind myself that it is for  the  [claimant]  to  establish
         this case on the balance of probabilities.  I consider all  matters
         of evidence as distinct but consider them in the round.

         11.  As for the EEA Regulations 2006, it is plain there is now  new
         evidence the [claimant] in the UK since July 2007.  It  is  a  pity
         that she did not alert the UK authorities of  this  evidence  which
         would inevitably have led to there being no need for this appeal. "

 5. There is no other reasoning in the determination, and in particular, no
    evaluation of the documents which appear  to  have  been  post-decision
    evidence.  The judge found that the Secretary of State's  decision  was
    'not in accordance with law' and allowed the appeal.

 6. He noted that no order for anonymity was sought,  and  made  none.   He
    made no order for costs as 'the case was not brought properly' and  the
    claimant 'could have dealt with this by sending  in  her  documents  in
    full from the outset as requested'.  He  then  erroneously  refused  to
    make a fee award on the basis that he had dismissed the appeal:  it  is
    plain however that his intention was to allow it.



Grounds of appeal

 7. The Secretary of State in her grounds  of  appeal  contended  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal determination lacked reasoning  and  permission  to
    appeal was given on that basis.

Upper Tribunal hearing

 8. At the beginning  of  the  hearing  today  I  made  available  to  Miss
    Isherwood the 'brown envelope' documents and retired, to allow  her  to
    consider them and to take instructions.  Miss Isherwood  accepted  that
    the documents, which were before the First-tier Tribunal, did establish
    that the claimant had been residing continuously in the United  Kingdom
    since at least 2008.

 9. In addition it  now  appears  that  just  a  week  after  refusing  the
    claimant's application, on 13th April  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State
    granted the  claimant's  husband  permanent  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

10. Miss Isherwood did not dispute that  the  proper  course  was  for  the
    claimant to be granted leave in line with her husband.  While  she  did
    not withdraw the Secretary of State's appeal, neither did she  seek  to
    make any submissions, relying upon the grounds of  appeal  as  drafted.
    The claimant, who appeared in person, was not called upon by me to make
    submissions.

Discussion

11. The First-tier Tribunal judge's reasoning  is  plainly  inadequate  and
    that lack of reasoning is an error of law.  However, having  regard  to
    the materials which were before him, I nevertheless decline to set  the
    determination aside because had he reasoned his determination properly,
    it would have been bound to succeed.

12. The Secretary of State's appeal is therefore dismissed.

Direction

13. I direct that the Secretary of State  provide  the  claimant  forthwith
    with a document certifying her right  to  permanent  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom, in line with that of her husband.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


