

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/11645 /2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons         |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 2 December 2016                            |On 8 December 2016           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                        JONATHAN OSAYUNDE OSAMUDIAMEN
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal was listed for hearing on  17  November  2016  but  on  10
      November 2016 the parties agreed by consent, pursuant to Rule 39(1) of
      the Upper Tribunal procedure rules 2008, to disposal on the  following
      grounds:


   i) That the Tribunal need not decide in this case any jurisdiction issues
      arising from the Tribunal's decision in Sala (EFMs: Right  of  Appeal:
      Albania) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC).


  ii) That the Tribunal upholds the Secretary  of  State's  challenge,  sets
      aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  as  not  recording
      the outstanding need for extensive examination  under  reg  17(4)  and
      (5); and


 iii) That a determination be substituted allowing the appeal to the limited
      extent that extensive examination is to be undertaken by the Secretary
      of State on the unchallenged basis that  a  durable  relationship  has
      been established under reg. 8(5).


   2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria who  applied  for  a  residence
      card as the extended family member of an EEA national. His appeal  was
      allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Meyler under the Regulations. The
      respondent obtained permission to appeal on  12  August  2016  on  the
      basis that the matter  should  arguably  have  been  remitted  to  the
      respondent for the exercise of  her  discretion  rather  than  allowed
      outright.


   3. Although the appeal has been brought by  the  Secretary  of  State,  I
      continue to refer to the parties as they were  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


   4. Given the terms of the consent order agreed  by  the  parties,  I  set
      aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal for the reasons set
      out in paragraph 1(ii) above.


   5. Decision


   6. I re-make the decision and allow the appeal to the limited extent that
      it is remitted to the Secretary of State for  further  examination  in
      terms of paragraph 1(iii) above.



    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 2 December 2016




