
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/11468/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 September  2015                          |On 4 September 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     BO
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against a determination  promulgated  on  3  July  2014  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Birk which allowed the Article 8 ECHR appeal of BO.

 2. For the purposes of this determination, I refer to BO as appellant  and
    to the Secretary of State as the respondent, reflecting their positions
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the children concerned, one of  whom  has  a
    disability.

 4. The appeal was brought on the basis of Article 8 ECHR. BO, her  husband
    and children are citizens of Nigeria. BO and her husband have  been  in
    the UK unlawfully for some time. As of the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  they had two children who were both born in the  UK  but
    have never had leave. The older child, X, was born on 11 June 2005  and
    the younger child, Y, on 25 September 2008. Y has been  diagnosed  with
    autism.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal judge allowed the  appeal  in  a  second  stage
    Article 8 assessment.  That  conclusion  was  reached  after  seriously
    adverse findings were made at [27]  to  [31]  that  the  appellant  was
    "openly opportunistic in her attempt to try and remain in the UK",  had
    come in order to benefit from the better medical facilities  here  when
    she gave birth, that she "openly  gave  oral  evidence  that  on  legal
    advice she deliberately waited  to  apply  for  regularisation  of  her
    illegal immigration status when her visa had expired until  her  oldest
    child was aged 7." Both she and her husband had worked illegally in the
    UK for significant periods of time. The  appellant  was  found  not  be
    truthful as to having little contact with her father in Nigeria and  it
    was not accepted that she had lost all ties with Nigeria.  The  husband
    was found able to work if he went back to Nigeria and the family not to
    be at physical risk there. The appellant and her husband could  "settle
    and integrate there  without  difficulties."  Where  the  family  could
    return together family life could continue in Nigeria.

 6. At [35], having considered the evidence relating to the  autism  of  Y,
    the judge states:

         " I do not find that his condition reaches a threshold of Article 3
         and do not find that to be a breach, however, I do find that it  is
         of considerable and significant weight under article 8  in  respect
         of his family in private life."

 7. The judge goes on to state at [39] that:

         "In assessing proportionality, I take into account the  finding  is
         that I have made in paragraphs 24 to 35 above and  having  balanced
         all of those various  factors,  and  the  decision  to  refuse  the
         Appellant's application is not a proportionate one and there  is  a
         breach of Article 8."


 8. The respondent submits that the best interests  of  the  children  were
    weighed here as a trump card, insufficient weight being  given  to  the
    public interest.

 9. At [33] of ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4, Baroness  Hale  provided
    guidance on to how to approach the best interests  of  children  in  an
    Article 8 case:

           "In making the proportionality assessment under Article  8,  the
           best interests of the child must  be  a  primary  consideration.
           This means that they must be  considered  first.  They  can,  of
           course,  be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of   other
           considerations."

10. The Court of Appeal elaborate on this in EV (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874 at [36] and [37]:

       "36. In a sense the tribunal  is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
   answer falls to be given to
       the question: is it in the best interests of the child to remain?
       The longer the child has
       been here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of his
       education, the looser his ties
       with the country in question, and the more deleterious the
       consequences of his return,
       the greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales. If it
       is overwhelmingly in
       the child's best interests that he should not return, the need to
       maintain immigration
       control may well not tip the balance. By contrast if it is in the
       child's best interests to
       remain, but only on balance (with some factors pointing the other
       way), the result may
       be the opposite.


       37. In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken into
       account the strong weight
       to be given to the need to maintain immigration control in pursuit
       of the economic
       well-being of the country and the fact that, ex hypothesi, the
       applicants have no
       entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the parents may
       also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers, or have acted
       deceitfully.


    and at [58] to [60]:


       "58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests
       of the children must be made on the basis that the facts are as they
       are in the real world. If one parent has no
       right to remain, but the other parent does, that is the background
       against which the
       assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,
       then that is the
       background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
       ultimate question
       will be: is it reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent
       with no right to remain
       to the country of origin?


       59. On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to expect the children
       to follow their mother
       to Tanzania, not least because the family would be separated and the
       children would
       be deprived of the right to grow up in the country of which they
       were citizens.


       60. That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case none
       of the family is a
       British citizen. None has the right to remain in this country. If
       the mother is removed,
       the father has no independent right to remain. If the parents are
       removed, then it is
       entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As the
       immigration judge
       found it is obviously in their best interests to remain with their
       parents. Although it is,
       of course a question of fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the
       desirability of being
       educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh the benefit to the
       children of
       remaining with their parents. Just as we cannot provide medical
       treatment for the
       world, so we cannot educate the world."

11. In my view the First-tier Tribunal  here  did  not  approach  the  best
    interests of the children in line with EV (Philippines)  and  that  was
    material given the adverse findings about the parents and their ability
    to relocate to Nigeria without real difficulty.

12. I also referred to the guidance provided by R  (Nagre)  v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWHC 720 (Admin), recently confirmed in the Court of Appeal at [29]  of
    SS (Congo) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387, thus:


             "It is clear, therefore, that it  cannot  be  maintained  as  a
             general proposition that LTR or  LTE  outside  the  Immigration
             Rules should only be granted in exceptional cases. However,  in
             certain specific contexts, a proper application  of  Article  8
             may itself make it clear that the legal test for grant  of  LTR
             or  LTE  outside  the  Rules  should  indeed  be  a   test   of
             exceptionality. This has now been identified to be the case, on
             the basis of the constant jurisprudence of the ECtHR itself, in
             relation to applications for LTR outside the Rules on the basis
             of family life (where no children are involved) established  in
             the United Kingdom at a time when the presence of one or  other
             of the partners was known to be precarious: see  Nagre,  paras.
             [38]-[43], approved by this court  in  MF  (Nigeria)  at  [41]-
             [42]."

13. The immigration status of the entire family has  been  unlawful.  Their
    status cannot be described as anything other  than  precarious  and  in
    those circumstances they must  show  "exceptional"  circumstances.  The
    determination also does not show that the judge applied that  principle
    here in the proportionality assessment.

14. There is the additional matter of the need to weigh the failure to meet
    the  Immigration  Rules  as  a  starting  and  central  point  in   the
    proportionality assessment; see Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558.
    The judge here does not weigh the failure to meet the Immigration Rules
    at all proportionality assessment.

15. An additional matter which I considered to  be  "Robinson"  obvious  is
    that the First-tier Tribunal judge also failed to  apply  the  learning
    from MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279 on  Article  8  "medical"
    cases.  MM confirms that the threshold in such cases is as high  as  it
    is in Article 3 cases and a case does not succeed under Article 8 where
    it cannot under Article 3, the comment  at  [35]  suggesting  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not properly recognise this principle.

16. Further, the Court  of  Appeal  in  MM  identified  how  an  Article  8
    "medical" case could succeed if it did not under Article 3:
           "23. The only cases I can foresee where the absence of  adequate
           medical treatment in the country to which  a  person  is  to  be
           deported will be relevant to  Article  8,  is  where  it  is  an
           additional factor to be  weighed  in  the  balance,  with  other
           factors which by themselves engage Article 8. Suppose,  in  this
           case, the appellant had established firm  family  ties  in  this
           country, then the availability of continuing  medical  treatment
           here, coupled  with  his  dependence  on  the  family  here  for
           support, together establish 'private life' under Article 8. That
           conclusion  would  not  involve  a  comparison  between  medical
           facilities here and those in Zimbabwe. Such a finding would  not
           offend the principle expressed above that the United Kingdom  is
           under no Convention obligation to provide medical treatment here
           when it is not available in the country to which  the  appellant
           is to be deported."

17. There First-tier Tribunal  has not identified the  "additional  factor"
    that allowed the "medical" aspect of this  case  to  weigh  so  heavily
    given the  very  high  threshold  still  required  in  such  cases  and
    requirement for "other factors which by themselves engage Article 8."

18. For all of these reasons I found an error of law in the proportionality
    assessment conducted by the First-tier Tribunal such that it had to  be
    set aside to be re-made.

19. At the hearing I was informed that the appellant and her  husband  have
    had a third child and the oldest child, X, has applied for  citizenship
    as he was born in the UK and has been here continuously for  10  years.
    Also, before me the appellant  was  not  legally  represented.  It  was
    conceded for the respondent that the re-making of the case  would  have
    to be made on a significantly different basis to that considered in the
    decision of Judge Birk and that it was appropriate to remit the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal  in line with paragraph 7.2 (b) of Part 3 of
    the Senior President's Practice Statement dated 25 September 2012.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside.

17. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal   for  the  second  stage
    Article 8 assessment to be re-made.

Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 4 September 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
