
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11161/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th June 2015                    |On 19th June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                         ms ELIZABETH MADGETA YOUNG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, Counsel, Garden Court Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Jamaica whose appeal  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fox  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  19th
    September 2014.  Grounds of application were lodged  primarily  on  the
    basis that the judge  had  ignored  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    grandchild who was extremely vulnerable and the evidence  was  that  he
    needed his grandmother.

 2. While permission  to  appeal  was  initially  refused,  permission  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain.  The  Secretary  of  State
    lodged a Rule 24 notice setting out the  Appellant's  poor  immigration
    history and the adverse credibility findings and  submitting  that  the
    judge could not reasonably have reached a different conclusion.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 4. For the Appellant Mr Lewis relied  on  his  grounds.   The  judge  said
    (paragraph 12) that while it was unnecessary to  call  the  Appellant's
    grandson Murdoq to give evidence  in  view  of  his  vulnerability  his
    evidence was given "full weight".  This contracted  very  sharply  with
    the finding at paragraph 50 that he was not placing "any weight" on the
    evidence of the grandchild.  It was quite clear that the grandchild was
    an extraordinarily vulnerable person and he had attended court to  give
    evidence to support the Appellant  and  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and the grandchild was the main thrust of the appeal.   There
    were other errors by the judge as he clearly had  evidence  before  him
    that Diane Canaku was the  Deputy  Head  teacher  in  the  grandchild's
    school and had, contrary to what  the  judge  had  said,  provided  her
    credentials. Notwithstanding the Appellant's immigration  history,  the
    errors were material requiring the decision to be set aside and a fresh
    hearing fixed before the First -Tier Tribunal.

 5. For the Secretary of State  Mr  Tufan  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    engaged in a freewheeling Article 8 assessment but should have borne in
    mind that the Appellant did not qualify under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    However the correct decision had been reached. Reliance was  placed  on
    the terms of the Rule 24 notice.  I was asked to find that there was no
    material error in law.

 6. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 7. The judge made a number of negative credibility  findings  against  the
    Appellant including that she was not a credible witness (paragraph 54).
     In fact the judge was particularly unimpressed with all the  witnesses
    - see the finding at paragraph 56.  The grounds of application take  no
    issue with those findings but focus on  the  extreme  vulnerability  of
    Murdoq and the effect on him caused by the removal  of  the  Appellant.
    What the judge was therefore bound to do was to focus on the nature  of
    the relationship between the parties, its importance to  the  wellbeing
    of Murdoq  taking  the  best  interests  of  the  child  as  a  primary
    consideration and in the light of that decide whether  the  removal  of
    the Appellant was proportionate.

 8. Unfortunately the judge seems to have done  the  complete  opposite  to
    that.  Having said in paragraph 12  that  he  was  going  to  give  the
    evidence of Murdoq "full weight" he then concluded that he was  "unable
    to place any weight"  on  his  evidence.   There  was  nothing  in  the
    decision to indicate that he had taken into account Murdoq's  statement
    which is contained in the bundle and mentioned in paragraph 19  of  the
    grounds, namely that he would be very upset if his nanny had to go back
    to Jamaica.  Rather what appears to have happened  is  that  the  judge
    discounted this evidence and focused on other matters before  going  on
    to dismiss the appeal.

 9. Not to consider the relationship between the Appellant  and  Murdoq  in
    any meaningful way was a material error in law particulary when it  was
    the principal reason why the Appellant was arguing that she should  not
    be sent back to Jamaica.  It cannot be said that  another  judge  would
    have necessarily dismissed the appeal  even  if  they  had  taken  into
    account the relationship between the Appellant and Murdoq.  Given  that
    finding there is no alternative but that this  case  will  have  to  be
    heard again and afresh by the First-tier Tribunal. I was not  addressed
    by either party on whether, if that was  the  outcome  certain  factual
    findings should remain and for the sake of clarity  I  direct  that  no
    factual findings remain intact. The determination of the First  -  tier
    tribunal is therefore set aside in its entirety.  No  findings  are  to
    stand. Under section 12 (2) (b)  (i)  of  the  2007  Act  and  Practice
    Statement  7.2 the nature and extent  of   the  judicial  fact  finding
    necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is  appropriate
    to remit the case to the First- tier Tribunal.

10. In the event that I did find an error in law Mr Lewis asked me  to  see
    if  the  appeal  could  be  heard  at  Taylor  House,  London  for  the
    convenience of the parties. I hope that suitable  arrangements  can  be
    made.

Notice of Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

12. I set aside the decision.

13. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
