
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11465/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th September 2016                       |On 23rd September 2016        |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                         chetnaben arvindbhai patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah of Counsel instructed by Imperium Group
     Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India whose date of birth is recorded  as
    3rd October 1983.  She appealed the decision of the Secretary of  State
    dated 18th March 2015 refusing to grant her  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on human rights grounds.  The appeal was heard by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge James, sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  17th  February
    2016.  Judge James dismissed the appeal.

 2. Not content with the decision of Judge  James,  by  Notice  dated  15th
    March 2016 the Appellant made application for permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal contending that the judge had erred in  reading  the
    summary of the skeleton argument provided on behalf of the Appellant as
    including a concession that the Appellant did not meet the  Immigration
    Rules.  The grounds point particularly to paragraph 11 of the  decision
    which reads:

         "The skeleton argument submitted for the appeal concedes on page  4
         of the Appellant's bundle that she does not meet  the  criteria  of
         the rules for private life or family  life  under  the  Immigration
         Rules, and moreover she does not  qualify  for  leave  outside  the
         rules under article 8 ECHR.  However no withdrawal of  this  appeal
         has been made by the Appellant."

 3. Quite why the judge thought there was  a  concession  is  difficult  to
    understand because it is perfectly clear  that  although  there  was  a
    skeleton argument at page 4, all that  appears  is  a  summary  of  the
    Reasons for Refusal in which the Secretary of State was to say that the
    Appellant did not  qualify  for  leave  under  the  Immigration  Rules,
    private and family life and did not qualify for leave outside the Rules
    but further down, under the heading, "Legal arguments" it is  perfectly
    clear that there was no such concession at all.

 4. Was there an error of law?  I have no difficulty whatsoever in  finding
    that there was an error of law  and  indeed  neither  party  sought  to
    persuade me otherwise.  The question for me is  whether  the  error  is
    material; this is not a case in which the judge then simply disposed of
    the matter.  This decision then runs to 41 paragraphs and even allowing
    for the last four (which are simply matters under the  heading  "Notice
    of Decision") there are findings of fact which were clearly open to the
    judge on the evidence; indeed it is clear that she actually did address
    statutory  matters  such  as  the  exception  at  Section  117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the best interests  of
    the child.

 5. At paragraph 12 of the Decision, Judge James looked to submissions made
    on behalf  of  the  Appellant.   She  noted  the  antenatal  tests  but
    explained why she found the evidence on the point  lacking.  She  noted
    that some of the evidence was indecipherable.

 6. This was a case in which the Appellant had  first  asked  for  an  oral
    hearing.  It was not a case in which the judge  merely  went  ahead  to
    deal with the matter without giving the Appellant the opportunity to be
    heard. A formal request was made to the Tribunal for the matter  to  be
    dealt with on the papers and so the judge did the best she could on the
    available evidence.

 7. There was an index  in  the  bundle  that  said  there  was  a  witness
    statement to follow but there was  no  witness  statement.   The  judge
    explained sufficiently in my judgment why the Appellant and  her  child
    failed to meet the  criteria  under  the  Immigration  Rules  regarding
    private and family life.

 8. The judge  made  reference  to  appropriate  guidance  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal in coming to her decision and  went  on,  quite  properly,  to
    consider that this appeal, having regard to the  wider  application  of
    Article 8 directing herself to the guidance in the case of  Razgar  now
    trite law in this jurisdiction.

 9. This was I find but for the strange reference to a concession, that was
    not made, a decision in which the judge clearly considered the evidence
    that was before her quite properly and made findings that were open  to
    her.  It does not seem to me that her apparent belief that a concession
    was made actually affected the decision that she made,  that  she  made
    that decision based on the evidence.  I was concerned that it might  be
    argued that the fact of the judge believing a concession had been  made
    infected the rest of the decision but it  is  perfectly  clear  to  me,
    reading the decision as a whole, that that is not the case.

10. I was very grateful to Mr Miah for the submissions that he made and the
    realistic manner in  which  he  made  them  but  notwithstanding  those
    submissions I find that the error of law is not material and  if  I  am
    wrong about that, were I to  remake  the  case  on  the  basis  of  the
    findings made by the judge, I would have come to exactly the same view.
     In the circumstances the appeal is dismissed and the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
