
                                    [pic]
St
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11593/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 23rd December 2016               |                                  |
|                                    |on 4th January 2017               |
|                                    |                                  |
|                                    |                                  |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY





                                   Between


                              MR. DENIS TANAEV

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                          Appellant

                                     And


               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent




Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J. Butterworth, Counsel instructed by Zahra and Co,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:  Mr Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of the Ukraine, born in 1976. He is from
      the Crimea, where his parents and brother live. He entered the United
      Kingdom in 1997 and unsuccessfully claimed asylum. In 2011 he was
      encountered using a passport which did not belong to him in order to
      obtain employment. He was subsequently sentenced to 6 months
      imprisonment for this. His removal was stayed following an application
      for leave to remain. The basis of the application initially was the
      length of residence here and then also because of his relationship
      with a Ms Rosie Chambers.


   2. His application was refused in March 2015. It was considered under
      paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration rules. As he had not been here
      the necessary 20 years his meeting the rule turned on whether there
      would be very significant obstacles to his reintegration into his home
      country. The respondent concluded he could return.

   3. It was accepted that he was in a genuine and subsisting relationship
      with Ms Chambers. He did not meet the suitability requirements in
      appendix FM on the basis it was conducive to the public good to
      exclude him from the United Kingdom because of conduct, as evidenced
      by his conviction. His partner came to the United Kingdom as a student
      in 2001 and was granted indefinite leave to remain on 28 April 2011.
      She became a nationalised British citizen on 14 August 2012. The issue
      arising was section EX 1, namely, whether there would be
      insurmountable obstacles to family life between the couple continuing
      outside the United Kingdom. The respondent concluded not.

   4. No exceptional circumstances were identified which would justify the
      grant of leave outside the rules.

The First tier Tribunal

   5. The appellant's appeal was heard by Judge Hanbury of the First Tier
      Tribunal. An expert report had been obtained on his behalf as to the
      situation in the Ukraine and in particular in Crimea. The judge
      accepted that the appellant might face significant difficulties in
      obtaining travel documentation. The judge concluded that whilst he
      should be able to get into the Ukraine he may not be able to return to
      his home area in the Crimea and he could face problems because of his
      Tartar surname. The judge found that his partner would face even more
      significant difficulties. She had never been to the Ukraine and Russia
      could be hostile to her British nationality. Furthermore, her Muslim
      faith would be unlikely to assist in her integration. The judge found
      matters to be evenly balanced but nevertheless dismissed the appeal.


The Upper Tribunal.

   6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis
      the judge arguably failed to give sufficient weight to the expert
      report in relation to obstacles faced by the couple in maintaining
      family life. In particular, the report indicated that his partner
      might only obtain temporary admission. The judge had also referred to
      his partner `reintegrating' and it was arguable that the judge
      misunderstood her status in that she was not from the Ukraine. The
      respondent responded by way of a rule 24 statement opposing the appeal
      and submitting that the appellant could return to a different part of
      the Ukraine with his partner.


   7. At hearing the focus was upon EX 1. Mr Butterworth referred me to the
      respondents IDI on applying EX1.He emphasised the fact that the
      exception focused not only upon an applicant but also upon their
      partner's situation. I was directed to the specific reference in the
      guidance to their ability to enter and remain lawfully in the proposed
      country and the existence of any cultural barriers. I was referred to
      paragraph 22 of the decision whereby the judge accepted the expert
      opinion that the appellant would face difficulties obtaining the
      necessary passport and that his partner was likely to find cultural
      assimilation in Ukraine extremely challenging. I was then referred to
      page 14 of the expert report where reference was made to the
      deteriorating relations between Russia and Kazakhstan and the United
      Kingdom and the conclusion that an ethnic Kazakhstan and who was a
      British citizen would be unlikely to be granted more than a temporary
      visit visa for the Crimea or elsewhere in the Ukraine.

   8. Mr Butterworth accepted that there was a high threshold to meet EX.1.
      I was then referred to paragraphs 23 and 24 of the decision. The judge
      referred to the couple having no children. There is mention of the
      appellant having family members in the Ukraine. There was also mention
      of his ties to that country. Reference was made to his private life in
      the United Kingdom which was established in the knowledge his right to
      be here was either illegal or precarious. At paragraph 24 the judge
      concluded the difficulties facing the appellant to obtain a passport
      were unlikely to be insurmountable and that he could continue his
      family life with partner in some part of the Ukraine. Consequently the
      judge concluded that the obstacles whilst challenging were not
      insurmountable.

   9. Mr Butterworth argued that these two paragraphs indicated the judge
      was conflating the balancing exercise engaged in an article 8
      evaluation with what was required for an EX 1 assessment. Paragraphs
      23 and 24 were focused upon the appellant and inadequate consideration
      was given to his partner's situation. There was reference to them
      having no children. This was not relevant to the EX1 issue of ongoing
      enjoyment of the relationship between the appellant and his partner in
      another country. He submitted that the reference to the appellant's
      family members did not assist in the evaluation of his partner's
      situation. The same applied to the focus upon the appellant's ties
      with Ukraine but not his partners. There is reference to his
      employment with no consideration given to his partner's. There was no
      reference to the expert conclusion that his partner could only obtain
      entry for a limited time.


  10.  Mr Walker conceded that the paragraphs referred to suggested that
      Judge Hanbury had conflated the issues arising in EX1 with the test
      applicable in an article 8 assessment. The judge had acknowledged the
      difficulties his partner would face but the focus was upon the
      appellant's situation.

  11. Both parties were in agreement that the reference to his partner's
      reintegration to the Ukraine when read in context was more likely to
      have been a slip rather than the judge incorrectly believing she had
      ties with that country.

Consideration

  12. I am grateful to both representatives for the way in which the appeal
      has been presented and the focus on the central issue.


  13.  I do find merit in the arguments advanced by Mr Butterworth in
      relation to EX1. The provision is directed towards the enjoyment of
      family life and whether that can continue outside the United Kingdom.
      The reference to insurmountable obstacles is indicative of the high
      threshold involved. This is referred to in the guidance at page 26 as
      being different and requiring a more stringent assessment than whether
      it would be reasonable to expect a partner to join an applicant
      overseas. Examples are given of a British partner with family here;
      who works here; who speaks only English; not wishing to uproot
      themselves to travel to a country they are unfamiliar with. The
      guidance refers to such a situation, where there may be a significant
      degree of hardship or inconvenience, but suggested this would not
      amount to insurmountable obstacles.

  14. The assessment requires focus upon the proposed country of return. A
      material change in the quality of life such as accommodation or
      employment would not usually amount to an insurmountable obstacle. In
      the context of this threshold the guidance does identified specific
      factors of relevance. One of these is the ability to stay in another
      country. There is also reference to cultural barriers but again in the
      context of a high threshold. The example given is of a same-sex couple
      with the prospect of substantial social discrimination.

  15. The expert report is highly relevant. The judge accepted the content
      of the report and Mr Walker has not sought to raise any issues in
      relation to it. The report highlights what is described as the Crimean
      crisis and its effect upon citizenship. The appellant as a tartar from
      Crimea would face difficulties in obtaining documentation. However,
      the greatest difficulty relates to his partner and there is reference
      at page 14 to her only being able to obtain a temporary visa. The
      respondent's guidance refers to the ability to stay in another
      country: it is difficult to see how family life could continue and
      grow when one partner has only a temporary status in the country.



   Error of law

  16. Considering the decision in its entirety it is my conclusion that
      Judge Hanbury materially erred in law in the assessment of EX1. This
      is because the judge's focus was upon the situation of the appellant
      and that inadequate consideration was not given to his partner. This
      is particularly so in light of the expert report which was accepted
      and the evidence in relation to her gaining only a limited right to
      reside and difficulties she would encounter with integration. The
      reasoning is largely contained at paragraph 23 and refers to factors
      more relevant to a proportionality assessment under article 8 at the
      expense of focusing upon the situation of the appellant and his
      partner. As the application of EX1 is central to the appeal the
      decision cannot stand.


   Remaking the decision

  17. Both parties were in agreement that if I found a material error of law
      there was sufficient evidence in the papers for me to remake the
      decision. Bearing in mind the undisputed expert evidence and the
      comments about the appellant's partner I find that the appellant
      benefits from EX1. This is primarily because the accepted family life
      could not continue outside the United Kingdom bearing in mind the
      situation of the appellant's partner. Consequently, I would remake the
      decision allowing the appeal on this basis.

  18. Because I have allowed the appeal under the rules it is not necessary
      to consider whether a freestanding article 8 assessment was
      appropriate. This was not argued but for completeness I find paragraph
      26 of the decision is unclear: it suggests Judge Hanbury did not feel
      the circumstances were such that a freestanding article 8 assessment
      was justified. Alternatively, it could be read as indicating that the
      judge concluded the decision was proportionate and no breach occurred.

  19.  There are features which would justify a freestanding assessment.
      Family life having been accepted there are issues arising from the
      fact the appellant has now been here 19 years; the situation in the
      Ukraine and the circumstances of his partner. In terms of
      proportionality both have a command of English and the appellant's
      partner is a high earner,

Decision.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury contains a material error
of law and is set aside. The decision is remade allowing the appeal under
the immigration rules.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

Fee Order

The appellant's representative has not sought a fee order. In any event I
do not feel such an order would be appropriate given that the appeal has
succeeded on the basis of additional information provided, principally the
expert report and the arguments advanced.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

