
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/11558/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 6 February 2015                   |On 10 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                           MUHAMMAD RIZWAN BUKHARI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Iqbal counsel instructed by Denning Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kaler promulgated on 29 July 2014  which  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 1 January 1978 and is a national of Pakistan.
    He was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom  as  a  student  on  3
    February 2007 and that leave had been extended until 31 July  2013.  He
    made an application for variation of leave on 23 January  2014  on  the
    basis of his relationship with Majida Shaheen.

 4. On 27 February 2014 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons: the Appellant
    did not meet the relationship requirements of the rules  as  there  was
    insufficient evidence that they had lived together for 2 years prior to
    the date  of  application;  EX.1  was  considered  but  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant and his  wife  relocating  to
    Pakistan; they Appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276
    ADE and there were no reasons for a grant of leave outside the Rules.

The Judge's Decision

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kaler ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
    decision. The Judge found in essence:

      a) There was insufficient evidence that the Appellant and his  partner
         had lived together for 2 years prior to the date of the application
         and therefore the Appellant could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
         Appendix FM.

      b) The Judge carried out an assessment under Article 8 and found  that
         the decision to remove the Appellant was proportionate.

 6.  Grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  arguing  that  the  proportionality
    assessment was flawed  failing to give proper weight to  the  sponsor's
    ill heath, the fact that the parties belonged  to  different  sects  of
    Islam and had failed to refer to the 5 stage test  set  out  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 .

 7. On 17 September 2014 permission was refused and the appeal was  renewed
    before the Upper Tribunal. On 12 December  2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Perkins gave permission to appeal stating:

    "I have given permission in this case because it is arguable  that  the
    finding that the  appellant,  a  British  citizen,  can  reasonably  be
    expected to live in Pakistan is made without consideration of her claim
    to be a Shia Muslim in a  Sunni  dominated  country.  It  is  at  least
    arguable that this might have made a difference."

 8. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Iqbal  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) He submitted  that  the  issue  of  the  difficulty  faced  by  the
         Appellant's partner as a Shia Muslim in a Sunni country was  raised
         in the Appellant's witness statement when he  referred  to  clashes
         being an 'everyday occurrence'.

      b) He accepted that this issue did  not  feature  in  the  submissions
         before the Judge as recorded in the decision.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Wilding submitted that :

      c) He accepted that the point may be raised in the  witness  statement
         but  may  not  necessarily  be  relevant  to  the   proportionality
         assessment.

      d) Judge Kaler assessed the case that was put to her and the arguments
         placed before the Judge did not pursue  the  issue  raised  in  the
         grounds of appeal.

Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

11. The Appellant applied for leave to remain as the partner  of  a  United
    Kingdom citizen of Pakistani origin. The application was refused  under
    the Immigration Rules on the basis that the Appellant and  his  partner
    did not meet the relationship requirements as they had not  co  habited
    for 2 years prior to the date of the  application  and  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to them relocating to Pakistan  and  therefore
    EX.1 did not apply. The evidence of the sponsor's  health  issues  were
    not found sufficient reason to warrant a grant  of  leave  outside  the
    rules.

12. The grounds of appeal that were before the First-tier tribunal at  2(b)
    (page 12 of the bundle) stated that there were cultural  and  religious
    barriers to the parties relocating to  Pakistan  in  that  his  partner
    would be 'disadvantaged' due to her belief in a 'different sect and her
    adoptability to the other sects prevalent in Pakistan making  her  less
    confident in practice.' The majority of the  argument  in  the  grounds
    related to the sponsors  health  issues  and  their  relevance  to  the
    Article 8 assessment.

13. I have looked at the bundle of documents placed before  the  Judge  and
    there was no additional evidence in the  bundle  to  suggest  that  the
    religious difficulties that the sponsor would face if she relocated  to
    Pakistan went beyond that which was argued in the grounds. There was  a
    reference in the witness statement of the  Appellant  that  there  were
    'clashes' but no evidence to substantiate this part  of  the  claim  or
    indeed directly relate them to her circumstances. The Judge records  no
    argument placed before her on this issue and I have checked  her  notes
    of evidence and the decision accurately reflects the  arguments  placed
    before her:  there  was  no  reference  my  Mr  Ali  to  the  religious
    differences being relevant to the assessment of proportionality.

14. The Appellant in his renewed grounds of appeal relied on extracts  from
    the COIS in relation to sectarian violence  but this evidence  was  not
    of course before Judge Kaler I am satisfied that on the  basis  of  the
    evidence of the arguments  and  evidence  placed  before  her  she  was
    entitled to conclude that the decision to remove was proportionate  and
    what is being advanced before me is an attempt to argue the case  on  a
    different basis to that advanced before the Judge .

15. Even if it was an error of law not to specifically refer  to  an  issue
    raised solely in very general terms in the grounds of appeal this could
    not have been material to the outcome again because there was  no  more
    evidence adduced or indeed argument placed before the Judge to  advance
    that argument raised so briefly in the grounds. The additional evidence
    relied on in the renewed grounds of  appeal  moreover  are  of  such  a
    general nature that even if they had been before the Judge  they  would
    not on any reasonable assessment tip  the  proportionality  balance  in
    favour of the Appellant given the other factors she had properly  taken
    into account  against the background of non compliance with  the  Rules
    including the fact that Article 8 was a qualified right, the  Appellant
    was well educated and resourceful, had had  a  good  job  in  Pakistan,
    there was no evidence  in  relation  to  the  sponsors  claimed  health
    conditions non of which were serious in  any  event,   the  Appellant's
    family would help them reintegrate, and the Appellant  could  re  apply
    for entry clearance from Pakistan in due course if  the  sponsor  chose
    not to accompany him.

16. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.



CONCLUSION

17. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.



DECISION

18. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 9.2.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
