

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11468/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 4 September 2013                           |on 12 September 2013         |



                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT



                                   Between

                        JOY KELEIBISA QUEEN IGBELABO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Babarinde of Hatten Wyatt Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge McGavin dated 9 July 2013  which  dismissed  the  appellant's
        appeal against the refusal of leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)
        Student.



Background


     2. The appellant, who was born on 26  March  1981,  is  a  citizen  of
        Nigeria. She came to the UK as a student on 11 June  2006  and  was
        granted leave to remain in that capacity  until  30  January  2013.
        She applied for further leave to remain in time on 21 January 2013.




     3. There is no dispute between the parties that at the time  that  the
        application was made, the appellant's college was suspended.

     4. In addition, there is no dispute that the  college  was  unable  to
        issue the  appellant  with  a  Certificate  of  Acknowledgement  of
        Studies (CAS) as required by the  Immigration  Rules  when  seeking
        further leave to remain as a student.

     5. The application of 21 January 2013 was  therefore  made  without  a
        CAS. It was refused on 25 March 2013 solely because  there  was  no
        CAS.

     6. The appellant appealed that refusal. She maintained that the letter
        from her college that she had submitted with her application should
        have led the respondent to put her application on  hold  until  the
        suspension of the college had been resolved, until the college  had
        issued her with a CAS and then should have been allowed.

     7. I was shown a copy of the letter from the college which  was  dated
        17 January 2013. The original was on the respondent's  file  and  I
        was satisfied that it was before the respondent at  the  time  that
        the decision of 25  March  2013  was  made  although  there  is  no
        reference to it in the refusal letter.

     8. The letter states that the college was unable to offer a  new  CAS.
        It went on to state:

                  "On further consultation with the  UKBA  we  were  advised
                  that students should submit their CAS application  with  a
                  cover letter explaining the College's situation  and  that
                  these applications would be placed  "on  hold"  until  the
                  situation has been resolved."


     9. It is this part of the letter and what should have been done in the
        light of it that is really at the heart of this appeal.


   Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    10. The appellant  argued  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
        respondent should not have refused her application without  waiting
        for the outcome of the suspension of  the  college,  following  the
        "agreement" referred to in the college's letter  dated  17  January
        2013.


    11. Judge McGavin at [13] did not accept that there could have been any
        formal agreement  between  the  college  and  UKBA.  There  was  no
        evidence  of  such  an  agreement.  He  did  not  accept  that  the
        respondent would make such an agreement,  apparently  without  time
        limit, where the college was suspended and had no CAS documents  to
        issue to students. At [14] and [15], Judge McGavin  explained  why,
        in his view, common law fairness did not arise. The  appellant  had
        known that the college was suspended. She had known  that  she  did
        not have a CAS. She had proceeded to make the  application  anyway,
        knowing that it did not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
        Rules.

    12. There is no dispute that Judge McGavin allowed the appeal correctly
        as regards the Section 47 removal order and  no  further  issue  on
        that matter arose.

   Grounds of Appeal


    13. The grounds of appeal argue at [8]  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        erred in ignoring  the  letter  dated  17  January  2013  from  the
        college. I found paragraphs [3] and [4]  of  the  grounds  hard  to
        follow. There appeared to be an argument  that  the  judge  further
        erred in concluding that the agreement did not exist in  the  terms
        maintained by the appellant. The Tier 4 policy guidance referred to
        leave being  curtailed  or  limited  if  a  sponsor's  licence  was
        revoked. This had never happened to the appellant and this  was  an
        indication that she was  entitled  to  continue  her  studies  even
        though the college was suspended. Paragraphs  [5]  to  [7]  of  the
        grounds raised arguments of common law  fairness  following  Thakur
        (PBS decision - 'common law fairness') Bangladesh [2011]  UKUT  151
        (IAC) and Patel (revocation of sponsor licence  -  fairness)  India
        [2011] UKUT 211 (IAC).


   Discussion

    14. Firstly, I did not accept that the failure  of  the  respondent  to
        curtail the appellant's leave or limit her leave or even notify her
        of the suspension of her college were matters that showed that  the
        respondent had not acted in line with the Tier 4 policy guidance or
        had acted unfairly.


    15. The extracts from the Tier 4 policy  guidance  in  the  grounds  of
        appeal  are  not  at  all  accurate.  They  conflate  guidance   on
        suspension and guidance on revocation and  surrender.  This  matter
        concerns only suspension.

    16. The correct section of the policy  guidance  on  suspension  is  at
        paragraph 10. It states that

             "If you are already in the UK and  studying  with  the  Tier  4
           sponsor,
             we will not tell you if we suspend their licence. However, if
             the
             result of the suspension is that the Tier 4 sponsor loses their
             licence, we will tell you and your permission to stay may be
             limited."


        and goes on:


             "If you are extending your stay: You can still apply to extend
             your permission to stay if it runs out when the Tier 4
             sponsor's licence is suspended, as long as you
             already have a CAS, however, we will hold the application until
             the
             suspension is resolved."

    17. The policy guidance does not state  that  the  appellant  would  be
        informed about suspension. It does  not  state  that  she  was  not
        entitled to continue her studies  or  should  have  had  her  leave
        limited or curtailed. It indicates that in  her  circumstances  she
        needed a CAS if she wanted to apply for further  leave  to  remain.
        There is no dispute here that the appellant did not have a CAS.  It
        was only if she had been able to provide a CAS that the  respondent
        would "hold the application until the suspension is resolved".


    18. I found that the  respondent  had  not  acted  outwith  the  policy
        guidance, therefore.


    19. Secondly, the facts of this case are not at all the same as  Thakur
        and Patel. In those cases the appellant's were left in  a  position
        where they did not know of the revocation of the sponsor's  licence
        when the respondent should have informed them  and  given  them  an
        opportunity  to  remedy  their  situation.  In  this  appeal,   the
        appellant knew that the college had been suspended  and  knew  that
        she did not have a CAS.  The  letter  from  the  college  dated  17
        January 2013 told her this even if she did not know it before.  Her
        option then was to apply for a CAS at a different  college  not  to
        apply to continue her studies  at  the  suspended  college  without
        including a CAS with the application.


    20. Thirdly,  I  did  not  accept  that  Judge  McGavin  erred  in  his
        assessment of the evidence about the  purported  agreement  between
        the college and the respondent. He states at [3] that he took  into
        account when making his decision the appellant's bundle of evidence
        which included the letter from the  college.   He  was  correct  to
        state at [13] that there was no evidence of  an  "agreement".   The
        letter from the  college  refers  only  to  the  respondent  having
        advised the college to tell students to submit applications in  the
        way this appellant did.

    21. In addition, it appeared more than likely to me that his  statement
        of there being no evidence of an agreement was a reference to there
        being no correspondence between the college and the  respondent  of
        any kind that might support the claim that there was an "agreement"
        or even that the respondent's advice as set out in the  letter  had
        been given in those terms.

    22. Further,  as  pointed  out  by  Mr  Tufan,  the  reference  to  the
        respondent advising that students should make a  "CAS  application"
        does not make sense. The application was one for further  leave  to
        remain as a student under Tier 4 of the Points Based System, not  a
        "CAS application". The very problem that had to  be  addressed  was
        the inability of the college to issue a CAS and the absence of that
        document from the appellant's application. This made it  even  less
        likely, in my view, that the respondent would have given the advice
        in the terms set out in the college's letter dated 17 January 2013.



    23. For all of these reasons, I did not find that Judge  McGavin  erred
        in law when he refused the appeal.

Decision

    24. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  does not disclose  an
        error on a point of law and shall stand.



Signed:                                          Dated: 05 November 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt














