
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/11552/2014
                                                               IA/13036/2014
                                                               IA/13031/2014
                                                               IA/13028/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |                         Decision &      |
|                                   |Reasons Promulgated                      |
|On 23rd June 2015                  |                         On 7th July 2015|
|                                   |                                         |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                            H S (FIRST APPELLANT)
                          A S G (SECOND APPELLANT)
                           H S G (THIRD APPELLANT)
                           M K (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Turner of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandala


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants born on 31st December 1974, 11th June 2001, 8th November
    2002 and 1st April 1968 respectively are all citizens  of  India.   The
    First and Fourth Appellants are husband and wife  and  the  Second  and
    Third  Appellants  are  their  two  sons.   The  Appellants  had   made
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom under  Article  8
    of  the  ECHR.   The  Respondent  had  refused  that   application   on
    14th February 2014.  The Appellants had  appealed  that  decision  and
    their appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pygott  sitting  at
    Richmond on 5th September and 7th November 2014.   He  dismissed  their
    appeals.

 2. Application for permission to appeal was lodged on 17th February  2015.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cox  on
    2nd April 2015.  It was said that the  grounds  disclosed  an  arguable
    error of law.  The Respondent opposed the granting of  the  application
    by a letter dated 13th April 2015.   Directions  were  issued  for  the
    Upper Tribunal firstly to consider whether an error  of  law  had  been
    made by the First-tier Tribunal and  the  matter  comes  before  me  in
    accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellants

 3. Mr Turner referred to the lengthy Grounds of Appeal that he had drafted
    and relied upon them.  He helpfully summarised those by  submitting  as
    follows:

      i) The judge had found that the best interests of the children were to
         remain in the United Kingdom but found against their remaining here
         by "visiting the sins of the parents upon the children".

     ii) The judge had not dealt properly with Section 55 of the Borders Act
         2009.

    iii) The judge had failed to look at Dr Halari's report properly.

 4. Essentially Mr Turner submitted that the judge had not  dealt  properly
    with Dr Halari's report in particular the aspects of the report  where
    the children expressed their own wishes and  desires.   Notwithstanding
    that if the judge, as he had indicated, found the best interests of the
    children lay in remaining within the United  Kingdom  the  only  factor
    outweighing that was the maintenance of immigration  control  and  that
    was contrary to a point raised in the case of Zoumbas.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr Kandala relied upon the Respondent's letter and said that the  judge
    had looked at this matter properly  and  whilst  looking  at  the  best
    interests of the children that was only part of the assessment  of  the
    case and that essentially the Grounds of Appeal  amounted  to  no  more
    than a disagreement with the findings reached.

 6. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    documents and submissions raised.  I now provide that decision with  my
    reasons.





Decision and Reasons

 7. The judge at paragraph 2 had set out the lengthy history in this  case.
    The Appellants, on  separate  occasions  had  all  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as visitors between 2005 and 2007 and had  remained  unlawfully
    at the conclusion of their valid visa stay.  By 21st December 2007  all
    were unlawfully in the UK.  The Appellants made no effort to return  or
    regularise  their  stay  until  24th  December  2012  where  they  made
    application to remain under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  in  particular
    relying upon the position of the youngest  child.   Those  applications
    were refused by the Respondent on 3rd October 2013  with  no  right  of
    appeal.  Since that date there has been protracted  appeal  proceedings
    which have now lasted for 21 months.

 8. The judge had set out in detail at paragraphs 3 to 11, the basis of the
    Respondent's refusal in respect of all Appellants, and at paragraph  12
    the Grounds of Appeal submitted on behalf of the Appellants.   She  had
    noted the  documentary  evidence  submitted  for  the  hearing  on  5th
    September 2014 and had thereafter set out in  considerable  detail  the
    evidence of the Appellants.  The Appellants' representative raised  the
    prospect that, having taken instructions, there may be  a  claim  under
    Article 2/3 of the EHCR or  humanitarian  protection,  particularly  in
    respect of the wife.  Perhaps generously, given the length of time  and
    legal advice already provided to the Appellants to  raise  any  issues,
    the judge granted an adjournment with directions  that  the  Appellants
    serve any fresh evidence in relation to this matter and  commenced  the
    part-heard hearing again on 7th November 2014.

 9. Again the judge  set  out  in  detail  documentary  evidence  and  oral
    evidence presented.  It is noteworthy that at paragraph  25  the  judge
    noted the Appellants' representative asked her to "weed out" pages 7 to
    237 of the Appellants' bundle as being evidence not relied upon.   That
    raises the question why such a volume of material was placed within the
    bundle in the first instance.

10. The judge had noted at paragraph 37 that she had set out a full  Record
    of Proceedings and had taken account of all  material  and  submissions
    presented.  It is clear from the detailed and logical decision that the
    judge was fully appraised of the  evidence  in  this  case.   This  was
    despite this being one of those cases where through exertions of either
    the Appellants and/or representatives the amount of  material,  changes
    and pleadings had the effect to cloud a relatively  simple  issue  that
    did not necessarily require twenty months within the Appellate  system.



11. The judge had within her Section of applicable law, dealt properly with
    the relevant law in an area that is  not  without  some  confusion  and
    constant change.  She clearly had in mind for example  Razgar,  Section
    55 of the Borders Act 2009 and indeed earlier at paragraph 12 her refer
    to Article 3(1) of the UN Convention on the rights of a child.

12. In terms of matter under consideration the judge had noted at paragraph
    28 that despite the representative's request and  the  granting  of  an
    adjournment to look at Articles 2/3  and  humanitarian  protection  the
    Appellants did not rely upon those matters nor  indeed  did  they  rely
    upon Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  It was also acknowledged by
    the representative that under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  and  (vi)  being
    relied upon under the Immigration Rules, the parents had  a  weak  case
    without the children.

13. Essentially the questions to be dealt with by the judge were:

      i) under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules was  it  reasonable
         to expect the children to return to India; and

     ii) under Article 8 of the ECHR did the children's  best  interests  if
         found to be in the UK outweigh all other factors  when  looking  at
         the proportionality exercise in the final test of Razgar.

14. At paragraphs 49 to 88 the judge dealt  with  a  consideration  of  the
    evidence and submissions.   She  clearly  had  considered  Dr  Halari's
    report and referred to such specifically at paragraphs 70 to 73.  There
    is nothing to support the assertions within the Grounds  of  Appeal  or
    submissions that the judge failed to read or take account or  be  aware
    of parts of Dr Halari's  report.   The  fact  that  certain  paragraphs
    referred to within the Grounds of Appeal in Dr Halari's report, are not
    specifically referenced within  the  decision  is  no  basis  for  such
    assertions.  Indeed while Mr Turner seems to place much upon the report
    within the Grounds of Appeal and his submissions,  he  overstates  that
    matter.  Dr Halari as she acknowledged at paragraph 5 of her report did
    not  know  the  Appellants.   She  had  never  met  them  before  being
    commissioned to prepare a report by  their  legal  representatives  and
    providing that report in June 2014 two months  prior  to  the  hearing.
    She therefore had no history  of  knowledge  or  involvement  with  the
    family.

15. Her report was based on one interview with the Appellants  rather  than
    any series of meetings over time.  She had access to school reports but
    no indication of access to any other documentation.  She was reliant as
    she indicated at paragraph 4  on  the  self-reported  history  and  the
    perceptions of the Appellants.  That is understandable and no criticism
    is made of her.  It was not her role to assess the credibility  of  the
    Appellants' claims or to place findings  of  fact  and  credibility  in
    context with the evidence as a whole.  That was  the  judge's  function
    and in that respect Dr  Halari's  evidence  was  only  a  part  of  the
    evidential picture.  The judge  understood  that  and  dealt  with  the
    expert  report  properly.   She  had  properly  noted  that   some   of
    Dr Halari's conclusions as to "best interests" were based on  evidence
    that the judge had found not to be credible or evidence that  had  been
    exaggerated.  Whilst the matter not noted by the judge it could also be
    said that the wishes and  desires  as  expressed  by  minors  does  not
    necessarily or always translate into their best interests.

16. The judge had concluded at paragraph 73 that it was  "probably  in  the
    best interests of the children to remain in the UK".  However the judge
    had concluded that in respect of the relevant child to which  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) applied it was not unreasonable to expect that  child  to
    return to India.  That is a finding open to the judge.  It is  entirely
    open to find on an examination of evidence that the best interests of a
    child may lie within the UK rather than returning to  a  home  country.
    However if the difference in terms of best  interests  between  staying
    and returning is marginal it would not be necessarily  unreasonable  to
    expect a return.  If the difference between the  two  options  was  not
    marginal but significant it may become unreasonable to demand a return.
     It is a question of judgment for the judge who dealt with the evidence
    and was best placed to make such a decision  and  the  judge  did  that
    properly and based on a detailed knowledge of the  case  and  evidence.
    It could also be said, if the argument is raised, that there must be  a
    difference in legal terms between "the best interests of a  child"  and
    the question under the Immigration Rules of whether returning  a  child
    would be unreasonable.  If  the  test  was  identical  then  those  who
    drafted the changes to the Immigration Rules in July 2012 and have  had
    them  under  review  thereafter  would  simply  have  used   the   same
    terminology within paragraph 276ADE as that found either within Section
    55 of the Borders Act or Article 3(1) of the UN document.   Accordingly
    if the test was meant to be identical it would  be  inherently  foolish
    for the Rules not to have been drafted using identical terminology.

17. Thereafter in her examination of Article 8 of the ECHR outside  of  the
    Rules, she dealt with those factors that needed to be  examined  within
    the proportionality test of Razgar.  That included  an  examination  of
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act and Section 55 of the  Borders  Act  2009.
    She had clearly in earlier parts of her decision already  substantially
    examined all the relevant evidence and factual  decisions  reached  and
    indeed made reference to such within the decision.  She made  it  clear
    at paragraph 81 that their private lives had been developed whilst they
    were  unlawfully  in  the  UK  and  their   status   precarious.    She
    specifically referred to the poor immigration history weighing  heavily
    against the adult  Appellants  but  did  not  weigh  that  against  the
    children (paragraph 81).  In terms  of  removal  of  the  children  she
    referred at paragraph 82 to the factors she had already mentioned in  a
    lengthy paragraph 75.  Those were significant features of the  family's
    links, including the children,  and  family  situation  generally  that
    mitigated against any significant or indeed  unreasonable  problems  if
    the children or family as  a  whole  were  returned  to  India.   Those
    factors referred to in paragraph 75 were important features  the  judge
    was entitled to take into account and were factors arrived at after her
    detailed examination of the evidence.  In summary at paragraph  83  she
    found that the maintenance of immigration control in the  interests  of
    the Respondent on one side of the balancing act outweighed in terms  of
    proportionality the specific interests of  the  individual  family  and
    specifically with reference to "the best  interests  of  the  children"
    taken into  account  when  examining  their  specific  position.   That
    decision upon the proportionality question was a decision that she  was
    entitled to reach, a decision that was clearly reasonably open  to  her
    and was based upon a detailed and proper grasp of the case law, statute
    and the evidence in this case.



Notice of Decision

18. There was no material error of law made by the judge and I  uphold  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

19. Anonymity direction made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
