
-
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/11415/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Promulgated on               |
|On 11 August 2014                             |On 21st Aug 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                      Januario Antonio Falcao Da Silva
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: In Person
For the Respondent: Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing an appeal by the appellant against the respondent's decision
    made on 06 February 2014  to  refuse  to  issue  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right of residence as the partner of an EEA  national
    exercising Treaty rights in the UK.

 2. The applicant is a citizen of Angola born  on  13  March  1980.  On  02
    December 2013 he applied for a residence card but his  application  was
    refused on the basis that he had failed to provide sufficient  evidence
    to demonstrate that his partner was currently a qualified person  as  a
    job seeker as required by reg 6(2) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations
    2006.

 3. The appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  dealt  with  on  the
    documentary evidence. The judge found that there were documents to show
    that the appellant's partner was employed between 06 September 2012 and
    29 September 2013 and subsequently she had not been working due to  her
    pregnancy. She noted there were two P45's dated 06 November 2013 and 22
    January 2014 which indicated that her job seekers allowance had  ceased
    on those dates and said that there was no  evidence  therefore  at  the
    date of application,  date  of  decision  or  currently  that  she  was
    registered as a jobseeker or that she had a  genuine  chance  of  being
    engaged. For these reasons the appeal was dismissed.

 4. In his grounds of appeal  the  appellant  said  that  he  had  provided
    evidence necessary to show that his partner had worked for a  year  and
    subsequently when not employed she had enrolled at the Job  Centre  and
    had studied. He wished to obtain a residence card so that he could work
    and live with his family. He had two sons, one aged six and the  second
    one month and twenty days. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that reg 6(2)(b)(iii) had  been  treated  by
    the judge as a further requirement rather than as an alternative to the
    provisions of reg 6(2)(b)(i) and (ii).

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Jack conceded that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law by failing to take into account the  jurisprudence  in
    the decision of the CJEU in Saint Prix  [2013]  EUECJC-507/12,  to  the
    effect that women who  could  be  deemed  temporarily  unable  to  work
    because of the physical constraints of the  late  stages  of  pregnancy
    must retain the status of  worker,  a  status  retained  until  it  was
    reasonable for her to return to or seek work after  the  birth  of  her
    child. That period could not be shorter than the  period  provided  for
    under national legislation during which pregnant  women  were  exempted
    from being available for work or having actively to seek work which  in
    the UK was a period of up to 12 months. In the light of  these  factors
    not being taken into account, he conceded that  on  the  facts  of  the
    present case, the appeal should have been allowed.

Decision

 6. For these reasons I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    law and its decision is set aside. I re-make the decision  by  allowing
    the appeal against the decision to refuse a residence card.




Signed                                  Date 11 August 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
