


                                    [pic]



The                              Upper                              Tribunal
Appeal number:    IA /11914/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



Heard                   at                    Field                    House
             Determination sent
On 9  October  2013                                              11  October
2013


                       THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

                                  Between

                                              RUMANA                   BEGUM
                           Appellant

                                                                       and


                    Secretary   of   State   for   the    Home    Department


                                                        Respondent



Representation:

For the appellant: Mr Hossain, A1 Law Chambers
For the respondent: Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                 DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, Rumana Begum, was born on  5  January  1991  and  is  a
      female citizen of  Bangladesh.  She  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      against the determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 12
      August  2013  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent dated 18 April 2013  cancelling  her  leave  to  enter  the
      United Kingdom.


   2. The college to which she had  applied  to  study  has  the  status  of
      "Highly Trusted Sponsor" and had  issued  a  CAS  in  respect  of  her
      application to study there and on the basis of her score  in  relevant
      English language  test.  However,  upon  her  arrival  in  the  United
      Kingdom, she had been interviewed by the respondent's officers who had
      concluded that she had  made  false  representations  as  regards  her
      ability to speak English; it is recorded  by  the  officers  that  the
      appellant could communicate with them only with the assistance  of  an
      interpreter.
   3. The First-tier Tribunal had concluded that the appellant had not  used
      deception to obtain her place at the  college  [14].  The  judge  had,
      however,  found  that  there  had  been  a  "fundamental   change   of
      circumstances" such that the appellant's appeal fell to  be  dismissed
      under paragraph 321A(1) of the Immigration Rules [14].


   4. Mr Tarlow, for the respondent, did not seek to persuade me  to  uphold
      the First-tier Tribunal's determination. He acknowledged that it  made
      little sense for the judge to characterise the difficulties which  the
      appellant had experienced in speaking to the immigration officers as a
      "change of circumstances" within the meaning of paragraph 321A; it was
      unlikely that the appellant's ability to communicate  in  English  had
      deserted her en route to the United Kingdom and it made no  sense  for
      the  judge  to  have  gone  behind  the  CAS  and  test  results,  the
      authenticity of which the respondent had not challenged. The  position
      of students entering the country is as described by the Upper Tribunal
      in Khaliq (entry clearance- paragraph 321) Pakistan [2011] UKUT  00350
      (IAC):

      We reach that conclusion with no enthusiasm.  The appellant  has  been
      judicially assessed as untruthful.  He has been  prepared  to  deceive
      others as to the level of his competence in English.  He  has  arrived
      to undertake a course that his Highly Trusted Sponsor college admitted
      him for, but says that it would have difficulty in delivering to  him.
      But the UKBA's decision to allow colleges, rather than Entry Clearance
      Officers, to assess whether students should be admitted, and to remove
      from both Entry Clearance Officers and Immigration Officers the  power
      to reach any view independent of the colleges (most of  which  have  a
      clear financial motive to admit as many students as  possible)  forces
      us to the conclusion we have reached.  It is  one  which  demonstrates
      that the Immigration Rules, as in force at the relevant time,  provide
      little security against the admission of  what  may  be  described  as
      bogus students. Changes have since been made, but they do  not  affect
      this appeal.

   5. In the circumstances, I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law
      such that its   determination falls to be  set  aside.  I  remake  the
      decision allowing the appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
      cancel the appellant's leave to enter.





DECISION

This appeal is allowed. I have remade the decision. The  appellant's  appeal
against the decision of the respondent dated 18 April 2013 is allowed  under
the Immigration Rules
      Signed[pic]

      Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


      Dated 9 October 2013
