


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal No:
IA/12224/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
Determination promulgated
On 1 September 2014                                 On 9 September 2014


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY

                                   Between

                                SARVAR AMANOV
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the respondent: Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer




                               DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of Uzbekistan, applied for a  residence  card
      as confirmation of a right to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.  That
      application was refused and an appeal against the decision  dismissed.
      The application was refused because the respondent concluded that  the
      marriage in question was a marriage of convenience and the  judge  who
      heard the appeal reached the same conclusion.

   2. The grounds of appeal make four points:  (i) the appellant  said  that
      he had sent witness statements and photographs to  the  court  but  no
      mention has been made of these in  the  court  proceedings;  (ii)  the
      judge refers to an entry clearance officer when this was an in-country
      appeal; (iii) there was a reference to a  previous  application;  (iv)
      the judge said that a permanent residence  card  was  being  requested
      when this was not the case.


   3.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Simpson.  She  referred  to
      the second and fourth of the above mentioned matters  and  added  that
      the judge said that the respondent had discretion, which was  not  the
      case. She concluded that:

              i. Altogether there were  disclosed  arguable  errors  of  law
                 arising from the judge's conceptions of the facts and law.

   4. There is a rule 24 response which states that whilst there  appear  to
      be superficial errors in the determination these do  not  vitiate  the
      decision. It is then said that in spite of the serious allegation, the
      appellant did not fully engage with the appellate process and sought a
      decision on the papers. The judge made clear findings on the  question
      of a marriage of convenience and  the appellant  provided no  evidence
      dealing with the points taken against him.


   5. The points I have called (ii) and (iv) and the point  that  the  judge
      granting permission made about discretion have  no  relevance  to  the
      decision at all and whilst they  are  errors  they  are  not  material
      errors and could not effect the decision in any way. The reference  to
      a previous determination did not contain an error of  law;  the  judge
      was entitled to do this.

   6. The first allegation in the grounds, that the appellant said  that  he
      had sent witness statements and   photographs  to  the  court  but  no
      mention has been made of these in the court proceedings  is  different
      in nature. It is clear that these were not  on  the  court  file;  see
      paragraph 11 of the determination. There is no evidence that they were
      ever sent and even now have not been. For such a point to become  even
      arguable there would have to be, at  the  very  least,  evidence  that
      documents were sent and there is no such  evidence.  It  follows  that
      there is here no error of law.

   7. I turn to the core of this case. The law is set out in Papajorgi  (EEA
      spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038  (IAC).  It
      is for the  respondent  to  raise  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
      marriage is one of convenience, and then it is for  the  appellant  to
      prove on a balance of probabilities that it is not.

   8. Here the respondent produces clear evidence as to the doubtful  status
      of the marriage; see the paragraph that commences  "On arrival  at the
      premises" in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter.  It  is  then  for  the
      appellant to prove that the marriage is not one of  convenience.  That
      is something that he has plainly failed to do. He provided no evidence
      on the point at all. The judge gives clear reasons in paragraph 11  of
      the determination why he  concluded  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
      convenience; that conclusion was clearly open to him on  the  evidence
      In those circumstances the judge' decision is properly reasoned on the
      crucial points in the case.





   9.  It follows that the original judge made no error of law. The original
      decision stands.


The appeal is dismissed


Designated  Judge Digney
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                         2 September 2014
