
[pic]
IAC-fH-ck-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12977/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated      |
|On 30 October 2014                         |On 11 November 2014            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                              Mrs Nabeela Begum
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and  her  date  of  birth  is  2
    January 1975.  On 29 January 2014 she made an application to  vary  her
    leave on the basis of her  relationship  with  a  British  citizen,  Mr
    Gulfraz Kayani.  The appellant had entered the UK as  a  spouse  on  23
    December 2011.

2.   The appellant entered the UK as a spouse on 23 December 2011. She  made
    an application for leave to remain on 29 January 2014. This application
    was refused by the Secretary of State in  a  decision  of  28  February
    2014.  The application was refused under paragraph  284(ix)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Rules because the appellant  did  not  have  the  necessary
    English language qualification.  The application was  considered  under
    Appendix FM and the decision-maker decided  that  the  appellant  could
    relocate  to  Pakistan  with  her  family  and  that  there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles to this.  It was also refused on the basis  of
    private life under 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and her appeal was dismissed (having been determined on the  papers  at
    the appellant's  request)  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ross  in  a
    decision that was promulgated on 11 July 2014.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 3 September 2014 by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Davies.  Thus the matter came before me.

5.   The grounds seeking leave to appeal are lengthy and unclear.   However,
    after distillation, they argue that; the Judge erred in dismissing  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules; that the appellant had a legitimate
    expectation that her appeal would succeed and that the Judge  erred  in
    concluding that the application was based on the appellant's child when
    it was actually based on the appellant being  a  spouse  of  a  British
    citizen. 6.   It is argued that  the  appellant's  application  is  not
    subject to Appendix FM and that the Judge did not appreciate  that  the
    appellant had spent more than two years with her husband and  child  in
    the UK.  The Judge did not attach any weight to Section 55 of the  BCIA
    2009.  The Judge did  not  give  any  weight  to  the  failure  of  the
    Secretary of State to allow the appellant the  opportunity  to  produce
    the correct English language certificate. The Judge erred  in  that  he
    did not consider Article 8 outside of the Rules.

6.   Mr Wilding argued that there was no error of law and he questioned  the
    decision to grant permission. Permission was  granted  on  a  different
    basis entirely by Judge Davies on 3 September 2014.  It appears  to  me
    that Judge Davies did not engage with the grounds  seeking  permission.
    He granted the application because in his view there  was  an  arguable
    error of law on the basis that Judge Ross  made  no  reference  in  his
    determination to either the burden or standard of proof  that  is  upon
    the appellant.

7.   The  appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal having requested that the matter be determined on the  papers.
    She did not attend  the  hearing  before  me.   She  submitted  further
    evidence which was received by the Tribunal on 28 October 2014  with  a
    covering letter that is dated 24 October 2014.

8    Judge Ross made the following findings:

         6.   Unfortunately the appellant has failed  to  comply  with  this
             condition because she has still only provided a certificate at
             level B1 dated 14 January 2014, and furthermore as was  stated
             in the refusal this provider is not approved by the  Secretary
             of State.  Accordingly the appellant cannot succeed under  the
             rules.


         7.   The appellant  also  claims  that  she  should  succeed  under
             article 8.  Since her application was after 9 July 2012 it  is
             subject to the introduction of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
             rules in relation to family life, and paragraph  276  ADE.  in
             relation to private life.


         8.   The requirements in  relation  to  partners  are  set  out  at
             paragraph R-LTRP, which states that the  appellant  must  meet
             the suitability requirements and the eligibility  requirements
             of paragraph EX1.  There is no suggestion that  the  appellant
             does not meet the suitability requirements.   In  relation  to
             the relationship requirements the appellant must show that her
             partner is a  British  citizen  in  the  UK  the  relationship
             between her and her partner must be genuine and subsisting and
             they must intend to  live  together  permanently  in  the  UK.
             Evidence  must  be  provided  which  shows  that  since  entry
             clearance was granted the applicant and her partner have lived
             together in the UK.  There are also financial requirements  to
             be met, and again the appellant  must  have  passed  the  same
             language requirement as in the Immigration Rules.


         9.   It follows that since the appellant has not complied with  the
             English language test requirement  she  cannot  succeed  under
             Appendix FM.  The  refusal  letter  is  silent  on  the  other
             requirements.


         10.   In  relation  to  an  application  for  leave  based  on  the
             appellant's child, these are considered at paragraph  E-TTRPT,
             and can be summarised as follows: the child must be under  the
             age of 18 at the date of the application, living in the UK and
             is either a British citizen or settled in the UK or has  lived
             in the UK continuously for at least  seven  years  immediately
             preceding the  date  of  the  application  and  paragraph  EX1
             applies which states that the paragraph applies if in addition
             it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK
             or there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with  the
             partner in question continuing outside the UK.


         11.  The appellant has not appeared to give evidence,  and  neither
             have the members of her family.  The child in question has not
             lived in the UK for seven years, indeed I have  not  seen  any
             evidence that the child is living in the  UK.   The  appellant
             and her family have given no evidence as to  why  they  cannot
             return to  Pakistan  and  live  there,  or  why  it  would  be
             unreasonable to expect  them  to  do  so  or  that  there  are
             insurmountable obstacles which prevent  them  from  continuing
             their relationship in Pakistan.


         12.  In relation to their private life, the appellant has not lived
             in the UK for 20 years, and it cannot be said that she has  no
             social cultural or family ties to Pakistan since she has lived
             in Pakistan for all of her life, and speaks the language.  She
             therefore cannot succeed under  the  private  life  provisions
             either.


         13.  The case of Gulshan (Article 8 - new rules - correct approach)
             2013 UK UT00640 makes it clear that the tribunal has no  power
             to avoid waive or  circumvent  the  immigration  rules  by  in
             effect applying the law as it stood before the introduction of
             the new rules, unless  there  are  exceptional  circumstances,
             this would be the case where the consequences of refusal would
             be  so  unduly   harsh   that   they   would   amount   to   a
             disproportionate failure by the state to  respect  private  or
             family life.


         14.  The appellant has failed to produce any evidence to show  that
             the circumstances in this case are exceptional, and  therefore
             I consider that her article 8 claim must fail."
Conclusions

9.   I have taken into account the  appellant's  skeleton  argument  in  the
    bundle that has been served with the  covering  letter  of  24  October
    2014.

10.  The appellant could not meet the English language requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and thus the Judge had to dismiss  her  appeal  under
    paragraph 284. The application  was  dated  29  January  2014  but  the
    transitional provisions applied (see Part 8  A280  of  the  Rules).  In
    these circumstances it is arguable that  Appendix  FM  did  not  apply.
    However, this is not a material error of law.

11.  There is a witness statement from the appellant,  but  there  is  scant
    evidence relating to her family and private life  here.   She  did  not
    take the opportunity of providing full and detailed witness  statements
    in support  of  her  appeal  and  she  requested  that  the  matter  be
    determined on the papers. The Judge found that there  was  no  evidence
    that the appellant's  child  (Muhammad  Saqib  Gulfraz,  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan) was in the UK and no evidence why the  family  cannot  return
    there together. The child had not been  in  the  UK  for  seven  years.
    Although  the  Judge  found  that  there  would  be  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to relocation he also found that it would not be unreasonable
    to expect the family to return to Pakistan. He took into  account  that
    the appellant's husband is a British citizen.  However,  there  was  no
    evidence from him relating to his life here and the evidence  from  the
    appellant on the issue was skeletal. All the issues relevant to Article
    8 (outside the rules) were considered by the Judge.

12.  There was no discrete finding in relation to the best interests of  the
    child, but this does not amount to a material error of law. It was  the
    appellant's case that her son had been here since 2011, but  the  Judge
    was not even satisfied that he was here in the UK.  The  child  of  the
    appellant will be 18 in December 2015 and there was  no  evidence  from
    him relating to his life here or that in Pakistan (prior to  coming  to
    the UK). With the appellant's bundle submitted for the  hearing  before
    me there is a residence permit relating to her son confirming  that  he
    has settlement here. This was not before the First-tier Tribunal and in
    any event there is still no evidence from him or from his parents about
    his best interest other than general uncorroborated assertions  in  the
    appellant's witness statements.

13.  If I were to set aside the decision  and  remake  it  under  Article  8
    outside the Rules I would have to do so through the  prism  of  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act I would go on to dismiss the appeal in the absence
    of evidence relating to the quality of the appellant's family's private
    and family life here or evidence of the difficulties the  family  would
    face should they be returned to Pakistan. The appellant's statement  of
    24 October 2014 does not add anything to  the  statement  before  Judge
    Ross.

14.  In my view the Judge did not make a  material  error  of  law  and  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  Article
    8 stands.



Signed: Joanna McWilliam                                   Date  8  November
    2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

