
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12636/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st March 2016                            |On 13th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                           MIRZA MUHAMMAD TEHSEEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Javed of Reiss Solicitors Bradford
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan (born 29th  January  1987).   He
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Dickson) dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's decision
    to refuse him leave to remain  in  the  UK  as  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence.  The refusal decision is dated 23rd March 2015.

Background

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  29th  June  2012  after
    being given leave to enter as the prospective spouse of Shazad Begum, a
    British citizen.  That leave to enter was effective until 21st December
    2012.  On 19th November 2012 the Appellant submitted an application for
    further leave to remain as a spouse.  That application was  granted  on
    7th March 2013 with the Appellant having  leave  to  remain  until  7th
    March 2015.

 3. The Appellant's wife gave birth to their son on  26th  September  2013.
    The marriage ran into difficulties.  On 6th March  2015  the  Appellant
    applied for indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    victim of domestic violence.  The Respondent refused  that  application
    on 23rd March 2015 and also made a decision that the  Appellant  should
    be removed by way of directions under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 4. The Appellant appealed the Respondent's decision, and the  appeal  came
    before Judge Dickson on 14th July 2015.  In a comprehensively  set  out
    decision the judge reminded himself that a victim of domestic  violence
    must satisfy paragraphs 289A(i) - (iii) of the  Immigration  Rules.  He
    also considered whether the Appellant could meet the criteria  set  out
    in Appendix FM  276ADC  and  paragraph  EX.1  of  the  Rules.  He  also
    considered whether the Appellant could avail himself of article 8 ECHR.



 5. The judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant, his sister-in-law Mrs
    Rabina Kauser and Mrs Akhtar a family friend.  In addition  there  were
    several statements from associates of the  Appellant.   All  statements
    testified to there being  problems  within  the  marriage  between  the
    Appellant and his wife.

 6. Having considered the evidence, the judge  dismissed  the  appeal.   In
    summary he accepted that the relationship between the Appellant and his
    wife had permanently broken down.  He also  accepted  that  he  had  no
    doubts that in common with other failed marriages there may  have  been
    some heated moments between the couple and that  on  one  occasion  the
    Appellant's wife may have filled his shoes with cold  water.   However,
    he was not satisfied that the  marriage  had  broken  down  because  of
    domestic violence on the part of the Appellant's wife.   He  noted  the
    medical report produced did not assist the Appellant. The report  which
    was from a GP simply records the Appellant informing the  GP  that  his
    wife mistreated him. The judge  also  noted  that  the  Appellant  only
    reported matters to the police in February 2015 by which  time  he  had
    not been living with his wife and child for  some  four  months.  Apart
    from noting the complaint, no further action was taken by the police.

 7. The Appellant sought and was granted permission  to  appeal  the  FtT's
    decision.  The relevant parts of the grant of permission  are  set  out
    here.

         "2.  It is arguable as set out in the grounds that  the  judge  did
         not give adequate  reasons  for  explaining  why  he  rejected  the
         evidence of Mrs Akhtar as to the domestic violence  perpetrated  on
         the appellant.  He simply says that he  was  not  assisted  by  her
         evidence but he does not explain why.  He did give reasons however,
         at least implicitly, for rejecting Mr  Baber  Ali's  evidence,  the
         contradictions  referred  to  being  the  location  at  which   the
         appellant was allegedly collected by Mr Barber Ali.  Whilst it does
         not follow that even if there was  violence  as  described  by  Mrs
         Akhtar, that was the reason for the  marriage  breaking  down,  the
         judge appears to have come to his conclusions at [39] on the  basis
         he was not satisfied that there was violence beyond heated moments,
         and  the  appellant's  shoes  being   filled   with   cold   water.
         Accordingly if the judge erred so far  as  rejecting  Mrs  Akhtar's
         evidence is concerned, any error could be material to  the  finding
         whether the marriage did indeed break down as a result of  domestic
         violence.

         3.   It is said at paragraph 6 of the grounds that the judge should
         have allowed the appeal to the limited extent because the  decision
         letter did not deal with the fact there  was  an  access  order  in
         place but it is difficult to  see  how  the  respondent's  decision
         could have been not in accordance with the law if the access  order
         was not in place at the date of the respondent's  decision  (indeed
         it appears the appellant's child was then in Pakistan).

         4.   It is said that the judge erred in failing to acknowledge  the
         appellant's involvement in the child's upbringing since  his  birth
         and that the appellant was waiting for his wife's bank  details  to
         pay maintenance but the question was when the appellant was  taking
         an active role in the child's  upbringing  not  simply  whether  he
         intended to take such a role in the future (the rules  say  "taking
         and intend to continue to take" - my underlining) or had taken  one
         in the past.  The judge's findings as to the role the appellant was
         taking at the date of the hearing appear justified on the  evidence
         that the appellant had not seen the child since November  2014  and
         had not provided financial support.

         5.   Nevertheless as I would grant permission in any event  on  the
         ground as to domestic violence and as the totality of the facts are
         relevant to the appellant's case under Article 8  ECHR,  I  do  not
         limit permission despite my comments above."

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal discloses an error of law such  that  the  decision
    needs to be set aside and remade.

The UT Hearing

 8.  Mrs  Javed  who  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  based  her
    submissions on the lines of the grant  of  permission.   She  submitted
    that the Appellant's claim was one of domestic violence  and  that  the
    FtT Judge had not given adequate reasons for explaining why he rejected
    the evidence  of  Mrs  Akhtar  as  to  the  claimed  domestic  violence
    perpetrated on the Appellant.  That evidence may have been material  in
    finding whether the marriage had broken down as a  result  of  domestic
    violence.

 9. Mr Diwnycz submitted that the judge's  findings  were  sound,  both  in
    terms of the jurisprudence and the evidence before him.   He  said  the
    grant of permission is not persuasive in showing that the  decision  is
    incorrect. The best that could be said for  the  Appellant's  case  was
    that Judge Dickson may have erred only in failing to spell out robustly
    his reasons for showing that the evidence of Mrs Akhtar did not assist.
    However one looked at the decision the reality was  that  the  evidence
    fell far short of  that  required  to  establish  a  case  of  domestic
    violence. Any error therefore would be immaterial.  The  short  medical
    evidence was provided late  in  the  day  and  police  involvement  was
    minimal.  The decision should stand.

Discussion

10. I find myself  in  agreement  with  Mr  Diwnycz's  submissions.   Judge
    Dickson has produced a  detailed  and  thorough  decision  following  a
    hearing in which the Appellant and two witnesses  gave  oral  evidence.
    He has taken into account the written statements of other witnesses and
    noted that the medical evidence and police involvement is minimal.

11. Contrary to what is asserted in the grounds seeking permission,  it  is
    clear why Judge Dickson said  he  was  not  assisted  by  Mrs  Akhtar's
    evidence.  At [33] the judge records the following:

         "Mrs Akhtar confirmed the truth of her statement.  She  was  living
         with the Appellant for some time and his wife was  always  slapping
         him round the face as well as committing other abuses.  Mrs  Akhtar
         told Mr Mullarkey that she lived with the Appellant  and  his  wife
         for some time.  The worst incident was when the Appellant came back
         from work and picked up his son.  His wife snatched his son off him
         and said the child was sleepy.  She slapped him and grabbed hold of
         the child.  She did not remember the date and year  that  this  had
         happened."

    At [34] the judge records:

         "I was not assisted by the evidence of Mrs Kauser  and  Mrs  Akhtar
         although her statement gives numerous incidents of abuse.  She said
         the worst incident was when  she  took  their  son  away  from  the
         Appellant because he was sleepy and slapped his face".

    The judge then went on to say at [39]:

         "The Appellant is now separated from his wife who has returned from
         Pakistan with their  son.   I  accept  that  the  relationship  has
         permanently broken down.  I have no doubt that in common with other
         failed marriages there may have been some  heated  moments  between
         the couple and that on one occasion he wife  may  have  filled  his
         shoes with cold water."

12. I am satisfied that Judge Dickson has considered the evidence which was
    put before him. He records that Mrs Kauser had not  seen  directly  any
    conflict between the Appellant and his wife  and  only  knew  what  the
    Appellant told her. Mrs Akhtar reported that the "worst"  incident  was
    the slap when the Appellant picked up his sleepy child, but  could  not
    even remember the date or year when this is said to have occurred.  The
    judge was entitled to evaluate that  evidence  by  saying  it  did  not
    assist the Appellant. I am satisfied he has reached  an  outcome  which
    was available to him on the evidence before him.  I  find  the  grounds
    amount to little more than a disagreement with the judge's findings and
    conclusions.

13.  The judge did go on to consider  Article  8,  acknowledging  that  the
    Appellant has a son in the United Kingdom who  is  a  British  citizen.
    However the marriage has broken down.  The  judge  properly  considered
    that there was no evidence put before him to  show  why  the  Appellant
    could not continue to have contact with his son through modern means of
    communication and/or by making application to visit his son.

14. For the foregoing reasons the decision of Judge  Dickson  discloses  no
    error of law and the decision stands.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

No fee award.




Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts


