
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12644/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 November 2016                        |On 13 December 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FAJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Praisoody, instructed by Supreme Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, FAJ, a female citizen of Nigeria was born in
    1983.  She is the mother of two children, a boy aged 8 (A) and  a  girl
    age 5 (F).  Both  children  were  born  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant entered the United Kingdom in 1996.  The Secretary  of  State
    acknowledged that A had lived continuously in the United Kingdom for at
    least seven years but considered that it would be reasonable to  expect
    A to leave the United Kingdom.  In her application to the Secretary  of
    State, the appellant had not claimed to have a partner  in  the  United
    Kingdom and given that paragraph EX1 did not apply the application made
    by the appellant to remain in the United Kingdom with her children  was
    rejected by a decision dated 7 March 2015.  The appellant had  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge K Swinnerton) which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 22 June 2016, allowed  the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of  appeal.   First,  the  judge  had  failed  to
    acknowledge that a period of seven years calculated from the age  of  4
    is likely to be of greater significance in  a  child's  life  than  the
    first seven  years  of  that  child's  life  (Azimi-Moayed  and  Others
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197  (IAC)).
    Further, the reasons given for finding that it was  not  reasonable  to
    expect child A to leave the United Kingdom and  live  in  Nigeria  were
    inadequate.

 3. The Upper Tribunal should hesitate before interfering with the  factual
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal but I find that this is an instance
    in which the reasoning of the judge was neither clear nor adequate.  As
    regards A, the judge recorded that he was doing well at school [66].  A
    does not speak Yoruba.  The judge noted that "no evidence was  provided
    that [A] has ever visited Nigeria or has ever visited  his  grandmother
    or other  family  in  Nigeria."   The  judge  recorded  that  the  best
    interests of the children would be to remain with their parents or,  in
    this case, the mother.  It was noted also that  it  "generally  in  the
    interests of the children to have stability  and  continuity  in  their
    education and social situation."  [71]. The judge  recorded  [72]  that
    Nigeria has a "functioning education  system."   However,  the  problem
    with the judge's analysis is that at  [73]  she  states  that  she  has
    "endeavoured  to  make  an  overall  assessment   of   the   particular
    circumstances of the children in this case."  It is not  at  all  clear
    what those "particular circumstances" are  beyond  the  fact  that  the
    children have not visited Nigeria and are doing well  at  school.   The
    judge concluded by saying:

         In  relation  to  A  I  find  that  his  removal  would  involve  a
         significant disruption to his educational development, particularly
         as he has lived all his life in the UK, does not have any ties with
         Nigeria and has never visited Nigeria.  I do not find  that  it  is
         reasonable to expect him to live in Nigeria based upon  an  overall
         assessment of his wellbeing.

 4. That paragraph may have been an adequate summary or conclusion had  the
    preceding analysis identified evidence which might  indicate  that  the
    disruption to A's educational development  would  be  "significant"  or
    evidence which might indicate that the  fact  that  A  does  not  speak
    Yoruba (but does speak English, one of the  main  languages  spoken  in
    Nigeria) and has never visited Nigeria hitherto would impact  upon  his
    welfare to the extent that it would be unreasonable for  him  to  leave
    the United Kingdom to live in Nigeria.  I do not say that  the  judge's
    findings were unavailable to her; however, I do say that the judge  has
    failed to identify evidence which would support her conclusion at [74].
     More generally, I find that it should not simply be  assumed  that  it
    would be unreasonable for a child under 10 years of age to relocate  to
    the country of his or her nationality simply  because  he  or  she  had
    never yet visited that country.

 5. In the circumstances, I find that the judge's decision  should  be  set
    aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  I  accept  that  the
    lives of the children and the appellant have perhaps moved on since the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and that it is necessary to have
    a further fact-finding exercise.  That exercise is better conducted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal, to which I return  this  appeal  in  order  to
    remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 22 June 2016  is  set
aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The  appeal  is  returned
to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge K Swinnerton)  for  that  Tribunal  to
remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 10 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

