
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12824/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3 March 2015                            |On 5 March 2015                  |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                            PETER ADEDEJI IKUESAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Record, Counsel, instructed by David Grand
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal bought by the appellant against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Handley  promulgated  on  17  November  2014.  The
    decision refused  the  appellant's  application  for  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules on the basis of his Article 8 rights.

 2. The factual matrix is undisputed before me and is  that  the  appellant
    came to the UK unlawfully in 2007, had remained  here  unlawfully  ever
    since  including  working  here  unlawfully.   His  partner  also  came
    unlawfully and has remained unlawfully ever since.  The three  children
    born here since then have never had any leave either.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Handley found  that  there  was  family  life
    between the members of the family but that could take the case  nowhere
    as the family could all return to Nigeria together. The judge refers to
    these matters at [23] where he considers whether it was reasonable  for
    the children to return  to  Nigeria  with  the  parents.   At  [24]  he
    considered the provisions of Sections 117B and 117C of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  correctly  identifying  that  little
    weight could attract to the appellant's private life  or  that  of  his
    family where it was established while they were here illegally.

 4. The grounds of appeal as drafted objected to the decision on the  basis
    that it failed to take into account the fact that  only  the  appellant
    had been issued with removal directions. I could see no merit  in  this
    argument whatsoever.  As indicated in the previous paragraphs, there is
    nothing preventing the wife and children returning to Nigeria with  the
    appellant.  It is not a  case  of  "family  splitting".   There  is  no
    obligation on the Secretary of State to  issue  removal  directions  in
    order to make it reasonable for the wife  and  children  to  return  to
    Nigeria.  The first ground of appeal has no merit.

 5. Miss Record quite properly focused on the second ground of appeal which
    argued that the judge failed to carry out any proper assessment of what
    is in the best interests of the children. It was maintained that  where
    the judge considered the children's situation at paragraph  23  of  the
    decision this was not sufficient.  I presume that is what is  meant  in
    paragraph 3 of the grounds although it states "Para 23 is  an  adequate
    assessment of where their best interests lie"; I assume that must be  a
    typographical error.

 6. I do not think that this ground of appeal has  any  merit  either.  The
    ages of the appellant's older children as of  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal were 4, 2 and the third child was only a few months
    old.  There was nothing in  the  evidence  before  me  that  identified
    anything in particular about their circumstances other than  that  they
    were born here in the circumstances described  above  to  two  Nigerian
    parents who entered unlawfully and have remained unlawfully ever since.
      I could not see anything that could possibly have  allowed  the  best
    interests of the children to be assessed as other than  remaining  with
    their parents wherever that might be. That is so whether the  wife  and
    children choose to return to Nigeria with the appellant or  not.   That
    is merely a family decision and not something  for  the  respondent  or
    this Tribunal to be concerned with.

 7. Put simply, there is nothing in this case  on  the  evidence  that  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal that could have allowed it to succeed on
    any basis and that was so even after the best interests of the children
    assessed and weighed and their highest were taken into account.

 8. In any event, I am satisfied that in the context of the  evidence  that
    was before this judge, his consideration at [23] that it was reasonable
    for the children to return with the father even though this  would,  as
    he noted, amount to "disruption  and  inconvenience"  was  an  entirely
    proper and sustainable approach to the best interests of  the  children
    and to the proportionality issues here.

 9. At the hearing Miss Record raised a slightly different point as  to  an
    improper test being applied, that of insurmountable obstacles.  I could
    not see where in the determination the judge  could  be  said  to  have
    applied this test, his wording at [23]  being  quite  clearly  that  of
    reasonableness. The final sentence of [23] states that he did not  find
    it "unreasonable to expect them  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom".   As
    above, it remains the  case that there was nothing here that could show
    that there  is  otherwise  than  a  very  clear  expectation  that  the
    appellant and his family should leave the United  Kingdom,  even  after
    the fullest consideration of any Article 8 issues.

10. I therefore do not find that an error has been shown in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.

Signed   [pic]                               Date 4 March 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

