
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA125372014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th June 2017                            |On 3rd July 2017              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          YADDARTHAN CHANDRASEGARAM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Slatter, Counsel (Direct Access)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I shall  refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant is  a  citizen
    of Sri Lanka born on 10th June 1989.  His appeal against  the  decision
    to remove him was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen under the
    Immigration Rules and on Article 8 grounds on 14th April 2015.

2.   The  Secretary  of  State  appealed  on  the  grounds  that  the  judge
    misdirected himself in law in failing to apply the correct test set out
    in paragraph EX.2 which states: "For the purposes of paragraph  EX.1(b)
    'insurmountable obstacles'  means  the  very  significant  difficulties
    which would be faced by the applicant or their  partner  in  continuing
    their family life together outside  the  UK  and  which  could  not  be
    overcome or would entail very serious hardship  for  the  applicant  or
    their partner." It was submitted that the reasons given by  the  judge,
    that the Sponsor was British and had a family and a job in the UK, were
    insufficient to amount to insurmountable obstacles.

3.   Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman, on 25th  April
    2017, on the basis that it was arguable that paragraph EX.2 should have
    been applied and was not. UTJ Macleman stated: "The Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department's grounds contend failure to consider and apply
    paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. (EX.2 came into
    force on 28/7/14 after the  date  of  the  Respondent's  decision,  but
    before the date of the hearing in the FtT. It is not mentioned  in  the
    judge's narration of the submissions. The suspicion arises that he  did
    not have the assistance he should have had from representatives on both
    sides about its applicability.)  It  is  highly  unfortunate  that  the
    Appellant now finds the case re-opened after a long  series  of  delays
    not of his making.  However, in respect of the timeliness issue, I find
    it  inescapable  that  the   foregoing   circumstances   require   this
    application to be admitted and on the merits, the  Secretary  of  State
    states an arguable case that paragraph  EX.2  (even  if  not  drawn  to
    attention) should have been applied, but was not."



The Appellant's immigration history

4.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 15th September  2009  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student valid until 1st November 2012.  He  married  a
    British citizen on 31st August 2011. He submitted a Tier 4  application
    for leave to remain on 27th November 2012 which  was  refused  on  18th
    January 2013. A further Tier 4 application on 21st  February  2013  was
    refused on 4th July 2013. He was served notice as an overstayer on  3rd
    June 2013.

5.   On 3rd July 2013, the Appellant made an application as the spouse of  a
    British citizen. This application was refused on 9th September 2013 and
    a One-Stop Notice was issued on 24th January 2014. The  Appellant  made
    representations on human rights grounds on  3rd  February  2014.  Those
    representations were rejected for the reasons given in the letter dated
    19th February 2014 and a decision to remove the Appellant to Sri  Lanka
    was made on the same date. The Appellant appealed on  10th  March  2014
    and the appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Dineen  on  17th
    October 2014






The judge's decision

6.   The judge found that the Appellant and Sponsor were truthful  witnesses
    and each of them had been consistent. The relationship was genuine  and
    subsisting. The judge went on to consider paragraph EX.1 and  made  the
    following findings:

         "34. So far as this requirement is concerned, it is  not  necessary
             for the appellant to  show  that  there  are  obstacles  which
             literally cannot be surmounted. It is not necessary to show it
             is impossible to surmount any such obstacle. It is a  question
             of whether there are particularly compelling  reasons  arising
             from the specific circumstances  of  the  case  why  leave  to
             remain should be granted.

         35.  I bear in mind that, as noted by the respondent, the appellant
             has family in Sri Lanka to whom he could return.   However,  I
             also take into account that the sponsor is a  British  citizen
             with a British family in the UK, and has been born and brought
             up in the UK.  For her, the  prospect  of  relocating  in  Sri
             Lanka would be frightening, and, as she stated, she would  not
             resettle with her husband there, despite the strength of their
             relationship.

         36.  For the sponsor to relocate to Sri Lanka would entail  serious
             interference with the ongoing close relationship  she  has  by
             way of private life  with  her  British  citizen  parents  and
             sister in the UK. It would also, as I accept,  mean  that  she
             could not pursue the career for which she has been trained  in
             biomedical science.

         37.   All  of  these  matters,  as  I  find  amount  to  compelling
             circumstances which satisfy the requirement of EX.1.

         38.  If, contrary to my above findings, EX.1 is not satisfied, I am
             satisfied that the removal of the appellant would constitute a
             serious interference with the family and private life of  both
             himself and the sponsor. While such interference would be  for
             a lawful purpose within Article 8(2), I am also satisfied, for
             the reasons  given  above,  that  there  are  very  compelling
             reasons why that interference would be disproportionate.

         39.  In reaching this conclusion,  I  take  into  account  all  the
             circumstances, including the provisions of Section 117B of the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  I  take  into
             account sub-Section (1)  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
             immigration controls is in the  public  interest  and  I  find
             that, in all the  circumstances  of  the  case  including  the
             existence of a genuine and subsisting marriage, the  continued
             presence of the appellant in the UK would not be  inconsistent
             with the maintenance of such controls.

         40.  The appellant is a fluent English speaker. He and the  sponsor
             are financially independent and not  a  burden  on  taxpayers.
             They are  both  clearly  integrated  into  UK  society.  Their
             relationship was not formed at a  time  when  the  immigration
             status of the  appellant  was  unlawful  or  precarious.  Sub-
             paragraphs (2) to (5) inclusive are therefore satisfied.  Sub-
             paragraph (6) is inapplicable.

         41.  I find there is no public interest  consideration  adverse  to
             the appellant."



Submissions

7.   Mr Bramble submitted that the judge  applied  the  test  of  compelling
    circumstances in his consideration of  insurmountable  obstacles.  This
    was not the appropriate test.  The test under the Immigration Rules was
    more stringent than the test outside the Rules.  This  was  a  material
    error because the judge's findings at paragraphs  34  to  36  were  not
    sufficient to demonstrate insurmountable obstacles.

8.   Mr Bramble submitted that paragraph EX.2 was not in  existence  at  the
    date of decision, but it was applicable at the date of hearing and  the
    judge should have applied it. If the judge had erred in his application
    of EX.1,  this  affected  his  assessment  of  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  Further, in considering when the  relationship  was
    formed, the judge failed to appreciate that the Appellant was a student
    and therefore his immigration status was precarious.

9.   The  judge's  approach  under  the  Immigration  Rules  amounted  to  a
    material error of law  which  undermined  his  further  conclusions  on
    Article 8. No weight should be attached to  the  Appellant's  case  and
    greater weight should be attached to the public interest in  concluding
    that removal is proportionate.

10.  Mr Slatter submitted that, whilst this was a generous decision, it  was
    a decision that was open to the judge on the material  before  him.  Mr
    Slatter relied on paragraph 27 of EJA v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 10 which  states:  "Decisions  of  tribunals
    should not become formulaic and rarely benefit from copious citation of
    authority.  Arguments that reduce to the proposition that the  FtT  has
    failed to mention dicta from a series of cases in the Court  of  Appeal
    or elsewhere will rarely prosper.  Similarly, as Lord Hoffmann said  in
    Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360, 1372, 'reasons should be  read
    on the assumption that, unless he has demonstrated  the  contrary,  the
    judge knew how he should perform his functions  and  which  matters  he
    should take into account'. He added that  an  'appellate  court  should
    resist the temptation to subvert the principle  that  they  should  not
    substitute their own discretion for that  of  the  judge  by  a  narrow
    textual analysis which  enables  them  to  claim  that  he  misdirected
    himself'. Moreover, some principles are so firmly embedded in  judicial
    thinking that they do not need to be recited.  For example, it would be
    surprising to see in every civil judgment a paragraph dealing with  the
    burden and standard of  proof;  or  in  every  running  down  action  a
    treatise, however short, on the law  of  negligence.   That  said,  the
    reader of any judicial decision must be reassured from its content that
    the court or tribunal  has  applied  the  correct  legal  test  to  any
    question it is deciding."

11.  Mr Slatter relied on the following paragraphs of R (on the  application
    of) Agyarko v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  UKSC
    11:

         "16. At the time when the present cases were considered, the  Rules
             did not define the expression  'insurmountable  obstacles'.  A
             definition was however introduced with  effect  from  28  July
             2014, when paragraph EX.2 was inserted into Appendix FM by the
             Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules (HC 532, 2014):
                  'For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1(b)  'insurmountable
                  obstacles' means the very significant  difficulties  which
                  would be faced  by  the  applicant  or  their  partner  in
                  continuing their family life together outside the  UK  and
                  which could not be overcome or would entail  very  serious
                  hardship for the applicant or their partner.'
             Paragraph EX.2 applies only  to  applications  decided  on  or
             after 28 July 2014."

         "42. In Jeunesse, the Grand Chamber identified,  consistently  with
             earlier judgments of the court, a  number  of  factors  to  be
             taken into account  in  assessing  the  proportionality  under
             Article 8 of the removal  of  non-settled  migrants  from  the
             contracting state in which they have family members.  Relevant
             factors were said to include the extent to which  family  life
             would effectively be ruptured, the extent of  the  ties  in  a
             contracting  state,   whether   there   were   'insurmountable
             obstacles' in the way of the family living in the  country  of
             origin of the non-national concerned, and whether  there  were
             factors of immigration  control  (for  example  a  history  of
             breach of immigration law) or considerations of  public  order
             weighing in favour of exclusion.


         43.   It  appears  that  the  European  Court  intends  the   words
             'insurmountable obstacles' to be understood in a practical and
             realistic sense rather than as referring solely  to  obstacles
             which make it literally impossible  for  the  family  to  live
             together  in  the  country  of  origin  of  the   non-national
             concerned.   In  some  cases,  the  courts  have  used   other
             expressions which make that clearer, for example referring  to
             .... 'major  impediments'...  or  asking  itself  whether  the
             family  could   'realistically'   be   expected   to   move...
             'Insurmountable obstacles' is however the expression  employed
             by the  Grand  Chamber  and  the  court's  application  of  it
             indicates that it is a stringent test... "


          44. Domestically the expression 'insurmountable obstacles' appears
             in paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM to the Rules. As explained
             in paragraph 15 above that paragraph applies in cases where an
             applicant for leave to remain under the partner  route  is  in
             the UK in breach of immigration laws and requires  that  there
             should be insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with  that
             partner   continuing   outside   the   UK.   The    expression
             'insurmountable obstacles' is now defined by paragraph EX.2 as
             meaning 'very significant difficulties which would be faced by
             the applicant or their partner in continuing their family life
             together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
             would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or  their
             partner.' That definition appears to me to be consistent  with
             the meaning which can be derived from the Strasbourg case law.
             As explained in paragraph 16  above  paragraph  EX.2  was  not
             introduced until after the  dates  of  the  decisions  in  the
             present cases. Prior to the insertion of  that  definition  it
             would nevertheless be reasonable to  infer  consistently  with
             the Secretary of State's statutory duty to act compatibly with
             Convention rights that the expression was intended to bear the
             same meaning in the Rules as in the Strasbourg case  law  from
             which it was derived. I will therefore interpret it as bearing
             the same meaning as is now set out in paragraph EX.2."

         "57. That approach is also appropriate when a court or tribunal  is
             considering whether refusal of leave to remain  is  compatible
             with Article 8 in  the  context  of  precarious  family  life.
             Ultimately,  it  has  to  decide  whether   the   refusal   is
             proportionate in the particular case before it, balancing  the
             strength of the public interest in the removal of  the  person
             in question against the impact on private and family life.  In
             doing so it should give appropriate weight to the Secretary of
             State's policy expressed in the  Rules  and  the  instructions
             that  the  public  interest  in  immigration  control  can  be
             outweighed, when  considering  an  application  for  leave  to
             remain brought by a person in the UK in breach of  immigration
             laws, only  where  there  are  'insurmountable  obstacles'  or
             'exceptional circumstances' as defined. It must also  consider
             all  factors  relevant  to  the  specific  case  in   question
             including, where relevant, the matters discussed at paragraphs
             51 to 52 above. The critical issue will generally be  whether,
             giving due weight to the strength of the  public  interest  in
             the removal of the person in the case before it, the Article 8
             claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh it.  In  general,  in
             cases concerned with precarious family life, a very strong  or
             compelling claim is required to outweigh the  public  interest
             in immigration control."

12.  Mr Slatter submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  applied
    the correct test and had properly considered insurmountable  obstacles.
    There was no definition in the Rules at the time  the  Respondent  made
    her decision. If it was the case that the  judge  should  have  applied
    paragraph EX.2, which was in force at the date  of  hearing,  then  the
    judge had done so. The judge had applied what was set out in Strasbourg
    case law and knew the  test.   It  had  the  same  meaning  before  the
    insertion of paragraph EX.2 as it did after paragraph EX.2 was  brought
    in. The test applied  by  the  judge  was  not  inconsistent  with  the
    insurmountable obstacles test set out in paragraph EX 2. Therefore, the
    judge had not misdirected himself in law.  The  Respondent's  challenge
    was a reasons  challenge  and  the  judge's  finding  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles was open to  him  on  the  facts  set  out  at
    paragraphs 34 to 36 of the decision.
13.  Mr Slatter submitted that the judge's findings  at  paragraph  34  were
    consistent with paragraphs 42, 43 and 57 of  Agyarko.  The  Appellant's
    wife, the Sponsor, would not resettle in Sri Lanka and therefore  there
    would be serious interference with family life, which would effectively
    be ruptured. There was also the fact that she had no ties to Sri Lanka,
    she would be in fear of relocating to  Sri  Lanka  and  she  could  not
    pursue her  career  there.  All  these  matters  would  entail  serious
    hardship for the Sponsor. The judge had properly directly  himself  and
    he had given adequate reasons. The  Respondent's  grounds  amounted  to
    disagreements with the judge's  decision,  but  disclosed  no  material
    error of law.

14.  In response Mr Bramble submitted that insurmountable obstacles had  the
    same meaning as that set out in  EX.2.  He  submitted  that  compelling
    reasons were not of the same level  as  very  significant  difficulties
    entailing serious hardship. The judge was not able to  carry  over  his
    assessment of insurmountable obstacles into his assessment  of  Article
    8. Compelling reasons was a less stringent test. Mr  Bramble  submitted
    that the judge's assessment of proportionality was  flawed  because  he
    failed to attach sufficient weight to the public  interest.  The  judge
    had made an error of law and the case should be remitted for rehearing.




Discussion and Conclusions

15.   The  implementation  provisions  in  the  Statement  of   Changes   in
    Immigration Rules HC 532 state that paragraph 59 (the  introduction  of
    EX.2 into the Immigration Rules) is to "take effect on 28th  July  2014
    and applies to all applications, to which paragraphs  276ADE  to  276DH
    and Appendix FM apply (or can be applied by virtue of  the  Immigration
    Rules), and to any other ECHR Article 8 claims  (save  for  those  from
    foreign criminals), and which are decided on or after that date."

16.  In this case the definition of  insurmountable  obstacles  set  out  in
    paragraph EX.2 was not part of the Immigration Rules at  the  time  the
    Secretary of State made her decision to remove the Appellant  from  the
    UK. However, it was part of the Immigration Rules when  the  First-tier
    Tribunal came to consider it.

17.  Mr Slatter was of the view that paragraph EX.2 did  not  apply  in  the
    Appellant's case because it was not in existence at  the  date  of  the
    Secretary of State's decision. Mr Bramble  was  of  the  view  that  it
    applied at the date of hearing and the judge should have considered it.
    I have no authority before  me  either  way,  but  I  find  it  is  not
    necessary to resolve this issue because, in this particular  case,  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge was aware that the applicable test under  the
    Immigration  Rules  was  that  of  insurmountable  obstacles  and   the
    definition in paragraph EX.2 was the same as that under Strasbourg case
    law, which the judge applied.



18.   The  judge  did  not  apply  a  less  stringent  test  of   compelling
    circumstances. He was aware that it was not necessary for the Appellant
    to show obstacles which could not be surmounted, but that there must be
    "particularly   compelling   reasons   arising   from   the    specific
    circumstances of the case why leave to remain should be  granted".  The
    judge recognised the high threshold that must be met.

19.  The judge found that the Sponsor was a British citizen with  a  British
    family in the UK and she had been born and brought up in  the  UK.  The
    prospect of relocating to Sri Lanka would be frightening  for  her  and
    she would not resettle there, with the Appellant, despite the  strength
    of the relationship.

20.  The judge took into account the factors referred to at paragraph 42  of
    Agyarko: the extent to which family life would effectively be ruptured;
    the extent of  ties  in  the  contracting  state;  whether  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles in the way of the family living in the country
    of origin of the non-national concerned; and whether there were factors
    of immigration control or considerations of public  order  weighing  in
    favour of exclusion.

21.  On the facts found by the judge, the Appellant's  removal  would  cause
    serious hardship to the  Sponsor.  Family  life  would  effectively  be
    ruptured. The Sponsor would not relocate to Sri Lanka. She had no  ties
    there and she would be  unable  to  pursue  her  career  in  biomedical
    science. It would also disrupt her ties to the UK and the private  life
    she had  with  her  family  and  sisters.  In  considering  immigration
    control, the Appellant had arrived in the UK legally as a  student  and
    married the Sponsor before his leave expired. His first application for
    further leave as a student was within the 28 day period. His second was
    out of time. His period of overstaying  was  limited  to  seven  months
    during which time he made  three  applications  for  further  leave  to
    remain. He was not seeking to evade immigration control. The  Appellant
    did not  have  a  significant  adverse  immigration  history  or  other
    considerations of public order weighing in favour of his exclusion.

22.  The matters which were of concern to the judge were  those  which  were
    relevant  to  the  assessment  of  insurmountable  obstacles  and   his
    reference  to  particularly  compelling  reasons  did  not  demonstrate
    otherwise. The judge's conclusions were consistent with Strasbourg case
    law and paragraphs 42 to 44 of Agyarko. The factors identified  by  the
    judge would entail very serious hardship  for  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner.  The failure to refer to EX.2 was therefore  not  material  to
    the judge's decision to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules. I
    find that the judge has  applied  the  correct  test  and,  whilst  his
    decision might be considered to be a generous one, it was one which was
    open to him on the evidence before him.

23.  The judge  found  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  constitute  a
    serious interference with the family  and  private  life  of  both  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor. The factors identified by the judge amounted
    to compelling reasons why that interference would be  disproportionate,
    namely the serious hardship caused to  the  Sponsor  and  the  lack  of
    weight to be attached to  the  public  interest  bearing  in  mind  the
    Appellant  had  not  formed  his  relationship  at  a  time  when   his
    immigration status was unlawful.  There was no material  error  in  the
    judge's application of section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002. The Appellant's precarious status  as  a  student  was
    only relevant to the assessment of his private life.

24.  Accordingly, I find that there was no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision of 14th April 2015 allowing the appeal under  the  Immigration
    Rules and on human rights grounds. The Secretary of State's  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.



              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 30th June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


