
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12224/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July 2016                       |On 11 July 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                           mr bashir sugulle hersi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller a Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision I will refer  to  Mr  Bashir  Sugulle  Hersi  as  "the
    appellant" and the Secretary of State for the Home Department  as  "the
    respondent",  although  their  roles  are  reversed  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

2.   This is the respondent's appeal against the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) to allow the appellant's appeal against the respondent's
    refusal to grant the appellant "permanent residence" on 13 March 2015.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of the United States of America who  claimed
    that he wished to exercise Treaty rights under  the  European  Economic
    Area Regulations 2006 ("2006 Regulations") as  a  family  member  of  a
    Dutch national, namely, Ugaaso Mohamed Yusuf.

4.    The  respondent  appealed  the  decision  of  the  FtT  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal against the refusal of  permanent  residence  on  17
    November 2015.

5.   The respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  on  the  basis  that
    there had been a material misdirection of law/inadequate  reasoning  in
    relation to the appellant's financial circumstances.

6.   Following a hearing on 25 May  2016  I  agreed  with  the  respondent's
    submission that there had  been  a  material  error  of  law  and  made
    appropriate directions for the filing of additional evidence.

7.   The case was relisted for  1  July  2016.   I  was  informed  that  the
    appellant wished to "withdraw the appeal".  As the present appeal is to
    the Upper Tribunal by the respondent it seems on  proper  consideration
    the  appellant  cannot  withdraw  the  appeal  but  I  will  treat  the
    application  to  withdraw  the  appeal  as  a   concession   that   the
    respondent's appeal against the decision of the FtT should  be  allowed
    by consent.

8.   Accordingly, I allow the respondent's appeal against  the  decision  of
    FtT and set aside the  decision  of  the  FtT.   It  follows  that  the
    decision of the respondent dated 13 March 2016 to refuse the  appellant
    permanent residence in the UK stands.

Notice of Decision

The respondent's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 11th July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appellant's appeal before the FTT stands dismissed and  therefore  there
can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 11th July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
