
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12222/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1st February 2016                          |On 21st March 2016             |
|                                              |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                          OLAKUNLE STEPHEN OLABODE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Chaggar of Counsel instructed by Peter Otto &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

 1. On 6th November 2015 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  M  Davies  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal S J Pacey in which he dismissed the  appeal  on
    immigration and human  rights  grounds  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse leave to remain in accordance with the  provisions
    of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  and  on
    human rights grounds outside them.

 2. Judge Davies noted that the grounds of application contended  that  the
    judge did not have before him the decision in  the  appellant's  wife's
    successful appeal which was allowed on Article 8 grounds on  19th  June
    2015.  Judge Davies considered that it was arguably  an  error  of  law
    that the judge had failed to consider  that  decision  before  reaching
    conclusions about the husband's appeal.

Error on a Point of Law

 3. At the hearing before me Ms Chaggar confirmed  that  the  grounds  were
    relied upon.  These point out that the  application  by  the  appellant
    relied upon the decision in the wife's appeal which concluded that  she
    had been residing in UK for a ten year period (even  if  the  ten  year
    lawful long residence claim had not been  made  out)  and  the  judge's
    significant conclusion that removal of  the  wife  would  amount  to  a
    breach of Article 8 rights.  Attention was also drawn to paragraph 6 of
    the appellant's statement submitted at  the  First-tier  hearing  which
    emphasised that the wife's appeal had been successful.  Ms Chaggar  was
    not, however, able to indicate whether or not, following the successful
    appeal by the wife, any status to remain had been granted to  her.   It
    appeared, however, that the respondent's application to appeal  against
    the decision in the wife's case was  refused  on  4th  September  2015,
    after the First- tier decision in the appellant's case  had  been  sent
    out on 30th July 2015.

 4. Mr McVeety pointed out that Judge Pacey had considered  the  appeal  on
    the papers in accordance  with  the  appellant's  request  and  on  the
    documents put before him. As paragraph 8 of the decision  makes  clear,
    such documents did not include a copy  of  the  decision  made  in  the
    wife's case which, as the grounds of appeal had conceded, was then  the
    subject of an application by the respondent for leave to  appeal.   The
    judge had therefore reached a decision open to him on  the  information
    put before him.

 5. In conclusion Ms Chaggar argued  that  the  judge  had  notice  of  the
    successful appeal so should have taken that factor into  account.   She
    also asked me to conclude that, as a result, there had not been a  fair
    hearing of the appeal on the basis set out in AM (Fair  hearing)  Sudan
    [2015] UKUT 00656 (IAC).

 6. At the end of the hearing and after considering the matter  for  a  few
    moments I announced that I was not satisfied that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal showed an error on a point of law and now  give  my
    reasons for that conclusion.

Conclusion and Reasons

 7. The basis upon which it is claimed that the judge erred is  an  alleged
    failure to take into consideration that an appeal  by  the  appellant's
    wife to remain on the basis of  ten  years'  long  residence  had  been
    allowed on Article 8 grounds.  Paragraph 8 of  the  decision  makes  it
    clear that the judge was fully aware of the submission in  the  grounds
    of appeal referring to the success  of  the  wife's  appeal  and,  from
    paragraph 9, shows that he had read  the  appellant's  statement  which
    contains a similar assertion.  The judge was not wrong to indicate that
    he did not have a  copy  of  the  decision,  could  not  rely  upon  on
    selective quotations from it and, bearing in mind that  the  respondent
    had submitted an application for leave to appeal against  it  that  the
    status of the appellant's wife was  unclear.  It  was  the  immigration
    status of the appellant's wife which  was  material  to  the  husband's
    appeal.

 8. Whilst the decision of the President in  AM  sets  out  parameters  for
    fairness at a hearing, it is also made clear that it is the duty  of  a
    judge to decide each case on the basis of  evidence  presented  by  the
    parties and it is not for the judge to assemble evidence.  Further,  it
    is clear from a letter written by solicitors to the  Tribunal  on  13th
    July 2015, just before the hearing, that the appellant decided that  he
    did not want an oral hearing but was content for the appeal to  proceed
    on the basis of the papers.   Thus,  the  appellant  had  foregone  the
    opportunity  to  be  cross-examined  upon  his  evidence  or  to   give
    explanations about matters upon which the judge  was  likely  to  reach
    material conclusions.  It should also be noted that, in paragraph 13 of
    the First-tier decision, the judge points to  a  significant  error  in
    dates in relation to the wife's appeal  and  determination  which  also
    enabled him to conclude that information given about that decision  was
    inconsistent.

 9. Whilst the judge properly concludes that he did not  have  evidence  to
    show that the wife had  been  granted  status  following  a  successful
    appeal he reached the favourable conclusion, in paragraph 11, that  the
    parties clearly had a family life in the United Kingdom and, because of
    the length of time they had been in this country, had also  established
    a private life.  The judge's consideration of human  rights  issues  on
    that basis applying the  "compelling  circumstances"  test  within  the
    framework guidance given in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and  Section
    117B of the 2002  Act  cannot  be  criticised.   The  judge  took  into
    consideration the limited evidence provided including the report from a
    consultant psychiatrist before conducting the proportionality balancing
    exercise having regard to the public interest criteria of Section 117B.

10. It is also evident, from the submissions put to  me,  that  the  actual
    status, if any, to be granted by the respondent to the appellant's wife
    has yet to be decided.  Thus, even if the judge had been given  a  copy
    of  the  First-tier  decision  and  had  been  able  to   resolve   the
    inconsistencies to which he referred, he could still have  reached  the
    decision he did bearing in mind that the status of the appellant's wife
    was, at that stage, no better than that of the appellant.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show a material error on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested or granted before the  First-tier  Tribunal  nor
do I consider that an  anonymity  direction  is  appropriate  in  the  Upper
Tribunal.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
