
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12226/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th January 2016                  |On 19th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                           Mr Tzortz-Tompi Tselios
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant in Person
For the Respondent:    Mr Esen Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on 1st July, 1992 and is a  citizen  of  Greece.
    In this appeal the Secretary of State decided on 12th  March,  2015  to
    revoke the appellant's EEA registration certificate issued  to  him  on
    14th January, 2011, pursuant to Regulation  20(2)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The appellant appealed that
    revocation and the appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup
    at Stoke-on-Trent without an oral hearing.

2.    At  paragraph  13  of  the  determination  the  judge  found  that  by
    Regulation 4 of the 2006 Regulations, the appellant as a student,  must
    demonstrate the matters set out in that Regulation.  In effect what  he
    said was that the appellant needed to show that:

         -    he was a student and had evidence  of  comprehensive  sickness
             insurance cover in the United Kingdom; and

         -    had provided an assurance to  the  Secretary  of  State  by  a
             declaration or equivalent that he had sufficient resources not
             to become a burden on the social assistance system of  the  UK
             during his period of residence.

3.   The judge noted that with the grounds of appeal was  a  statement  from
    the appellant and, although the judge found  that  this  statement  was
    brief, it appeared to him to comply and he was satisfied therefore that
    the appellant had made a declaration that he had  sufficient  resources
    not to become a burden.  The  issue  before  the  judge  was  therefore
    whether or not the  appellant  had  comprehensive  sickness  insurance.
    However, he failed to take account of transitional  arrangements  which
    Mr Tufan has very kindly made available to  me  today.   These  confirm
    that from  20th  June,  2011,  all  EEA  national  students  and  self-
    sufficient persons who are applying for documentary evidence for  their
    right to reside in the United Kingdom must provide evidence  that  they
    have comprehensive sickness insurance.

4.   Under the transitional arrangements  EEA  nationals  who  have  already
    been issued with registration certificates prior to 20th June  are  not
    required to produce such certificates of insurance.  In this  case  the
    appellant had been granted a residence  certificate  on  14th  January,
    2011 and was  not  therefore  caught  by  the  requirement  to  have  a
    certificate of comprehensive sickness insurance.  That being the  case,
    since he satisfied the judge by the declaration of means  that  he  had
    sufficient resources not to become a burden on  the  social  assistance
    system in the United Kingdom during the period of  his  residence,  the
    appeal should have been granted.

Notice of Decision

I find that for these reasons First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup erred in  law
and I set aside his decision.  My decision is  that  the  appeal  should  be
allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

