

                                    [pic]
S-T

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/12038/2014
                                                               IA/12047/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 14 October 2015                   |On 21 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                           ADESOJI JOSEPH ADEBAMBO
                          TAIWO ELIZABETH ADEBAMBO
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria born on  16  May  1975  and  3
       April 1977 respectively. The second appellant is the partner  of  the
       first appellant and appeals as his dependant. The first appellant had
       leave as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  until  21  January  2014.  An
       application was submitted for further leave as a Tier 4  Student  and
       his dependant. However, the application was refused  on  18  February
       2014 by reference to the Maintenance rules. The first  appellant  did
       not have an 'established presence', as defined  by  paragraph  1C  of
       Appendix C of the Immigration Rules, and in consequence did not  have
       sufficient funds in his account for the requisite 28-day period.  The
       reason he did not have an 'established presence' was that he had made
       his application on 28 January 2014, which was  after  his  leave  had
       expired. It followed that the  appellants  had  no  right  of  appeal
       against the decisions.

    2. The appellants lodged notices of appeal, arguing they had a right  of
       appeal because the application was  submitted  on  21  January  2014,
       which was in-time. The appellants request their appeals be decided on
       the papers.

    3. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal N Manuel  on
       19 July 2014. She noted the appellants had not responded by providing
       evidence to support the claim that the application was made prior  to
       28 January 2014. She dismissed the appeals for want of  jurisdiction.



    4. The grounds seeking permission to appeal argued the  judge  erred  in
       her assessment because she had overlooked the  fact  the  application
       was made on-line and the fee had been paid on 20  January  2014.  The
       application was made in-time.

    5. Permission to appeal was refused by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Chohan, who considered that it was apparent from the application form
       that it was completed on 20 January 2014 and a fee was charged on the
       same day. However, there was no evidence to establish  the  form  was
       actually submitted on 20 January 2014.

    6. The application was  renewed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  grounds
       asserted that the fee could only be paid once an application had been
       submitted online. However, the application was again  refused.  Upper
       Tribunal Judge  Freeman  considered  it  was  quite  clear  from  the
       respondent's letter of 12 March 2014 that it was a 'print  and  post'
       application, where a form is downloaded, completed  and  posted.  The
       letter of 12 March 2014 was a response  to  the  pre-action  protocol
       letter sent by the appellants' solicitors following the decisions  to
       refuse leave.

    7. The appellants then obtained an Order from the  Administrative  Court
       quashing the Upper Tribunal's  decision.  Permission  to  appeal  was
       formally granted by Mr C. M. G. Ockelton, Vice President of the Upper
       Tribunal, on 21 May 2015. Unfortunately, the  Administrative  Court's
       reasons for granting permission to bring  judicial  review  have  not
       been provided. A copy of the grounds was contained in the papers  and
       I made them available to the representatives.

    8. The respondent filed a rule 24 response opposing the appeal.

    9. The representatives made submissions on the issue  of  whether  Judge
       Manuel's decision contained a material error of law. I have  recorded
       these in full in the  record  of  proceedings  and  taken  them  into
       account. Discussion focused on the mechanics of making an application
       and paying the fee. Unfortunately, neither representative could offer
       definitive evidence regarding the precise process.

  Error of law

   10. I find Judge Manuel's decision does not contain a material  error  of
       law such that it must be set aside. The judge was faced with the task
       of deciding  whether  the  appellants'  factual  assertion  that  the
       application was made  online  on  20  January  2014  was  correct  or
       whether, as the respondent maintained, the form was simply downloaded
       and completed on 20 January and subsequently posted.  She had  to  do
       this "on the papers" and therefore without  the  benefit  of  hearing
       evidence and receiving  submissions.  She  had  the  benefit  of  the
       skeleton argument submitted with the appellant's bundle and copies of
       the decision and application form. She considered these documents and
       made a rational assessment of them. She dealt with the  argument  set
       out in  the  skeleton  argument  and  it  was  not  argued  that  her
       assessment on that point was faulty. She considered the remark of the
       Duty Judge that there was "some evidence" the application was in-time
       but it was clear that no final decision had been made  and  the  Duty
       Judge had suggested the parties deal with it by  way  of  preliminary
       issue. That is what Judge Manuel did. She noted  the  appellants  had
       been made aware of the  respondent's  position,  that  the  form  was
       posted on 28 January 2014, and  she  noted  the  appellants  had  not
       disputed this. I find she was entitled to reach the  conclusion  that
       the applications were submitted by post and  were  therefore  out  of
       time.

   11. Much of the discussion at the hearing concerned materials which  were
       not before the judge. If the  appellants  succeeded  in  showing  the
       application was in-time, they would also succeed in their substantive
       appeals. I was prepared to consider whether reaching a  just  outcome
       demanded a more flexible approach to the question of  error  of  law.
       However, consideration  of  the  new  materials  did  not  alter  the
       position.

   12. Ms Iqbal provided the appellants' bank statement showing the fee  was
       paid on 20 January 2014. This accorded with the information regarding
       payment by "credit card" on page 1 of the form.  However,  she  could
       not establish that the renewed grounds  of  appeal  were  correct  in
       asserting that a fee could  only  be  paid  if  an  application  were
       submitted  on-line  at  the  same  time.  It  remained   a   distinct
       possibility that a fee could be paid and a  form  downloaded  without
       the form being submitted online in the same transaction.  Whilst  the
       rules provide for online applications in paragraph 34G, such that the
       date of application would be the date the form was submitted  online,
       I do not find this happened in this instance. Mr Tarlow  pointed  out
       the rubric on page 2 of the form stated, "You need to submit this  to
       us by post in order to make your application." In other  words,  this
       was not a category in which an  online  application  was  acceptable.
       Such a conclusion would chime with the fact the online form had  been
       signed and dated in manuscript by the first appellant on pages 15 and
       16 and also the Home Office letter of 12  March  2014,  which  stated
       that the appellants signed the application on  20  January  and  then
       posted it recorded delivery on 28 January.  It  was  received  on  29
       January 2014. The date of application was therefore 28  January  2014
       in line with paragraph 34G(i) of the rules.

   13. The balance of the evidence therefore  supports  the  view  that  the
       appellants downloaded a form when they paid the  fee  on  20  January
       2014, then printed it off  and  posted  it  on  28  January  2014  in
       accordance with the guidance on the form. Unfortunately for them,  it
       was sent too late and was out of time, leave  having  expired  on  21
       January 2014.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision, dismissing the appeals for want  of
    jurisdiction, did not contain a material error of law and shall stand.




                               Signed   Date 15 October 2015


                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal


