
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12715/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 November 2016                   |On 18 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                              abdul malik awan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Iengar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 10 January 1985.  On  6
    September 2013 the appellant made a combined application for  leave  to
    remain in the UK as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under  the  points-
    based system.  The appellant was interviewed twice regarding his Tier 1
    application, first on 21 November 2013 and then  on  15  January  2015.
    His application was refused by way of a decision letter dated 13  March
    2015.

2.   An appeal was taken to the First-tier Tribunal on  23  March  2016  and
    was dismissed by a determination promulgated on  31  March  2016.   The
    appellant thereafter appealed this decision and permission to appeal to
    the Upper  Tribunal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  9
    September 2016 and later granted by the Upper Tribunal  on  11  October
    2016.

The Issue

3.   The issue raised in this case was a very  short  one.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal was informed that the respondent had not, despite calls on her
    to do so, disclosed to the appellant the whole transcript of his  first
    interview.

4.   We were informed that this interview had lasted  for  some  two  hours.
    All that had been disclosed by the  respondent  with  respect  to  this
    interview was a very short summary, running only to a few lines.

5.   It appears that no motion was made, on behalf of the appellant,  before
    the First-tier Tribunal to adjourn in order for a  full  transcript  of
    the said interview to be made available.  However, it was submitted  to
    the First-tier  Tribunal  that  in  the  whole  circumstances  no  real
    reliance could be placed on the summary of the interview.

6.   The case proceeded before the First-tier Tribunal.  Despite  the  above
    submission it is clear from paragraphs 10 to 13, 22 and 43 of the First-
    tier Tribunal's  determination  that  it  placed  significant,  if  not
    critical, reliance on the terms of the said  summary  in  reaching  its
    decision on the core issue in the case, namely: the credibility of  the
    appellant.

7.   In  particular  at  paragraph  43  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  as
    follows:-

         "I agree with the respondent's reasons for refusing on the basis of
         what the appellant  said  in  his  credibility  interviews.   After
         considering those interviews fully  the  only  sensible  conclusion
         that the respondent could have reached is that  the  appellant  had
         failed to satisfactorily  establish  that  he  was  in  a  credible
         business."

8.   Against that background the  issue  before  us  became  this:  did  the
    appellant have a fair hearing before the First-tier Tribunal?

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

9.   The submissions made on behalf of the appellant were  in  fairly  short
    compass.  First it was argued that the hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was unfair in the absence  of  the  whole  transcript  of  the
    interview being available in that:

    (a)  A summary could not be considered  simply  on  its  face,  a  true
         reflection of the answers given at the interview, and

    (b)  Having only  been  served  a  summary,  the  appellant  could  not
         adequately test the respondent's assertions, or properly  reply  to
         the respondent's findings based upon the interview.

10.  In support of the above reliance was placed on the observations of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Miah (interviewer's comments:  disclosure:  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00515 (IAC) at paragraph (iv) of  the  headnote  where  the
    following is said:

         "However, the document enshrining the  interviewer's  comments  ...
         must be disclosed as a matter of course.  An appellant's right to a
         fair hearing dictates this course."

11.   It  was  further  argued  on  behalf  of  the   appellant   that   the
    determination at paragraph 29 revealed a material error of  fact.   The
    First-tier Tribunal it was submitted at that part of the  determination
    incorrectly stated that:

         "This appeal hearing provided the appellant with a full opportunity
         to challenge the respondent's interview records.  The appellant did
         not challenge them."

12.  It was submitted that the  appellant  had  not  been  afforded  a  full
    opportunity to challenge the respondent's interview records, because  a
    full set was not provided to the appellant.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    had materially erred in fact by concluding that the appellant  did  not
    challenge the interview records.  It was  submitted  that  this  was  a
    material error as it incorrectly presumed that the appellant  had  been
    afforded the opportunity to properly  challenge  all  of  the  evidence
    submitted against him.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

13.  The submission made by Mr Avery was a concise one: in  the  absence  of
    the appellant having sought and been  refused  an  adjournment  on  the
    basis of the failure to provide  the  whole  transcript  of  the  first
    interview the appellant's argument did not  get  off  the  ground.   He
    further  submitted  that  Miah  could  not  be  read  across  into  the
    circumstances of this case given the different regulatory background of
    the two cases.

Discussion

14.  Dealing first with Mr Avery's  position  that  in  the  absence  of  an
    adjournment being sought at the First-tier Tribunal hearing the  appeal
    must fail, we reject this argument.  We believe that the best course in
    the circumstances of this case to have been followed by  the  appellant
    before the First-tier Tribunal would have been to seek an  adjournment.
    However, the failure to do so does not in our view in any way  diminish
    the criticisms of the determination made by Counsel for the  appellant.
    We without difficulty hold that  there  is  substantial  merit  in  the
    position as advanced before us on behalf of the appellant.

15.  We are satisfied that to decide, to a material extent, the  core  issue
    in the case on the basis of a summary of the  first  interview  was  to
    render the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal unfair.  To adopt
    this course is to first fail to consider, what  may  have  been,  other
    material evidence contained in the rest of the interview  and  secondly
    is to fail to allow the appellant to properly challenge,  by  reference
    to the whole terms of the interview, the assertions being made  by  the
    respondent based on the summary produced.

16.  A hearing cannot be fair where one side (in this case  the  respondent)
    is allowed to "cherry-pick" the parts of an interview which  it  wishes
    to rely on and not let the other side see the rest of the interview  to
    examine whether anything within that  can  materially  assist  them  in
    rebutting such parts of the interview as relied on.

17.  The observations in Miah on disclosure we believe set forth  a  general
    principle regarding disclosure  which  can  be  read  across  into  the
    circumstances of the instant case, namely: any document  relied  on  by
    the Secretary of State must be disclosed to an applicant.

Decision

18.  For the above reasons we find that there has been a material  error  of
    law.  We accordingly set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
     Given the basis upon which we are setting aside the said  decision  we
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing before  a
    differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

19.  We make no anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

