

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Numbers: IA/12410/2014
                                                               IA/12414/2014
                                                               IA/12418/2014
                                                               IA/12426/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at:  Manchester                         |   Decision Promulgated      |
|On:  9th January 2015                         |   On 3rd March 2015         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Wang Yan Chang
                              Mrs Shuxian Chang
                              Master Alex Chang
                             Master Jason Chang
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents

For the Appellant:     Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


For the Respondent:    Mr Hammond, Counsel instructed by Rahman & Company
                       Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents are all nationals of Guyana. They  are  respectively  a
    husband, wife and their two minor sons. On the 9th July 2014 the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Ransley)  allowed  their  linked  appeals  against
    decisions to remove them from the  United  Kingdom  under  s10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999.  The  Secretary  of  State  now  has
    permission[1] to appeal against that decision.


 2. This case concerns a family who applied for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on 'private life' grounds. Their applications were  made
    on the 13th March 2013 and so fell to  be  considered  under  the  'new
    rules', in  particular  paragraph  276ADE.  Reliance  was  specifically
    placed on the fact that the two children were born in the UK  and  have
    never lived anywhere else. The eldest was born on the 8th December 2005
    and so at the date of the application was aged 7 years and 3 months. He
    therefore fell for consideration under 276ADE(iv):
         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or
 3. The Secretary of State  rejected  the  applications[2].  In  a  refusal
    letter  dated  the  20th  February  2014  consideration  was  given  to
    paragraph 353B of  the  Rules,  Appendix  FM  ('partner'  and  'parent'
    routes), paragraph 276ADE and  s55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.  The approach  taken  was  to  first  refuse  the
    adults (since neither had leave the other could not found a case  under
    FM) and to then reach  the  following  conclusion  in  respect  of  the
    children:


         "as his parents applications  under  Appendix  FM  have  also  been
         refused, removal to Guyana is felt to be proportionate in his case.
         Therefore the Secretary of State is not satisfied that he can  meet
         the requirements of Rule 276ADE(1)(iv)".

 4. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley  took
    a different approach. She noted that the  applications  made  in  March
    2013 had made clear that the main applicant under 276ADE was Alex,  who
    had lived in the UK over seven years. She found that he was entitled to
    consideration of his application and proceeded to deal with the  appeal
    in the opposite order from that taken in the refusal letter. She  first
    considered Alex's appeal. She found that he is well integrated into the
    school system here, that  he  has  friends  and  close  family  members
    (grandparents, aunts and uncles) in the UK  and  by  contrast  none  in
    Guyana.  She  had  heard  argument  that  in  Guyana  they  had   faced
    discrimination  as  an  ethnic  minority.   The   determination   gives
    consideration  to  the  fact  that  the  adult  appellants   are   both
    overstayers. Mr Chang had arrived in June 2000 as a visitor, had  never
    sought to vary his status and had simply remained  without  leave.  Mrs
    Yang arrived on a 24 hour transit visa on the  2nd  November  2004  and
    also remained.   Judge  Ransley  also  found  as  fact  that  they  had
    deliberately waited until Alex had passed his seventh  birthday  before
    they had sought to regularise their position. That said, she found that
    the "two children are not to be blamed for their  parents'  misconduct,
    viz. breach of UK immigration law".    She  found  that  Alex  met  the
    requirements of 276ADE(iv)  and  allowed  his  appeal  on  that  basis.
    Then, having found it to be  contrary  to  his  best  interests  to  be
    separated from either his brother or parents, she found  their  removal
    to be disproportionate and the appeals of the rest of the  family  were
    allowed under Article 8.



    Error of Law: Grounds and Response


 5. The Secretary of State appeals on the ground that the term "reasonable"
    in paragraph 276ADE (iv) imports a proportionality  consideration  into
    the rule:


         "The reasonability criterion imposes a consideration  both  of  the
         child's best interests, and any  other  factors  in  the  migrant's
         favour, and a consideration of the public interest. It is  akin  to
         the proportionality evaluation demanded by the  fifth  question  in
         Razgar [2004] UKHL 27"


 6. It is submitted that the determination thereby contains an error of law
    in that "only the factors weighing  on  the  appellant's  side  of  the
    balance" are considered in the context of the rule.  The  Secretary  of
    State submits that 'best  interests'  cannot  be  determinative  of  an
    appeal.  Reliance is placed on EV (Philippines) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874.
    Per Christopher Clarke LJ:


         36. In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic an
         answer falls to be given to the question: is it in the best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer the child has been
         here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of his education,
         the looser his ties with the country in question, and the more
         deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater the weight
         that falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly in
         the child's best interests that he should not return, the need to
         maintain immigration control may well not tip the balance. By
         contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only
         on balance (with some factors pointing the other way), the result
         may be the opposite.


         37. In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken into
         account the strong weight to be given to the need to maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic well-being of the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi, the applicants have no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the parents may
         also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers, or have acted
         deceitfully.

    And Lewison LJ at 58-60:


         58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests
         of the children must be made on the basis that the facts are as
         they are in the real world. If one parent has no right to remain,
         but the other parent does, that is the background against which the
         assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,
         then that is the background against which the assessment is
         conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
         the country of origin?


         59. On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to expect the children
         to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the family
         would be separated and the children would be deprived of the right
         to grow up in the country of which they were citizens.


         60. That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case none
         of the family is a British citizen. None has the right to remain in
         this country. If the mother is removed, the father has no
         independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As the
         immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interests to
         remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question of
         fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh the benefit to
         the children of remaining with their parents. Just as we cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot educate the
         world.

 7. In summary, the Secretary of State submits that the First-tier Tribunal
    decision in respect of  Alex  was  flawed  for  failure  to  weigh  his
    parents' lack of status against him (or to attach sufficient weight  to
    that fact); the appeals of his parents and brother fell to be dismissed
    because none of them qualified under  the  Rules  and  there  were  not
    sufficiently "compelling reasons" to allow them under Article 8.


 8. Mr Hammond submits that this appeal is nothing more than an attempt  to
    re-argue the case.  He points out that the Tribunal set out its reasons
    and that it would appear that the credibility of the witnesses had been
    accepted as to why it would be unreasonable for Alex to go  to  Guyana.
    He argues that the 'child first' approach taken by the Tribunal  is  to
    be preferred  to  the  'adult  first'  order  of  the  refusal  letter.
    Considering the position of the child first ensures that  the  decision
    making process is consistent with s55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.




    Legal Framework


 9. What is the correct approach to 276ADE(iv)?  Does the term 'reasonable'
    import a Razgar proportionality balancing exercise  into  the  Rule  as
    contended in the grounds of appeal?


10. I look first to the rule itself:
         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:
         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and
         (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and
         (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or
         (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
         least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting
         any period of imprisonment); or
         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there would be very significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK
11. There are four alternative provisions contained within the rule. Two of
    them simply require a period of residence: any applicant who has had 20
    years continuous residence or a young person between the age of 18  and
    25 who has spent at least half of his life in the UK will  prima  facie
    succeed.  Whether  they  do  will  depend  of  whether  they  meet  the
    'suitability requirements' set out in S-LTR 1.1-2.3 and S-LTR  2.3  and
    3.1. So, for instance, the applicant who arrived on  her  9th  birthday
    and made an application the week after she turned 18 could only succeed
    if she does not fall foul of any of those diverse criteria set  out  in
    Appendix FM (matters failing under the heading 'suitability' range from
    being under a deportation order  to  failing  without  good  reason  to
    attend an interview).  On the face of it the 'residence' provisions set
    down the minimum requirements for strength of private  life  needed  to
    engage the UK's responsibility, whilst the  'suitability'  requirements
    are the countervailing matters that that Secretary of  State  considers
    must weigh against an applicant. That suggests that if anywhere, 276ADE
    (i) is where the decision-maker is invited to consider proportionality.


12. The two remaining alternatives within 276ADE are  (iv),  pertaining  to
    children, and (vi), applicable to those adults  who  have  neither  the
    qualification by way of age nor long residence to immediately  found  a
    claim under 'private life'.  The Secretary of  State  has  consistently
    emphasised the high threshold inherent in (vi). An adult applicant  who
    cannot show that he has been here for a  sufficiently  long  period  of
    time must instead show that he has lost "all ties" to  his  country  of
    origin, or in the new formulation,  show  that  there  would  be  "very
    significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into  the  country
    to which he would have to  go  if  required  to  leave  the  UK".  That
    reflects the Secretary of State's view that an adult who has  not  been
    here for a very long period will ordinarily be expected to give up  any
    private life that he has managed to establish  in  that  time  and  re-
    establish a new one somewhere else. The rule requires such an adult  to
    give very weighty reasons why his private life in the UK has assumed  a
    greater significance than it would  otherwise  be  afforded.  The  high
    threshold therefore applies to whether Article  8(1)  rights  are  even
    engaged. As with other applicants under the Rule, the  'proportionality
    exercise' is reflected in the Appendix FM suitability requirements.

13. That leaves children, who must now show a set period of long  residence
    and that it would not be reasonable to expect them  to  leave  the  UK.
    Given the structure of the rest of the paragraph there would not appear
    to be any rationale for imposing an additional proportionality test  on
    the child.  If the requirement is to be read in the context of the rule
    as  a  whole,  'reasonable',  as  in  'very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration'  goes to strength of private life, rather than the  public
    interest factors which militate against leave being  granted.  I  would
    suggest that as with all other 'private  life'  applicants,  these  are
    contained in Appendix FM.

14. That reading of the rule is supported by  the  statutory  framework  of
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended by the Immigration Act 2014):

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases


         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.


         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-


           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4) Little weight should be given to-


           (a) a private life, or
           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.


         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom.

    [emphasis added]


15. As a matter  of  construction,  the  interpretation  of  the  rule  now
    advanced by the Secretary of State in this appeal  would  seem  to  run
    counter to the statutory scheme and  the  stated  purpose  as  set  out
    above. If 'reasonable' were to be read as 'proportionate' section  117B
    would introduce some rather  circular  reasoning.  If  the  meaning  of
    'reasonable' is  as  the  Secretary  of  State  contends,  then  it  is
    difficult to see how and where the specified countervailing factors are
    weighed against the child applicant.  It does not, for obvious reasons,
    appear to be the Secretary of State's case that the public interest  is
    to be factored in twice.

16. I am satisfied, having regard to the plain wording of the rule and  the
    statute, that 'reasonable' does not  import  a  Razgar  proportionality
    balancing exercise into the rule. What then, does it mean?

17. The genesis of this provision was the concession known as DP5/96.  That
    policy, and those which followed, created a  general,  but  rebuttable,
    presumption that enforcement action would  "not  normally"  proceed  in
    cases where a child was born here and had lived continuously to the age
    of 7 or over, or where, having come to the United Kingdom at  an  early
    age, 7 years or more of continuous residence had  been  accumulated[3].
    As the  policy  statement[4]  which  accompanied  the  introduction  of
    paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) puts it: "a period of 7 continuous years spent
    in the UK as a child will generally establish  a  sufficient  level  of
    integration for family and private life  to  exist  such  that  removal
    would normally  not  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the  child"  [my
    emphasis].  The current guidance reaffirms that this  is  the  starting
    point for consideration of  the  rule.    The  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction 'Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as
    a Partner or Parent) and Private Life:  10-Year  Routes'   ("the  IDI")
    gives the following guidance:
         11.2.4. Would it be unreasonable to expect a non-British Citizen
         child to leave the UK?
         The requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived in the
         UK for a continuous period of at least the 7 years immediately
         preceding the date of application, recognises that over time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK,
         to the extent that being required to leave the UK may be
         unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK, and strong reasons will be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of
         more than 7 years.
         The decision maker must consider whether, in the specific
         circumstances of the case, it would be reasonable to expect the
         child to live in another country.
         The decision maker must consider the facts relating to each child
         in the UK in the family individually, and also consider all the
         facts relating to the family as a whole. The decision maker should
         also engage with any specific issues explicitly raised by the
         family, by each child or on behalf of each child.
18. I have had regard to the Hansard record of the debate in the  House  of
    Lords on the introduction of section 117B (6) NIAA 2002 (as amended  by
    the Immigration Act 2014) in which Home Office Minister Lord Wallace of
    Tankerness explained the government's thinking on the  significance  of
    the seven year mark:


         "we have acknowledged that if a child has reached the age of seven,
         he or she will have moved beyond simply having his or her needs met
         by the parents. The child will be part of the education system  and
         may be  developing  social  networks  and  connections  beyond  the
         parents and home. However, a child who has not spent seven years in
         the United Kingdom either will be  relatively  young  and  able  to
         adapt, or if they are older, will be likely  to  have  spent  their
         earlier years in their country of origin or another  country.  When
         considering  the  best  interests  of  the  child,  the   fact   of
         citizenship is important but so is the  fact  that  the  child  has
         spent  a  large  part  of  his  or  her  childhood  in  the  United
         Kingdom"[5].

19. All of this guidance recognises that after  a  period  of  seven  years
    residence a child will have forged strong links  with  the  UK  to  the
    extent that he or she will have an established private life outside  of
    the immediate embrace of his parents and siblings. It is  that  private
    life which is the starting point of consideration under this Rule.  The
    relationships and understanding of life that a  child  develops  as  he
    grows older are matters which in themselves attract  weight.  The  fact
    that the child might be able to adapt to life elsewhere is  a  relevant
    factor but it cannot be determinative, since exclusive  focus  on  that
    question would obscure the fact that for such  a  child,  his  "private
    life" in the UK is everything he knows.   That is the  starting  point,
    and the task of the Tribunal is to then look to other factors to decide
    whether, on the particular  facts  of  this  case,  these  displace  or
    outweigh the presumption that interference with that private life  will
    normally be contrary to the child's best interests. Those  factors  are
    wide-ranging and varied. The IDI gives several examples including,  for
    instance, the child's health,  whether  his  parents  have  leave,  the
    extent of family connections to the country  of  proposed  return.  The
    assessment of what is "reasonable" will call for the Tribunal to  weigh
    all of  these  matters  into  the  balance  and  to  see  whether  they
    constitute "strong reasons" - the language of  the  current  IDI  -  to
    proceed with removal notwithstanding the established Article  8  rights
    of the child in the UK.


20. It follows that the  guidance  in  EV  (Philippines)  is  not  directly
    relevant to the question of what is "reasonable".  That  case  concerns
    Article 8 entirely outside of  the  Rules,  the  children  in  question
    falling far short  of  seven  years  residence.   "Reasonable"  in  the
    context of 276ADE is not to be  equated  with  Razgar  proportionality.
    Although both involve consideration of  the  same  set  of  facts,  the
    starting point is quite different. An appeal can only be  allowed  with
    reference to Article 8 'outside of the  Rules'  where  there  are  some
    particular compelling circumstances not adequately reflected  in  those
    Rules: see EV.  By contrast it is the Respondent's stated  policy  that
    "strong reasons" will be required to refuse leave to a  child  who  has
    accrued seven years continuous residence.




    My Findings

21. It follows from the foregoing that I do  not  find  any  merit  in  the
    submission that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to  conduct  a
    Razgar  style  proportionality  assessment  within   the   context   of
    276ADE(iv). Nor do I accept that the Tribunal should  have  treated  as
    determinative the fact that the  adult  appellants  before  it  had  no
    leave. Judge Ransley's starting point was the fact that Alex had  lived
    in the UK at that point all of his eight and half years.  He had  never
    in fact been to his "home"  country  of  Guyana,  and  apart  from  his
    nationality, had  no  discernible  links  with  it.  It  was  expressly
    accepted that none of his extended family remain there,  and  that  his
    grandparents, aunts and uncles are here.  It is something of a  stretch
    for Mr Hammond to  submit  that  the  determination  contains  positive
    findings of fact that this family experienced racial discrimination  in
    Guyana, but it is correct to say that it was evidence recorded that was
    not rejected: see paragraph 12 of the  determination.   The  matter  of
    ethnicity was also relevant, to paraphrase the IDI, as to whether  Alex
    would be familiar with the culture there - there  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the UK hosts any significant diaspora  of  Chinese  origin
    Guyanese nationals.   Overall the findings of Judge Ransley  were  open
    to her on the evidence.  There  were  no  particular  features  of  the
    evidence to suggest that it would be reasonable to expect this child to
    leave the UK. The fact that his parents and brother would be going with
    him to the new and strange environment in  Guyana  was  not  in  itself
    sufficient to rebut the presumption created by his long  residence  and
    established private life.

22. As for the remaining appellants before the First-tier  Tribunal  it  is
    difficult to see how the  Secretary  of  State  can  contend  that  the
    decision should have been otherwise, since  section  117B(6)  expressly
    provides that in an Article 8 appeal -  as  theirs  was  -  the  public
    interest does not require the removal of parents who have a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child and  it  would
    not be reasonable for that child to be  removed.  The  appeals  of  the
    adult appellants therefore fell to be allowed with  reference  to  that
    statutory provision.  I presume that it is not contended that it  would
    be an error of law to allow Jason's appeal in those circumstances.


      Decisions

23. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law and it is upheld.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   30th
                                January 2015
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly on the 29th July
2014
[2] The refusals had not initially been accompanied by an immigration
decision giving rise to a right of appeal. Judicial review proceedings had
been launched which were settled by consent, with a s10 notice being issued
to each Respondent on the 20th February 2014
[3] For a detailed history of the rule and its development see Dyson LH in
Munir v SSHD [2012] UKSC 32 paras 9-13
[4] The Grounds of Compatibility with Article 8 of the ECHR: Statement by
the Home Office (13 June 2012) at 27.
[5] At column 1383, Hansard 5th March 2014

