
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12033/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 November 2014                           |On 8 December 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE Ms G A BLACK



                                   Between

                         MS CHRISTIANA MARY ABIMBOLA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Hulse, Counsel, instructed by A&A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against a decision by the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Molloy) promulgated on 4 September 2014 in which the Tribunal dismissed
    the appeal on immigration and human rights  grounds  having  determined
    the appeal without a hearing under Rule 15(2)(ba-c)  of  the  Asylum  &
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 ("the procedure rules").

Background

2.   The Appellant whose date of birth is 23 March 1973 and is a citizen  of
     Nigeria.

3.   The Respondent refused her application with reference to Regulations  2
    and 17(1A) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006
    on the grounds that her marriage was one of convenience.

4.   At the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  the  appellant  was  not  legally
    represented.  The Tribunal determined the appeal on the  papers  having
    invoked Rule 15 of the procedure rules primarily because it found  that
    the  parties  failed  to  produce  an  earlier   potentially   relevant
    determination.

5.   On the day of the hearing the Tribunal became alert to the  possibility
    of there being a relevant earlier determination to which the principles
    deriving from Devaseelan [2003] ImmAR 1 may have applied.  The Tribunal
    raised this with the  parties  and  enquiries  were  pursued.   In  the
    Statement of Reasons [14] the Tribunal states :

         "The writer then specifically informed the parties  that  he  would
         welcome a full copy of the decision in the visit  visa  case  being
         produced by 2 pm that  afternoon,  failing  which  and  in  default
         hearing  would  have  recourse  to  Rule  15  of  the  Asylum   and
         Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005."

6.   When reconvening  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  informed  the
    Tribunal that it had not been possible to locate the  earlier  decision
    and there was no record of this  appeal.   Enquiries  with  her  former
    solicitors  in  Nigeria  were  pursued  by  the  appellant  but  proved
    fruitless.  The Tribunal gave the parties further time  until  3.15  pm
    and indicated that the case  would  proceed  whatever  the  outcome  of
    enquiries in Nigeria.

7.   The Tribunal  refused  an  application  for  adjournment  made  by  the
    Respondent. The Tribunal summarised  the  matters  that  it  considered
    relevant to the application of Rule 15 and invited  comment  from  both
    parties. The respondent's representative submitted  that  the  Tribunal
    could hear oral evidence. The Tribunal relied  on  Rule  15(2)  of  the
    procedure rules and determined  the  appeal  without  an  oral  hearing
    having decided that the parties failed to comply with  a  direction  of
    the Tribunal and the Tribunal was satisfied, bearing in mind the extent
    of the failure and reasons for it, that it is appropriate to  determine
    appeal without a hearing. Its reasons were set out at [48-85] that  the
    earlier  determination  had  not  been  produced  which  prevented  the
    Tribunal's further consideration in respect of the EEA issues.


Grounds of Application

8.   Ground 1 - the  Tribunal  made  a  material  misdirection  of  law  and
    arrived at a perverse or irrational conclusion. The Tribunal relied  on
    Rule 15(2) of the 2005 Procedure Rules to dismiss the appeal.

9.   Ground 2 - the Tribunal materially erred  in  its  application  of  the
    applicability of Devaseelan guidance in the proceedings.  Both  parties
    confirmed  that  no  reliance  was  to  be  placed  on   the   previous
    determination and there was no evidence before the Tribunal to indicate
    that the decision made eight years ago had any relevance to the present
    appeal.  It was therefore unreasonable on the part of the  Tribunal  to
    consider that it had any relevance.

10.  Ground 3 - the Tribunal  erred  by  dismissing  the  appeal  without  a
    hearing as to the merits, on the basis of the failure  to  produce  the
    previous determination.  The proper course open to the Tribunal was  to
    have adjourned the hearing for the decision to be produced.  It was not
    reasonable to expect the appellant to get a copy of the  decision  from
    her solicitors in Nigeria on the day of the appeal.  Failure to adjourn
    was wholly unreasonable and unfair as to be perverse.

11.  Ground 4 -  in making use of Rule 15(2) the  Tribunal  failed  to  have
    regard to Rule 4 of the Immigration and Asylum  Procedure  Rules  2005,
    namely the overriding objective.  Fairness dictated that  the  Tribunal
    should have taken oral evidence as suggested by the respondent.

Permission to appeal

12.  Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Zucker  granted  permission  to
    appeal on 21 October 2014 on the following grounds:

         "Although, but only because the judge arguably 'entered the arena',
         there was a basis  for  finding  dishonesty  on  the  part  of  the
         appellant, it is also arguable that this was not fairly  tested  by
         the procedure adopted by the judge. This is arguably, all the  more
         so because the  appellant  was  not  represented  and  because  the
         respondent was content for the judge to determine the appeal in the
         absence of that earlier determination (see  paragraph  44).  It  is
         arguable that  the  proceedings  were  tainted  by  unfairness;  he
         decided to proceed without a hearing in circumstances where he  was
         'disappointed' by the conduct of both parties."


13.  A Rule 24 response was submitted but was not relied on at the  hearing.








The Hearing
Submissions

14.  Miss Hulse submitted that the decision made by the Tribunal was not  in
    accordance with the law, the Tribunal's  Procedure  Rules  and  not  in
    accordance with the Human Rights Act 1998.  She further submitted  that
    even having applied Rule 15(2) the Tribunal failed  to  engage  in  any
    determination of the issues at all.  There was no consideration of  any
    evidence to support any finding on either side and no consideration  of
    whether the Secretary of State had exercised discretion  or  not.   The
    Tribunal failed to consider the human rights of the  relevant  parties.
    Rule 15(2) was invoked by the Tribunal where there was a previous first
    determination approaching eight years old, where the appellant was  not
    legally represented and the Home Office had placed no reliance on  that
    determination.   The  Tribunal  failed  to  consider   the   overriding
    principles  with  regard  to  fairness.   There  had  been  no   proper
    consideration  of  the  appellant's  claim  whatsoever  in  reaching  a
    decision.

15.  Miss Holmes did not  rely  on  the  Rule  24  response  submitted.  She
    concurred with the submissions made on behalf of the appellant.   There
    was unfairness by the Tribunal; no real findings had been made  or  any
    proper consideration given to the  appellant's  claim.   There  was  no
    direction made in advance of the hearing to produce the  determination.
    This was a matter raised by the Tribunal on the day of the hearing.

16.  It was agreed between the parties that the Tribunal had erred  in  law.
    Having considered all of the  relevant  material  and  the  submissions
    made, I found that there was an error  of  law  by  way  of  procedural
    irregularity by the  Tribunal  which  resulted  in  unfairness  to  the
    appellant. She did not have a fair hearing.

Discussion and reasons

17.  I find that the decision taken by the Tribunal to invoke Rule  15A  was
    in the circumstances of this appeal an error. All of  the  grounds  are
    made out. I find that the Tribunal further erred by refusing  to  grant
    an adjournment so that the earlier determination,  which  the  Tribunal
    considered to be potentially relevant, could be obtained.

18.  I am satisfied that  the  application  of  Rule  15A  resulted  in  the
    appellant being treated unfairly.  The Tribunal raised the issue  of  a
    possible previous decision at its own instigation where  there  was  no
    indication that it had any relevance  to  the  present  proceedings  or
    having regard to Devaseelan principles  [7].  The  first  determination
    was not relied on nor  considered  to  be  relevant  by  either  party.
    Reasonable efforts had been made by both parties  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing to obtain a copy of the decision which itself  was  some  eight
    years old and an explanation given as to why it was not relevant to the
    current issues and facts. It was reasonable given that the  matter  was
    raised on the day of the hearing for the Tribunal to  have  granted  an
    adjournment in such circumstances.

19.   The  Tribunal  invited  responses  from  the  representatives   having
    indicated its reasons for  intending  to  rely  on  Rule  15A[34].  The
    Tribunal relied on the  late  response  in  filing  documents  for  the
    hearing, the appellant's failure to produce a witness statement and the
    failure of both sides to supply a copy of the first determination under
    Devaseelan principles which it considered was their duty/responsibility
    to do [51-73]. The Tribunal emphasised that the parties failed in their
    duty to produce a "potentially Devaseelan relevant decision" [66].

20.  Having decided to determine the appeal on the papers the Tribunal  then
    failed to consider the merits of the claim at all.  The Tribunal failed
    to give sufficient weight to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was  not
    represented and had not understood that she needed to produce a witness
    statement and/or that  she  could  give  oral  evidence.  Further,  the
    Tribunal emphasised that its consideration was limited  and  restricted
    by the failure to produce the earlier decision.

21.    I am satisfied that the proper and fair course of action was for  the
    Tribunal to have adjourned the proceedings so that it had before it the
    determination that it considered to be of potential  relevance  to  the
    appeal.  By its actions and overall approach the  Tribunal  appears  to
    have indeed "entered the arena" and has failed to  reach  an  objective
    and fair decision in line with the overriding objective under Rule 4 of
    the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2005. The only course of  action  open  to
    the Upper Tribunal is for the matter to be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh.

Decision

22.   There is a material error of law in the decision which  shall  be  set
    aside.
    The matter is to be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (excluding
    Judge Molloy) for re hearing at Taylor House on 27th April 2015.





Signed                                  Date 4.12.2014

G A Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

