
IAC-AH--V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12325/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 JANUARY 2015                           |On 27 JANUARY 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL GA BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

                                  MS A Z K
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery (Home Office presenting officer)
For the Claimant: In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  decision  and
    reasons by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Sweet) who allowed the appeal
    under the Immigration Rules EX 1 and in the alternative under Article 8
    ECHR.  The decision was promulgated on 17th October 2014.

 2. For convenience I shall refer to  the  parties  as  "the  Secretary  of
    State" who is the appellant in this matter and to "the Claimant."

Background

 3. The Claimant is a citizen of Sierra Leone and is female and was born on
    4th April 1989. She married her husband on 4th April  2013  in  Gambia.
    She entered the UK as a family visitor on 14th August 2013 and  applied
    for further leave as  a  parent  (D-LTRP1.1).   The  Claimant  and  her
    husband, who is a British citizen, have a young child born in the UK on
    8.9.2014. The Secretary of State considered the  application  prior  to
    the birth of the child and refused the same as  the  Claimant  was  not
    eligible under  paragraph  E-LTRP.2.1  having  entered  as  a  visitor,
    paragraph 276 ADE was not applicable, and  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances.

Tribunal

 4. The Tribunal considered the appeal and the fact of  the  birth  of  the
    child, under EX 1 and allowed the  appeal  accordingly  [24].   In  the
    alternative  the  Tribunal  considered  Article  8   ECHR   and   found
    exceptional circumstances for consideration outside of  the  Rules.  It
    concluded that the decision was disproportionate having regard  to  the
    'Chikwamba principle' finding that the only reason for  return  was  to
    make a new application for  leave  and  that  the  Claimant,  would  if
    returned to Sierra Leone, be separated from her family [25].

Grounds & permission

 5. In grounds of application the Secretary of State argued  firstly,  that
    the Tribunal erred by applying EX 1 when  it  was  not  a  freestanding
    provision as confirmed in  Sabir  (Appendix  FM-EX1  not  freestanding)
    [2014] UKUT 00063. The eligibility criteria under section E applied  to
    the exceptions under EX1. The  second  ground  was  that  there  was  a
    misdirection in law by the Tribunal regarding Article 8   by  following
    the  'Chikwamba  Principle'  which  had  now  been  superseded  by  new
    legislation setting out the correct approach to public interest in  the
    Immigration Act 2014 .  It was not unjustifiably harsh  to  expect  the
    Claimant to return to Gambia from where she can make an application for
    entry clearance.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Judge  Saffer  on  1st
    December 2014.

Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me the Claimant and  her  partner  were  present.
    They were not legally represented. I  explained  to  the  Claimant  the
    procedure that would be followed by the Tribunal,  the  nature  of  the
    proceedings, and that as she was not represented I would ascertain that
    she understood the proceedings, that she would have an  opportunity  to
    address the Tribunal and to respond to the submissions. Mr  Avery  made
    submissions  and  amplified  the  grounds  of  the   application.    He
    acknowledged that the Secretary of State had not  considered  the  best
    interests of the child under section 55 of the 2009 Act, as  the  child
    was born after the decision was made. The Tribunal failed  to  consider
    "Chikwamba" in light  of  the  new  rules  regarding  public  interest.
    However the First -tier Tribunal was able to consider the circumstances
    at the date of hearing.

 8. At the end of the hearing I indicated that I found an error of law  and
    that ground one was made out.  I reserved my decision in so far as  the
    second ground was concerned and explained that in  any  event  I  would
    prepare a full written decision and reasons, and how the  matter  would
    proceed having found the error of law;  whether  by  way  of  remittal,
    further hearing,  written  submissions  or  by  this  Tribunal  without
    further hearing.  Mr Avery indicated that the appeal  ought  to  be  re
    heard as the error rendered the entire decision unsound.

Discussion and decision

 9. It was common ground that the Claimant could not  meet  the  family  or
    private life rules  under  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph  267ADE.   I  am
    satisfied that the Tribunal made a clear error of law in  treating  EX1
    as a free standing provision which it is not, as  confirmed  in  Sabir.
    To be eligible under the exceptional  provisions  the  Claimant  cannot
    have entered as a visitor. The rules have now set the  public  interest
    in requiring an applicant to have entered into the UK in  a  particular
    capacity in order to be entitled  to  entry  in  that  capacity.    The
    Claimant was now seeking leave to remain as a  spouse/parent  when  she
    entered as a visitor.

10. The Tribunal went on to make an alternative decision  under  Article  8
    ECHR and found the interference to be disproportionate relying  on  the
    best interests of the child and that  is  was  not  reasonable  in  the
    circumstances to expect the Claimant to return to Sierra Leone to  make
    a fresh  application following the "Chikwamba" principle.

11. The Tribunal dealt with the issue of Article 8 in one paragraph and  as
    such I find its approach to the legal  issues  to  be  flawed  and  the
    findings inadequately reasoned. In considering Article 8  the  Tribunal
    failed to give any reasons for finding  exceptional  circumstances  for
    consideration outside of the Rules.  There after the Tribunal failed to
    follow the 5 stage approach in Razgar and did  not  identify  how  each
    stage was met to engage Article 8.  I find that  the  Tribunal  had  no
    regard to public interest factors either  as  provided  for  in  recent
    amendments to the  Nationality,  Immigration  &  Asylum  Act   2002  at
    section 117, or generally.

12. I conclude that the Tribunal erred in its approach and consideration of
    Article 8 ECHR, but I do not consider that this error is material  such
    that the decision or outcome would be  different.  My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

13. The findings of fact are not challenged.

14. On the evidence before the Tribunal I find exceptional circumstances to
    the extent that the Claimant now has a young  baby  who  is  a  British
    citizen and there was no consideration by the Secretary of State of his
    best interests.  I find that there is family life in the  UK  with  the
    child and  the  Claimant's  husband.   There  would  be  a  significant
    interference with the family life in the event that that  Claimant  was
    removed.  If she were to return with her child, I find an  interference
    with the father's Article 8 family life. I  am  satisfied  that  having
    regard to the young age of the baby, his British citizenship  and  that
    of his father, a removal of the Claimant, even in the short term  would
    be a significant disruption. It would not be in his best  interests  to
    be uprooted at such a young age and separated from his father. His best
    interests lie in remaining with both of his parents. The Claimant needs
    the support of her husband.  I find that her husband has older  British
    children from a previous relationship and that he would not be able  to
    live in Sierra Leone in the long term. I find no  sensible  reason  for
    why an entry clearance officer would be better placed to  consider  the
    new application.  The Claimant entered the  UK  lawfully.   The  public
    interest lies only in the maintenance of the  eligibility  criteria.  I
    have had regard to section 117 Immigration Act 2014 and  there  are  no
    concerns  as  financial  or  accommodation  or  other  relevant  public
    interest factors. The legislation provides  that  there  is  no  public
    interest in removal of an appellant where there would be  a  breach  of
    family life with a qualifying child and it is not  reasonable  for  the
    child to live outside the UK. It is  for  all  of  those  reasons  that
    having considered R (on the application of Zhang) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA
    892 (Admin), I take the view that the Tribunal's decision under Article
    8 following the "Chikwamba principle" is sustainable in this appeal.

Notice of Decision

15. There is no material error of law.  The decision  is  under  Article  8
    ECHR shall stand.

16.  The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.   There  is
a young child involved in these proceedings.



Signed        Date 23.1.2015

Judge GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.



Signed        Date 23.1.2015

Judge GA BLACK
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

