
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12341/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2 August 2016                         |On 10 August 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                 NAZIA JAVED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 11  January  1980.   She
    arrived in this country on 26  February  2007  as  a  student  and  has
    remained as a student or dependant and her latest leave  expired  on  7
    February 2015.  She made an application on the basis of her family life
    as a partner of a settled person on 6 February 2015.   The  application
    was refused by the respondent on 19 March 2015.  The appellant appealed
    and her appeal came before a First-tier Judge on 8 December 2015.   The
    appellant has three children and a preliminary issue was raised at  the
    hearing  by  the  representative  then  appearing  on  behalf  of   the
    appellant.  It was submitted that  the  three  children  had  now  been
    registered as British citizens.  It was  submitted  that  the  relevant
    date was the date of hearing and under the respondent's policy  British
    children should not be expected to leave the UK in accordance with  the
    decision of Zambrano [2011] INLR 481 CJEU.

2.   Reliance was placed on  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  and  it  was
    submitted that the appellant had  a  good  immigration  history,  spoke
    English and was literate.  The appellant was financially independent.

3.   The judge found that the appellant had failed to provide  any  reliable
    evidence  of  insurmountable  obstacles  and  merely  relied  upon  the
    children's new status as British citizens to resist  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision.  The judge did not consider it would be  unreasonable
    to expect the appellant's children to leave the UK with their  parents.
    The judge noted that the  appellant  had  not  given  evidence  at  the
    hearing and there was no other reliable evidence to assess her language
    ability and he was unable to make reliable findings of fact in relation
    to Section 117B for these reasons.  Any interference with Article 8 was
    proportionate.

4.   The judge noted in the concluding paragraphs of  his  determination  as
    follows:

         "41. The appellant's spouse is now present and settled  in  the  UK
             and their children have been registered as  British  citizens.
             The respondent had the opportunity to withdraw her decision at
             the hearing in light of the material change  in  circumstances
             but chose not to do so.


         42.   It  is  reasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  to  make  the
             appropriate paid application for further leave to remain which
             will give her the opportunity to provide reliable evidence  to
             support her current claimed circumstances."


5.   Mr Ahmed drew my attention to the case  of  Sanade  [2012]  UKUT  00048
    (IAC).  The Tribunal in that case referred to ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary
    of State [2011] UKSC 4 noting what Lord Hope had said at paragraph 41:

         "The fact of British citizenship does not  trump  everything  else.
         But it will hardly ever be less than a very significant and weighty
         factor against moving children who  have  that  status  to  another
         country with a parent who has no right to remain  here,  especially
         if the effect of doing this is that they will inevitably lose those
         benefits and advantages for the rest of their childhood."

    Furthermore, the judge had erred in concluding that the appellant could
    not speak English since the appellant had said on the application  form
    that she could speak both Urdu and English and no  challenge  had  been
    made to that claim.  The point had  not  been  taken  in  the  decision
    letter or at the hearing.  It was unfair for the judge to take a point.

6.   Mr Ahmed then referred to Treebhawon [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC) where  the
    Tribunal had considered Section 117B(6).  The Tribunal  had  stated  at
    paragraph 20 as follows:

         "In section 117B(6), Parliament has  prescribed  three  conditions,
             namely:

         (a)  the person concerned is not liable to deportation;

         (b)  such person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
             with a qualifying child, namely a person who is under the  age
             of 18 and is a British citizen or  has  lived  in  the  United
             Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more; and

         (c)  it would not be reasonable to expect the qualifying  child  to
             leave the United Kingdom.

             Within   this   discrete   regime,   the   statute   proclaims
             unequivocally that where these three conditions are  satisfied
             the public interest does not require the removal of the parent
             from the United Kingdom. Ambiguity there is none."

    It was submitted that paragraph 41 of the decision was  not  adequately
    reasoned. Further, as he had submitted at the hearing before the First-
    tier Judge, the position under Article 8 should have been considered on
    the facts as they appeared at the date of hearing.

7.   Mr Tarlow  having  considered  the  matter  agreed  that  it  would  be
    appropriate in this case for the caseworker to consider the  matter  in
    the light of the present facts. I note that  the  submission  that  the
    facts should be considered at the date of the hearing  in  relation  to
    Section 117B(6) (as distinct from the rules) appears to be supported by
    paragraph 13 of the decision of the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan)  &
    Ors, v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  &  Anor  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705 where the point was conceded by the Secretary of State:

             "Some  preliminary  observations  can  be  made   about   rule
             276ADE(iv) and section  117B(6).  First,  they  are  similarly
             framed: both require seven years'  residence  and  in  both  a
             critical question is whether it would be unreasonable for  the
             child to be expected to leave the UK. Second, the  concept  of
             seven years' residence may not be calculated in precisely  the
             same way in the two provisions. Rule 276ADE(1) states in terms
             that the period must  be  assessed  as  at  the  date  of  the
             application. However, the Secretary of State conceded that  as
             a result of section 85(4) of the 2002 Act, the  relevant  date
             for the purpose of section 117B is the  later  date  when  the
             court is making  its  determination.  We  have  acted  on  the
             assumption that this is correct. Third,  only  the  child  can
             apply  under  rule  276ADE  (iv),  whereas  section  117B   is
             concerned with article 8 applications  under  which  both  the
             child and the  parents  can  apply.  Fourth,  rule  276ADE  is
             concerned with applications made on the basis of private life,
             whereas claims under article 8 may rely on  both  private  and
             family  life.  Fifth,  it  is  in  my  judgment  a  legitimate
             assumption that the  question  whether  it  is  reasonable  to
             expect the child to leave should be approached in the same way
             in  each  context,  and  no  party  has  sought   to   contend
             otherwise." (per Elias, L.J.)

8.     It was accepted that the judge's decision was  materially  flawed  in
    law and that the respondent should have the opportunity to consider the
    position given  that  the  children  had  been  registered  as  British
    citizens.

Notice of Decision

9.   By agreement between the parties it is accepted that  this  is  a  case
    where the respondent wishes to revisit the decision in the light of the
    fact that the children had been registered as British  citizens.   Both
    sides agreed that there was power to remit in this case and it  is  not
    necessary in the premises to set out the somewhat tortuous commencement
    and transitional provisions of the 2014 Act referred to by the Tribunal
    in Nkomo (Deportation: 2014 rights of appeal) [2016]  UKUT  285  (IAC).
    The appeal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  it  is  remitted  to  the
    Secretary of State to reconsider the matter as Mr Tarlow requested.

Anonymity Direction

9.   The First-tier Judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.

Fee Award

10.  The First-tier Judge made no fee award  and  in  the  circumstances  of
    this case I do not consider it would be appropriate to make one.


Signed                                  Date 9 August 2016

G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
