
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12764/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2 July 2015                            |On 8 July 2015                    |
|Prepared 2 July 2015                      |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ANDREW OMORUYI AGBONIAHOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Ononeme, Counsel, instructed by Moorehouse
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Nigeria,  date  of  birth  17  March  1981,
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision dated 3  March  2014
    to refuse to vary leave to remain under Tier 2 PBS and to make  removal
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.

3.   The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Afako on  13  November
    2014 who allowed the appeal and the Secretary of State challenged  that
    decision.

4.   On 6 May 2015 I found that there had been an error of law in  that  the
    judge's reasoning had failed to  address  relevant  considerations  and
    also because the issue had been raised of reliance  on  representations
    by UKBA made to the Claimant's  Sponsor,  Thames  Water  Utilities  Plc
    (Thames Water), that the application to extend the  Tier  2  PBS  leave
    should be made on a varied basis, and  it  would  be  considered  on  a
    varied basis to reflect the circumstances  of  the  particular  Tier  2
    employer.  On the strength of the conversation, which at that time  was
    not in any sense particularised, it was said that there was  unfairness
    and/or that there was a legitimate  expectation  that  the  application
    would fall to be considered.  At that time I gave directions to address
    the question of to what extent there was unequivocal  understanding  or
    representations made to Thames Water by or on behalf of  the  Secretary
    of State.

5.    At  the  resumed  hearing  before  me  there  was  some  excerpts   of
    correspondence that related  back  to  or  preceded  the  date  of  the
    Claimant's application:  Included was the Certificate  for  Sponsorship
    created by Thames Water in which they indicated the application was for
    a Tier 2 (General) extension.  The relevant particulars  are  given  of
    the Claimant's work. Essentially it was identified  that  the  Claimant
    was seeking a Tier 2 extension for an existing employment, where no job
    role was being changed. It was clearly identified  in  the  application
    form from Thames Water that no labour market test  was  required  ("per
    Home Office 28.08.2013") and again emphasised that this was  a  Tier  2
    application by  a  person  already  employed  and  not  changing  role.
    Produced is a copy letter to UKBA, which was put on  the  Thames  Water
    files on 14 March 2014 by  Miss  Laura  Taylor  resourcing  manager  on
    behalf of Thames Water in which  she  recited  with  reference  to  the
    Claimant:

         "... I would like to state the occupation  code  attributed  to  Mr
         Agbonlahor was corrected as per our letter of 12  March  2012.  The
         updated code was confirmed as SOC  Code  1235  which  relates  most
         closely to the area of business in which Mr Agbonlahor works.   The
         SOC code 1235 was used for his visa which  expired  on  3  February
         2014, this code will continue to be  relevant  to  his  employment.
         Therefore there is no significant change in Mr Agbonlahor's role.

         Mr Agbonlahor was hired via our graduate recruitment programme, and
         his job title changed  through  the  natural  progression  of  this
         programme.  I would also like to state in conclusion I believe  the
         above facts to be true.  Please feel free  to  contact  me  if  you
         require any further information."

    The letter was duly signed.

6.   More recent correspondence which related  back,  in  terms  of  factual
    matters, to the engagement of the Claimant by Thames Water  in  October
    2010 as a graduate trainee,  stated that

         "The Thames Water graduate schemes leadership  programme  with  the
         intention of  fast  tracking  individuals  into  manager/leadership
         roles within five years.  Following  the  eighteen  months  on  the
         programme the individuals will be expected  to  naturally  progress
         into positions across Thames Water, building their career through a
         number  of  different  roles  (please  find  enclosed  our  current
         graduate programme recruitment summary from Thames Water website)."



7.   A later letter from Thames Water to the UKBA confirmed the  earlier  to
    UKBA was sent in March 2014 and  signed  by  Laura  Taylor  (resourcing
    manager on behalf of Thames Water).  In January 2014 a  certificate  of
    sponsorship was provided ....  by  Thames  Water  in  relation  to  the
    Claimant's employment. The later letter is signed by Laura Simarro,  HR
    operations and Resourcing Manager, on behalf of Thames Water.

8.   A further letter of 17 June 2015 signed by Miss Simarro stated

         "I verified the  following  information  with  Theresa  Davies,  HR
         coordinator in relation to this case.  On 28  August  2013  Theresa
         contacted  the  Home  Office  in  relation   to   (Mr   Agbonlahor)
         certificate of sponsorship.  Theresa was  advised  that  no  labour
         market test was required for his Tier 2 extension. She was  further
         advised to include the following wording on the  application  'This
         is a Tier 2 extension for a person already employed with us, and is
         not changing roles.   Please find a copy  of  the  form  which  was
         submitted'."

    Indeed as a fact in the application form before the Tribunal such words
    were indeed included by Thames Water.

9.   It seemed to me that the chain of information was  sufficient  to  show
    the following  facts.  First,  UKBA  operate  a  helpline  for  Tier  2
    employers. Secondly, Thames Water through its officers made use of  the
    helpline and were advised, as evidenced by  the  correspondence,  about
    the format of the application form and what would be required  for  the
    particular application. Thirdly, Thames Water properly relied upon  the
    UKBA advice and submitted a form  which  properly  reflected  the  fact
    that, in the circumstances of the case, a labour market  test  was  not
    needed nor any material change which  required  any  reference  through
    Jobcentre Plus, Jobcentre on line, Universal Job Match  or  indeed  any
    other organisation.   Thus,  there  was  no  need  for  a  job  vacancy
    reference number.

10.  It is not impossible for  Thames  Water  officers  to  have  completely
    misunderstood the advice they were given: Mr Melvin  argued  that  that
    may be the position.  Given Thames Water, not a fly by  night  employer
    nor with any reputation  for  flouting  UK  immigration  controls,  was
    obtaining advice and  the  contents  of  the  application  was  not  in
    dispute, it was unsurprising that the letter did not particularise  who
    had been speaking to who, the time and date of the telephone call,  and
    all those other particulars that Mr Melvin says  would  give  you  more
    confidence in believing that such a telephone call had been  made.   It
    did not seem likely  that  such  mistakes  or  misunderstandings  would
    occur. First, Thames Water had a  real  interest,  as  an  employer  of
    ensuring the Claimant  was  able  to  continue  working  for  them  and
    complete his traineeship. Secondly, the contemporary correspondence was
    not disputed then or since by UKBA. Thirdly,  the  later  Thames  Water
    correspondence was not substantively challenged by UKBA. Fourthly,  the
    Thames Water staff,  e.g.  Resourcing  manager  or  HR  manager,  being
    directly involved in employment issues were unlikely to have been  left
    in doubt about the advice received. If they had  been  they  would  not
    have written as set out above. Fifthly, it does not seem credible  that
    Thames Water would fabricate their claims  about  their  dealings  with
    UKBA. Sixthly, there was no positive case put by UKBA to  even  suggest
    that such advice would not be given come what may because 'the rule  is
    the rule'.

11.  I was satisfied on a balance  of  probabilities  that  the  application
    form made by the Sponsor, Thames Water Utilities Limited,  demonstrated
    that they had understood that the Tier  2  extension  was  tailored  to
    reflect the fact it was a graduate scheme, which was always longer than
    the original grant of leave, for a total  period  of  five  years,  and
    accordingly it was necessary for an extension  application  to  address
    those particular circumstances.

12.  Mr Melvin said, 'the Rules are the Rules', they can not be tailored  to
    suit anyone and that it was a matter  for  any  applicant  to  fit  the
    requirements of the Rules even if any of them was  not  appropriate  or
    factually necessary.  As a broad statement of a position from the  Home
    Office I quite understand his submission but in this case what occurred
    was that there clearly was advice given by UKBA upon which Thames Water
    were  entitled  to  act  and  rely  to  deal  specifically  with  their
    particular circumstances and those of the Claimant.

13.  In those circumstances what appeared to me to have happened and  it  is
    certainly not a matter of criticism of any particular officer, was that
    the point appears to have got lost when the  T2  extension  application
    was considered. Instead, it  was  approached  on  the  basis  that  the
    application was for a different job  and  needed  to  contain  all  the
    information that would normally be required for a new T2 application.

14.  It seemed to me that this is not a case specifically of any  legitimate
    expectation that the application would be permitted  but  rather  there
    was a reasonable expectation that the  application,  made  as  advised,
    would be considered on its merits.  The Secretary  of  State  is  still
    able to refuse the application but obviously that will require at least
    some rational explanation. Plainly if the Secretary of State wishes  to
    resile from the advice given, the Claimant and  Thames  Water  must  be
    given notice and the Claimant an opportunity to amend the  application.
    I do not see how the Secretary of State can lawfully  require  a  fresh
    application, when the Claimant's application was made in time.

15.  I find the Secretary of State's approach  in  determining  the  matter,
    irrespective of how it  had  been  put  in  the  context,  was  not  in
    accordance with the law. There was an underlying  factual  error  about
    the Claimant's employment and the  applicable  requirements  ultimately
    affected the validity of the Secretary of State's decision.

16.  Accordingly, I am  satisfied  that  the  correct  course  is  that  the
    Original Tribunal's decision does not stand.  The following decision is
    substituted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

17.  The appeal of Mr Agbonlahor is allowed to the extent  that  the  matter
    is returned to the Secretary of State to determine the  application  on
    the merits of the application advanced taking into account  that  there
    is no criticisms of the reliability of the Sponsor nor of Mr Agbonlahor
    in terms of them being  a  genuine  employer  and  a  genuine  employee
    seeking to continue and complete the original course under the graduate
    training scheme run by Thames Water.

18.  The appeal is allowed against the removal directions made.

Anonymity Order

19.  No anonymity order was requested nor is one required.

Fee Award

20.  The resolution of this matter  has  arisen  through  information  being
    provided in a clear way which was not previously  identifiable  to  the
    Secretary of State and in the circumstances it seemed to me a fee award
    was not appropriate.



Signed   Date 8 July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

