

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/12900/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 27 January 2015                            |On 28 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                     IMMIGRATION OFFICER, Gatwick North
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ATEF MANMOUDI
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Livingstone
Brown,      Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Tunisia, born on 24 January 1985.  On  24
    April 2012 he was given entry clearance as the spouse of a UK  citizen.
    He arrived in the UK on 4 April 2013,  seeking  entry  as  a  returning
    resident.   He was interviewed by the respondent on 5 April 2013.   The
    respondent cancelled  the  appellant's  leave  to  remain  for  reasons
    explained in a report dated 11 May 2013, written  in  response  to  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge P A Grant-Hutchison allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal by determination promulgated on 18 August 2014.   Although  both
    parties were represented, neither appears to have  reminded  the  Judge
    that  the  burden  was  on  the  Immigration  Officer  to  justify  the
    cancellation of leave under the Immigration Rules, rather than  on  the
    appellant to prove his case (paragraph 10).

 4. The Judge found that the appellant did not come within the Rules, which
    appears to have been common  ground.   It  may  be  axiomatic,  as  the
    grounds of appeal to the UT state, that consideration should begin with
    the Rules; but the Judge does not appear to  have  had  any  help  from
    either side in identifying the specific obstacles  in  the  appellant's
    path on any route he might explore under the Rules.

 5. The Judge held that notwithstanding failure to meet the requirements of
    the Rules the appellant had "a good and arguable case"  (paragraphs  18
    and 20) and that there were "compelling circumstances  ...  to  succeed
    outside the Rules" (paragraph 20).

 6. The Immigration Officer's grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  are
    along the lines that that  the  Judge  failed  to  identify  compelling
    circumstances not recognised by the Rules; the Judge had no  regard  to
    the appellant's statement that he was using his child  [unborn  at  the
    date of his arrival; born 25 June 2013] as a means to gain entry to the
    UK; an hour of supervised face-to-face contact every fortnight  between
    the appellant and his child [the situation by the date of the  hearing]
    could not be an exceptional or compelling circumstance;  and  the  best
    interests of the child could be served by her remaining in the UK  with
    her mother, her primary carer.

 7. The principles established by case law on which the  grounds  rely  are
    cited in the determination, which refers also to MS [2013] CSIH 52.

 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge went wrong  by  failing
    to explain adequately what  took  this  case  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The appellant's relationship with his wife had broken down, and
    he should not have tried to  re-enter  in  that  capacity.   He  had  a
    history of a similar situation in Holland, having another  child  there
    and a visa for that country although he had  never  sought  to  have  a
    relationship with that child.  He had admitted using the child  in  the
    UK as a means to enter and settle.  Mrs Saddiq accepted, however,  that
    such was the interpretation of the respondent rather  than  an  express
    admission by the appellant.  The Judge had taken no real account of the
    appellant's history or  of  the  public  interest,  although  that  was
    acknowledged at paragraph 15.

 9. Mr Winter  submitted  that  even  if  the  outcome  on  proportionality
    appeared to be a generous one, the determination  did  contain  reasons
    for its findings and the respondent's grounds amounted to  disagreement
    rather than legal error.

10. I indicated that I  was  not  persuaded  of  any  legal  error  in  the
    determination.

11. On a general approach to proportionality, the outcome does seem at  the
    charitable end of the spectrum.  However, the grounds do not  say  that
    it could not rationally be reached by any Judge.  The Judge  gives  his
    reasons: he finds that the appellant wishes to be  a  good  father;  he
    raised proceedings for contact; the contact  in  place  is  modest  but
    appropriate to the child's age; he contributes to the child's  support;
    he could exercise no meaningful family life in Tunisia; the child might
    be harmed by his removal; she will benefit financially and  emotionally
    from his presence.  The grounds of attack do not fairly  represent  the
    reasons given.

12. While there may have been nothing wrong with the Immigration  Officer's
    decision, based on the evidence at the date it was  made,  it  was  the
    parties' common approach in the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  address  the
    question whether the appellant's removal as at the date of the  hearing
    would interfere disproportionately with family life  interests,  namely
    the relationship between father and daughter.  No legal error has  been
    shown in the Judge's resolution of that point.

13. Neither party appears to have said anything specific to the Judge about
    part 5A of the  2002  Act,  although  he  refers  to  it  generally  at
    paragraph 15.  Section 117B(6) provides thus:



        In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
        public interest does not require the person's removal where-

        (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
        with a qualifying child, and

        (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
        United Kingdom.


14. The determination includes an effective finding that there is a genuine
    and subsisting relationship between the appellant and  his  child.   It
    may be at the weaker end of the scale but  it  is  substantial  enough.
    That  would  appear  on  its  own  to  justify  the  decision  reached.



15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

16. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
            27 January 2015




