
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12247/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 July 2016                                |On 15 July 2016               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                AA (pakistan)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting
                           Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Ms S Sharma, Counsel instructed by
                           Immigration Advice Bureau


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds outside the Rules against the  decision  to  remove  him  under
    Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 because he had stayed
    in the United Kingdom without leave to remain since 31  December  2008.
    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  direction,  but  Ms
    Sharma requested that an anonymity direction should be made  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal as the central focus of the appeal is
    whether the claimant can "piggyback" on the rights of his  child,  "S",
    who was born in Pakistan on 2 April 2003 and  who  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 11 May 2008 with the claimant's other dependant,  his  wife,
    "NM".  The application was not opposed by Mr Avery, and so  I  make  an
    anonymity direction in respect of the claimant and his family  members.



The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 26 May 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge JM Holmes gave her reasons for
    granting the Secretary of State permission to appeal:

         "1.  In a  Decision  promulgated  on  6  January  2016  First  Tier
             Tribunal Judge Lagunju dismissed under the Immigration  Rules,
             but allowed on  Article  8  grounds,  the  Appellant's  appeal
             against the decision to refuse him leave to remain in  the  UK
             as an overstayer.

         2.   The application is in time.

         3.   The grounds raise the short point that  the  Judge  failed  to
             engage with the guidance to be followed in an appeal  of  this
             type,  to  be  found  in  the  decisions  of  SS  (Congo),  EV
             (Philippines) and AM (Malawi).  As a  result  it  is  arguable
             that the Judge fell into error, failed to apply adequately  or
             at all s117A-D, and entered into a  freewheeling  approach  to
             the assessment of the proportionality of the removal  required
             under Article 8 without giving  any  adequate  weight  to  the
             public interest.  There was no issue that  the  entire  family
             could be removed in  safety  to  Pakistan,  where  educational
             opportunities were available to the Appellant's child, just as
             they had been available to him."

Relevant Background

 3. The claimant entered the UK as a student on 23 September 2003.  After a
    number of extensions, he became appeal rights exhausted in  June  2009.
    He made an application for leave to remain by letter dated  18  October
    2014, and the Secretary of State refused the application in a  decision
    dated 11 March 2015.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The claimant's appeal came before  Judge  Lagunju  sitting  at  Sheldon
    Court, Birmingham on  27  October  2015.   Both  parties  were  legally
    represented.  In paragraphs [9] to [14] of her subsequent decision, the
    judge gave her reasons for dismissing  the  claimant's  claim  that  he
    would face torture and/or other cruel, inhumane or degrading  treatment
    on his return to Pakistan at the hands of  his  father  or  his  wife's
    brothers, contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

 5. The judge then turned to consider the question of whether the  claimant
    qualified for leave to remain on either private or family life  grounds
    under the Rules.  She found that he did not meet the high threshold set
    out in  Rule  276ADE(1)(vi).   He  had  failed  to  provide  sufficient
    evidence to  show  he  would  face  significant  obstacles  on  return.
    Although he had spent a significant period of time in the UK,  he  left
    Pakistan as an adult and was thus still familiar with the  customs  and
    culture of his home country.  Also, the fact that he  had  returned  to
    Pakistan on a number of occasions confirmed  the  connections  that  he
    retained with his home country.

 6. The claimant's child S  was  7  years  old.   He  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of Rule 276ADE(1)(iv) because although he  was  under  the
    age of 18, at the date of application he had only been in he UK for six
    years and not the required seven years.

 7. The judge went on to apply the five  point  test  derived  from  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27.  On the topic of proportionality, she said as follows:

         "25. In assessing proportionality I have regard for the appellant's
             poor immigration history, I therefore attached limited  weight
             to the private life established when the appellant's leave was
             precarious and when he had no lawful leave  in  the  UK.   The
             appellant entered the UK as a student thus should have had the
             intention to return on completion of his studies;  however  he
             failed to return.  I accept however  that  the  appellant  did
             make some attempt to  regularise  his  stay.   I  consider  as
             relevant that the appellant admitted to  working  without  the
             necessary permission, this does  not  assist  the  appellant's
             case.  I find that the appellant although he has been  in  the
             UK for many years could maintain many of the  friendships  and
             connections he has formed over the  years  via  telephone  and
             internet.  I find the same in relation to his wife.

         26.  I consider also the appellant's son's private  life.   I  have
             regard for s.55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
             Act 2009 and consider as a primary consideration what would be
             in the best interests of the appellant's child.  I  note  that
             although he does not meet the 7  year  requirement  under  the
             rules, at the date of hearing he had been in the UK for over 7
             years as he entered in 2008 when he was 5 years old.

         27.  I consider the  guidance  given  in  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others
             (Decisions affecting  children;  onward  appeals)  Iran  UTIAC
             [2013] and note that the fact that  the  appellant's  son  has
             been here for 7 years since the age of 5 is  significant.   It
             can therefore be assumed that in that time  he  has  developed
             social, cultural and educational ties in the UK.   I  consider
             also the respondent's guidance and note that weight  is  given
             to the private life of a child who has resided in the  UK  for
             at least 7 years, although I acknowledge it  seems  to  relate
             specifically to the rules.  However I cannot overlook the fact
             that he has now resided in the UK for 7 years.

         28.  According to the appellant his son is terrified  of  returning
             to their home country Pakistan; he cites child kidnappings and
             other atrocities which he has  been  exposed  to  through  the
             media.  I find this unusual given he lived in Pakistan for the
             first five years of his life and it is his  and  his  parents'
             home country.  In my view the appellant and his  wife  have  a
             duty to protect their son from assimilating such  information.



         29.  I note however that although he spent the first five years  of
             his life there, he has spent most of his life in the  UK.   It
             is therefore likely that between the age of 5 and 12 years old
             a much more entrenched assimilation into UK culture would have
             occurred than the ties he is likely to have with Pakistan.   I
             note also that he has embarked on an education in the  UK  and
             is approaching a crucial stage in his  education,  namely  his
             GCSEs.  I  keep  in  mind  however  that  it  is  not  in  the
             appellant's favour that he has partly benefitted from  the  UK
             education system while his status was precarious, as it is not
             the responsibility of the UK to educate the world.

         30.  I note however that this was not the fault of his son who  has
             already, without any say in the matter, had to leave his  home
             and school in Pakistan in order to start again in the  UK.   I
             find it would not be in his best interests or in the interests
             of his education to suffer further disruption by  leaving  the
             UK and returning  to  Pakistan.   Such  ongoing  upheaval  and
             disruption  is  likely  to  have  long  term  effects  on  his
             education and his development particularly  in  light  of  his
             age.  I consider the letter from the GP and his  school;  both
             confirm that the appellant's son is suffering from anxiety, is
             distracted and may require counselling.

         31.  I consider the expert report prepared by  Mr  Robert  Simpson,
             Independent Social Worker on the appellant's instructions.   I
             have read and carefully considered  the  entire  report.   The
             report highlights the importance  of  maintaining  established
             attachments which should 'continue at an appropriate level  in
             order  to  achieve  a  stable  and  settled   childhood   into
             adulthood; it also encourages  stable  and  adequate  growth.'
             Although this may be true, it is also true that  children  are
             often adaptable and  with  the  right  level  of  support  and
             encouragement do adjust to new situations.  I consider however
             that the appellant's son has already experienced such upheaval
             by coming to the UK and having to adapt, thus he should not be
             subjected to any further instability.

         32.  The report however has approached the question  of  attachment
             and separation on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  would  be
             returned without his parents or one parent thus separated from
             them.  The affects of this are described as 'damaging  to  the
             point where such emotional damage, would  invariably  lead  to
             trauma for the child.'  This however is not the  case  as  the
             family would return together as a unit.

         33.  The report continues by  considering  the  child's  separation
             from his 'world' including his school and  concludes  that  it
             would not be in his best interests.  The report speaks to  the
             long term damage returning could have on the appellant.  I  am
             satisfied based on the findings of the report, the  length  of
             time he has been here and the stage he is at in his education,
             that it would not be in the best interests of the  appellant's
             son to leave the UK.

         34.  It is of course not expected that he should remain in  the  UK
             alone, thus I find it is also in the child's best interests to
             remain under the care and control of both parents in  the  UK.
             The appellant should by no means  be  rewarded  for  his  poor
             immigration history and poor decision making.  However despite
             the fact that the appellant, his wife and child  do  not  meet
             the  rules,  I  find  the  balance  tips  in  favour  of   the
             appellant's son remaining in the UK with his parents in  light
             of the damaging effects removal could have on  his  well-being
             and development.

         35.  In assessing proportionality I also have regard to the  public
             interest and s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
             Act 2002 (as amended by the Immigration Act  2014).   Although
             the appellant entered the UK lawfully,  much  of  his  private
             life was established whilst he  was  in  the  UK  unlawful,  I
             therefore  attach  limited  weight   to   the   private   life
             established in this time.  I note however  that  he  did  make
             attempts to regularise his stay and did not attempt  to  evade
             the authorities.

         36.  I note in his favour that he does speak English.  I note  also
             that there is no evidence  before me to suggest  that  he  has
             never claimed benefits however I note that his child has  been
             receiving an education in the UK which amounts to a burden  on
             the taxpayer.  I note  also  that  the  appellant  has  worked
             unlawfully in the UK; this  undoubtedly  counts  against  him.
             However,   having   considered   the   public   interest   and
             appropriately weighing all the matters  in  this  case,  I  am
             satisfied that the respondent has  failed  to  show  that  the
             appellant's removal is a proportionate  response  to  the  aim
             pursued."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 8. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Avery submitted that an adequate  balancing  exercise  had  not
    been carried out by the judge as detailed in paragraphs 1 to 3  of  the
    permission application which I reproduce in part below:

         "1.  The  FTT  finds  that  none  of  the  Appellants  satisfy  the
             Immigration Rules.  At paragraph  21,  the  FTTJ  proceeds  to
             consider Article  8  outside  the  Rules,  but  identifies  no
             compelling circumstances for doing, and does not  identify  an
             arguable case that is not already covered by the  Rules.   See
             The Secretary of State for the Home Department v SS (Congo)  &
             Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

         2.   At paragraph 27, the FTTJ gives weight to the child's  private
             life by reference to the Respondent's guidance, which the FTTJ
             notes relates specifically to the Immigration  Rules.   It  is
             asserted  that  there  are   different   considerations   when
             considering a child's private life outside the Rules.  Section
             117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
             applies and little weight  must  be  applied  to  the  child's
             private life.  The Act does not distinguish between a  child's
             private  life  and  an  adult's  private  life.    The   other
             considerations within section 117B must also apply, the  child
             cannot be considered as financially independent, but  must  be
             regarded as a  burden  on  the  taxpayers  by  virtue  of  his
             education (as noted in paragraph 36, but only when considering
             the adult Appellant).

         3.   The FTTJ failed to have regard to AM (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]
             UKUT 0260 (IAC):

             12.  There was no reason to infer that any interruption to the
                  education of the elder child upon return to  Malawi  would
                  be any more significant  than  that  faced  by  any  child
                  forced to move from one country to another  by  virtue  of
                  the careers of their parents.  Nor should the difficulties
                  of a  move  from  one  school  to  another  become  unduly
                  exaggerated.  It would be highly unusual for  a  child  in
                  the UK to complete the entirely of their education  within
                  one school.  The trauma, or excitement, of a  new  school,
                  new classmates and new teachers is  an  integral  part  of
                  growing up.  In too many appeals the FtT is presented with
                  arguments whose basic premise is that to change  a  school
                  is  to  submit  a  child  to  a  cruel  and  unduly  harsh
                  experience.  Indeed, as if to  illustrate  the  point,  we
                  note that  the  eldest  child  of  this  family  has  been
                  required to move schools, and from one end of  the  UK  to
                  the other, as a result of the decisions  of  her  parents.
                  The evidence does not suggest she suffered any hardship or
                  ill effect from so doing.

             13.  The mere presence of the children in the  UK,  and  their
                  academic success, was  not  a  'trump  card'  which  their
                  parents could deploy to demand immigration status for  the
                  whole family."

 9. On behalf of  the  claimant,  Ms  Sharma  submitted  that  the  judge's
    approach did not disclose an error of law.  She had taken full  account
    of the child's best interests in accordance with the guidance given  in
    EV (Philippines), and she had reached a sustainable decision  that  the
    proposed interference was disproportionate.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

10. The judge erred in engaging with Section 117B  of  the  2002  Act  only
    after she had already  reached  the  conclusion,  on  her  freestanding
    proportionality  assessment,  that  the   proposed   interference   was
    disproportionate.  The considerations arising under Section 117B needed
    to be an integral part  of  the  proportionality  assessment,  and  the
    relevant considerations  had  to  be  addressed  before  a  sustainable
    conclusion could be reached.

11. Although the best interests of the child are a primary consideration in
    the proportionality assessment, the judge had to engage  with  Sections
    117B(4) and (5) which stipulate that little weight should be given to a
    private life that is established by a person at a time when the  person
    is in the United Kingdom unlawfully  or  when  a  person's  immigration
    status is precarious.  As  submitted  in  the  permission  application,
    these sub-Sections apply to children as well as to adults.

12. The beginning of paragraph [34] also  discloses  another  flaw  in  the
    judge's approach.  If the child qualified for  leave  to  remain  under
    Rule 276ADE, then, following the Upper Tribunal decision in PS (India),
    it would have been open to the judge to find that the child  could  not
    be expected to remain here on his own and so he had to remain in the UK
    under the care of his parents, even though they were both  overstayers.
    But as neither the parents nor the child in this case qualify for leave
    to remain under the Rules, the judge's starting point needed to be that
    prima facie it was reasonable to expect the child to be looked after by
    his parents in the country of return.

13. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated  by  a
    material error of law such that it must be set aside and re-made.

The Re-making of the Decision

14. Both representatives  agreed  that  I  could  and  should  re-make  the
    decision on evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal.  There is
    no controversy about the judge's primary findings of fact.   The  issue
    is whether on the facts as found the claimant has made out a case  that
    there are sufficiently compelling circumstances to  justify  him  being
    granted Article 8 relief outside the Rules.

15. The respects in which it is in the child's  best  interests  to  remain
    here are set out by Judge Lagunju, and it is not necessary  for  me  to
    repeat them.  The best interest considerations militating in favour  of
    the child returning to Pakistan with his parents are that  he  will  be
    returning to the country of which he is a national, so he can enjoy  to
    the full the benefits attendant upon  his  Pakistani  citizenship.   He
    will have the support of his parents in adjusting to life in  Pakistan.
    He will be able to continue his education in Pakistan, and will be able
    to enjoy the same private life as he has enjoyed here,  albeit  with  a
    different set of friends, fellow pupils and teachers.   His  return  to
    Pakistan will have the positive benefit of the appellant being immersed
    in the social and cultural milieu from which both his  parents  spring,
    and spending the remainder of his formative years  in  the  society  to
    which he and his parents belong.

16. There is no reason to suppose that the  disruption  to  the  claimant's
    education consequential upon him having to return to Pakistan with  his
    parents will cause long  term  damage  to  the  child's  wellbeing  and
    development.  As a 12 year old child at the date of the hearing in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, child S was and still is a long  way  off  sitting
    for his GCSE examinations.

17. In conclusion, I consider that overall the child's best  interests  lie
    in him returning with his parents to Pakistan.  But even if I am  wrong
    about that, the best interests in favour of the  child  remaining  here
    only marginally outweigh the best interests  in  favour  of  the  child
    returning with his parents to  Pakistan,  and  accordingly  the  public
    interest considerations arising under Article 8(2) do not  have  to  be
    very strong to make it reasonable  to  expect  child  S  to  return  to
    Pakistan with his parents.

18. As noted by Judge Lagunju, the claimant has a poor immigration history.
     I do not  consider  that  his  previous  attempts  to  regularise  his
    immigration status constitute a mitigating factor.   On  the  contrary,
    the claimant has frustrated the public interest in firm  and  effective
    immigration controls by remaining here with his family despite becoming
    appeal rights exhausted on 16 June 2009, and despite his application of
    27 November 2012 being refused with no right of appeal on 28 June 2013.
     The claimant entered the United Kingdom as a student, and he  did  not
    have a legitimate expectation of being able to  remain  here  with  his
    family (who joined him here  as  student  dependants)  on  a  permanent
    basis.

19. I consider that the decision appealed against strikes  a  fair  balance
    between, on the one hand, the rights and interests of the claimant  and
    his dependent family members (who include child S), and, on  the  other
    hand, the wider interests of  society.   It  is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate public end sought to be achieved, namely the  protection  of
    the country's economic  wellbeing  and  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the claimant's appeal  on
human rights/protection (Article 3 ECHR) grounds did not  contain  an  error
of law, and the decision stands.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  claimant's  appeal  on
human rights (Article 8  ECHR)  grounds  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly that part of  the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following
decision is substituted: the claimant's appeal on human  rights  (Article  8
ECHR) grounds is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the  claimant/respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 15 July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal, there can be no fee award and  I  set  aside
the full fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed                              Date 15 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
