
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12195/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 September 2014                          |On 8 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MS ANGELA ISIOMA EMEFIELE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms U Miszkel, Jein Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent Ms Angela Isioma Emefiele (whom I shall refer to as  the
    appellant as she was in the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal)
    is a citizen of Nigeria and her date of birth is 27 December 1977.

2.   The appellant made an application for leave to remain in the  UK  as  a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the points-based system on 17  June
    2013.  Her application was refused by the  Secretary  of  State  for  a
    number of reasons in a decision of 20 February 2014. The thrust of  the
    decision was that the appellant was not a genuine entrepreneur.

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision and her appeal was  allowed
    by Immigration Judge Parkes in a determination that was promulgated  on
    24 July 2014 following a hearing on 18 July 2014.

4.   One of the grounds of appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that
    the respondent had  not  exercised  discretion  pursuant  to  paragraph
    245DD(j) of the Rules which states that the Secretary of State reserves
    the right to request additional information and evidence to support the
    assessment relating to whether or not he is a genuine entrepreneur.  On
    this basis it was argued that the decision is not  in  accordance  with
    the law.

5.   Prior to the decision the appellant was interviewed  by  the  Secretary
    of State. The appellant did not agree to what it was asserted that  she
    had stated in this interview.  The Judge  allowed  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that the Secretary of State  had  not  given  the  appellant  the
    opportunity to address issues that had been raised in the interview and
    had not exercised discretion contained in 245DD(j) and  concluded  that
    the decision was not in accordance with the law and allowed it to  that
    limited extent.

6.   The Secretary of State appealed against the decision and permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Appleyard  in  a
    decision of 12 August 2014.

The Grounds and Oral Submissions

7.   The grounds of appeal prepared by the Secretary  of  State  argue  that
    the Judge referred to  paragraph  245DD(h)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    however there is no discretion conferred by this  paragraph.   Secondly
    it is argued that  the  discretion  must  be  first  exercised  by  the
    Secretary of State  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  could  be  in  a
    position to consider the matter.

8.   I heard oral submissions from Ms Holmes who  stated  that  she  was  in
    difficulty in defending the Secretary of  States'  grounds  of  appeal.
    She submitted that it is clear that the Judge  referred  to  the  wrong
    paragraph of the Rules but, but in her view, this was  a  typographical
    error.  Ms Holmes stated she was not  in  a  position  to  concede  the
    matter but  was  unable  to  defend  the  grounds.   She  had  had  the
    opportunity to consider the appellant's  response  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal under Rule 24.  In Ms Holmes' view that paragraph 245DD(j)  does
    contain a discretion and it was not exercised by the decision maker.

Conclusions

9.   Having taken into account Ms Holmes'  submissions  and  considered  the
    (albeit ambiguous) wording of paragraph 245DD(j), I find that there was
    no material error of law and the decision of the  Judge  to  allow  the
    appeal on the basis that the decision is not in accordance with the law
    is maintained.  A lawful decision by the Secretary of State is pending.







Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 6 October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
