
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12016/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 21 February 2014                  |On 28 February 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Jaisri, Counsel instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  in  these  proceedings  is  the  Secretary  of  State.
       However, for convenience I refer to the parties as they  were  before
       the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. Thus, the appellant is a citizen of Tanzania, born  on  28  September
       1975. He arrived in the UK on 2 March 2006, with leave as a  student.
       He was granted further leave to remain in the same capacity until  28
       December 2012. He made an 'in-time' application for leave  to  remain
       as a parent which was refused. His appeal against that  decision  was
       allowed, under Article 8 of the ECHR, by a judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal after a hearing on 29 October 2013.

  Preliminary issue-timeliness of application for permission to appeal

    3. The Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal  which  was
       granted by a judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  had  initially
       considered that the application for permission to appeal was in  fact
       out of time. The application for permission sought  an  extension  of
       time but the matter was not addressed by  the  First-tier  judge  who
       dealt with the permission application.  Ms Isherwood agreed that  the
       application was out of time.

    4. On that basis I decided that the grant of permission  to  appeal  was
       'conditional' only  (see  Boktor  and  Wanis  (late  application  for
       permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT 00442 (IAC) and Samir  (FtT  Permission
       to appeal: time) [2013] UKUT 00003(IAC)). I then decided to deal with
       the question of the late application, sitting as a judge of the First-
       tier Tribunal. The explanation given for what was thought to  be  the
       lateness of the application was that the drafter of the  grounds  was
       out of the office because of "an unforeseen domestic  incident",  and
       the grounds were  lodged  at  the  first  opportunity  following  the
       drafter's return.

    5. Mr Jaisri submitted that I  should  not  extend  time  for  appealing
       because the person who allocated the  file  to  the  drafter  of  the
       grounds should have been aware that that person was not going  to  be
       available  to  draft  the  grounds.  Ms  Isherwood  referred  to  the
       explanation, submitting, in effect, that by its nature  the  incident
       could not have been foreseen.

    6. I decided to extend time for appealing because I was  satisfied  that
       by reason of special circumstances it would be unjust not  to  extend
       time.

    7. On further reflection however, I now see that the application was not
       out of time in the  first  place.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal was sent to the Secretary of State by second class  post  on
       15 November 2013. The deemed date of receipt was the 19 November 2013
       (rule 55(5) of The Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules
       2005. The time for lodging notice of application  for  permission  to
       appeal expired on 26 November 2013 (there being a weekend  after  the
       deemed date of service; and see rules 24 and 57 of the  2005  Rules).
       The application was received on 25 November 2013.

    8. Whether or not the application for permission to appeal was  in  time
       has no bearing on the validity of the proceedings before me.   If  in
       time, there is  no  difficulty;  the  grant  of  permission  was  not
       conditional and needed no further consideration. My  considering  the
       matter on the basis that it was out of time  was  irrelevant  to  the
       initial and correct grant of permission. If it was  in  fact  out  of
       time, the procedure I undertook dealt with the  issue  of  timeliness
       and the grant was perfected.





  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    9. The First-tier judge noted that it was  conceded  on  behalf  of  the
       appellant that he was not  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
       Immigration Rules for leave to remain as a parent.

   10. Considering Article 8, the judge concluded that the appellant and his
       wife were credible witnesses. She  referred  to  the  fact  that  the
       appellant's wife has leave to remain until 2016. They have a daughter
       born on 30 January 2008, although it appeared that their daughter was
       not formally granted leave as her mother's dependant.

   11. The judge accepted that the appellant has family life with  his  wife
       and daughter and the contrary was not suggested by the  Secretary  of
       State at that hearing. It was found that requiring the  appellant  to
       leave the UK would amount to an interference  with  his  family  life
       with them. The legitimate aim of immigration control was acknowledged
       by the judge.

   12. She noted the competing arguments. The Secretary of  State  contended
       that despite the leave granted to the appellant's wife, she and their
       daughter could accompany him to Tanzania. The appellant  argued  that
       his daughter was born in the UK, has settled here and has  a  private
       life in her own right. This would be disrupted if she and her  mother
       had to return to Tanzania at this stage.

   13. In concluding that the appellant's removal would be  disproportionate
       in Article 8 terms, the judge noted that the appellant and  his  wife
       have  both  been  lawfully  in  the  UK  to   date.   It   would   be
       disproportionate for the appellant to have to leave, leaving his wife
       and child in the UK which is what was likely  to  happen.  The  judge
       referred again to the family being a law-abiding  one  and  that  the
       appellant is heavily involved in his daughter's life. She referred to
       the view of both the appellant and his wife which was that it was not
       in their daughter's best interests to relocate to Tanzania,  she  now
       having settled at school. Lastly, she  took  into  account  that  the
       appellant's wife has been in the UK for some twelve years  which  was
       said to be for most of her adult life. The judge concluded at [52] by
       stating that

           "I find that in all  the  circumstances  the  interference  that
           would ensue in the life of  this  family  should  the  appellant
           return to Tanzania will be disproportionate  to  the  legitimate
           aim pursued."

  Submissions

   14. Ms Isherwood submitted that the First-tier judge materially erred  in
       law. The appellant was not able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
       Immigration Rules and had entered the UK in a temporary capacity. His
       wife also only has temporary leave. The decision in Gulshan  (Article
       8-new rules-correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 was relied on.

   15. The appellant's daughter would be able to adapt to life in  Tanzania.
       She was only 6 years old.  There  were  no  compelling  circumstances
       here. There was nothing to indicate that  their  daughter  could  not
       continue her education in Tanzania. The judge had not considered that
       the appellant's wife has the choice of returning with him.

   16. Ms Isherwood referred to what was said to have been an assault on the
       appellant in 2008, noting that there was no evidence to suggest  that
       he was not able to function as a result. They could both be  employed
       in Tanzania.

   17. The judge had given no weight to the Secretary of State's position in
       relation to the public interest under Article 8 as  set  out  in  the
       Immigration Rules. In reality, all the five paragraphs of reasons  in
       the determination amount to no more  than  the  conclusion  that  the
       appellant and his wife would prefer to stay in the UK.

   18. Ms Jaisri suggested that  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  was
       limited to ground 3. More widely, it was submitted  that  the  First-
       tier judge had given full reasons for her decision and the grounds of
       appeal are no more than a disagreement.  With  reference  to  various
       paragraphs of the determination it was submitted that the  judge  had
       given adequate consideration to the public interest.

   19. The decision in Gulshan could be distinguished on the facts. In  that
       case the  appellant  was  able  to  make  an  application  for  entry
       clearance. Furthermore, the appellant's wife wants her daughter to be
       able to stay in the UK in terms of  her  education.  The  appellant's
       wife herself has  established  "Article  8  rights"  since  2001.  To
       preserve family unity the Secretary of  State  granted  discretionary
       leave to the appellant's wife in 2009, and again up to 2016. All that
       was being asked for was that the appellant be granted leave  in  line
       with his wife.

  My assessment

   20. The grounds of appeal before the  Upper  Tribunal,  reflected  in  Ms
       Isherwood's submissions, contend that the First-tier  judge  did  not
       have  regard  to  the  public  interest  in  immigration  control  as
       expressed in the Immigration Rules. Mr Jaisri argued to the contrary.
       He referred to [47] of the determination in which  the  judge  stated
       that the appeal fell to be determined in accordance with Appendix  FM
       and paragraph 276 ADE. This, it was submitted, was an  acknowledgment
       of the public interest as set out in the Rules.

   21. Furthermore, at [3]-[6] the  judge  had  set  out  the  Secretary  of
       State's position under the Rules. At [49] she  had  referred  to  the
       legitimate aim of immigration control, and at [51] concluded that his
       removal would be disproportionate to that legitimate aim.

   22. Mr Jaisri did not disagree with the suggested need to  recognise  and
       give effect to the Secretary of State's view of the  public  interest
       as expressed in the Immigration Rules. That  there  is  the  need  to
       afford that recognition of the public  interest  is  clear  from  the
       decision  in  MF  (Article  8  -  new  rules)  Nigeria  [2012]   UKUT
       00393(IAC), a conclusion that is unaffected by the  subsequent  Court
       of Appeal decision (MF [2013] EWCA Civ 1192).

   23. I am not satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  does
       give recognition to the public interest in this respect. It  is  true
       that  it  was  accepted  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
       appellant is not able to meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
       Rules for leave to remain (as it was before me). The  only  basis  on
       which the appellant could theoretically succeed  in  his  appeal  was
       under Article 8 of the ECHR which  was  the  basis  for  the  judge's
       assessment of the facts.

   24. I do not accept that [47] demonstrates a recognition  of  the  public
       interest as  reflected  in  the  Immigration  Rules.  That  paragraph
       appears under the sub-heading "The  Law".  Stating  that  the  appeal
       "falls to be determined in accordance with Appendix FM and  paragraph
       276ADE of the Immigration Rules" was not an accurate statement of the
       basis on which the appeal was to be determined, which was on  Article
       8 grounds only: the appellant was not able to meet  the  requirements
       of the Immigration Rules and that fact was conceded. What  the  judge
       ought to have said under that subheading was that the appeal fell  to
       be determined only under Article 8. The point is not that  the  judge
       perhaps  included  a  'standard'  or  'template'  paragraph  here  by
       mistake. Such errors can happen from time to time. There really is no
       significance in this except to  reveal  that  this  is  what  plainly
       occurred here, rather than what has been suggested on behalf  of  the
       appellant, namely that the judge was giving recognition to the public
       interest as per the Immigration Rules. This is self-evident from  the
       subheading and from the context of the determination, in  which  "The
       Law" was not the Immigration Rules, which the appellant was not  able
       to meet.

   25. The two occasions in which the judge did quite properly refer to  the
       legitimate aim that was pursued in the Article 8 exercise did nothing
       more than recognise  what  the  legitimate  aim  was.  It  could  not
       realistically be said that the judge implicitly recognised  the  part
       that the Immigration Rules have to play in  that  assessment  of  the
       legitimate  aim.  No  such  recognition  can  be  detected   in   the
       determination in the "Findings  and  Conclusions"  paragraphs.  Still
       less could it be said that the rehearsal of the Secretary of  State's
       reasons for refusing the application for further leave to remain, set
       out much earlier in the determination, somehow indicate the necessary
       appreciation of this aspect of the public interest in  the  reasoning
       process.

   26. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that  this  experienced  judge
       did err in law in the assessment of proportionality. This is an error
       of law which means that the decision is to be set aside.

   27. In re-making the decision I  again  take  into  account  that  it  is
       conceded that the appellant is not able to meet the  requirements  of
       the Immigration Rules. He applied for leave to remain as a parent. It
       is as well to note that it was not suggested that  the  appellant  is
       able to meet the Immigration Rules in any other respect, for  example
       as a partner.

   28. I adopt the structured approach set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. The
       First-tier judge found that the appellant enjoys family life with his
       wife and child. The appellant and his wife married on 20 August 2011.



   29. I have assumed that the decision of the respondent  will  involve  an
       interference with the appellant's family (and private) life,  putting
       aside for present purposes the question of  whether  the  appellant's
       wife (and child) would return to Tanzania with him.  The interference
       will have consequences of such gravity as potentially to  engage  the
       operation of Article 8.

   30. The decision is in accordance with the law and pursues  a  legitimate
       aim, namely the economic well-being of the country expressed  through
       the maintenance of effective immigration control.

   31. As to proportionality, the best interests of the appellant's daughter
       are a primary consideration. The  First-tier  judge  found  that  the
       appellant is heavily involved in his daughter's life. Again, there is
       no reason for me to depart from that finding and it is a finding that
       is reflected  in  the  oral  evidence  and  the  witness  statements.
       Likewise, the appellant's wife has been in the UK since 2001 and will
       have established a private life in that time.

   32. I note the various letters of support for the appellant and his  wife
       in the bundle that was before the First-tier Tribunal. They are  both
       closely involved with the Luton Christian Fellowship. There  is  also
       evidence  of  charitable  donations  by  the  appellant  to   several
       charities.

   33. Contrary to what was suggested on behalf of  the  respondent  at  the
       hearing before me, there is  medical  evidence  in  relation  to  the
       appellant, which appears to relate to his having been the  victim  of
       an assault, as set out in his witness statement. The medical  report,
       from Dr Parvati Rajamani a consultant psychiatrist, is dated 16  July
       2013. It states that at that time the appellant  was  suffering  from
       PTSD and depression. It lists the medication he was then  taking.  It
       refers to his daughter being his protective factor. This was also the
       effect of the appellant's oral evidence to the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       whereby he said that he plans to continue on his ACCA course but  has
       been unable to start because of the effects of the attack on him, and
       would wish to undertake the course on a  part-time  basis.  Reference
       was made to an ACCA document in the appellant's bundle.

   34. In cross-examination he said that both  his  wife  and  daughter  are
       Tanzanian nationals, but explaining why  they  could  not  return  to
       Tanzania as a family. His daughter loves the UK, is settled at school
       and has many friends, does not speak Swahili and is not familiar with
       Tanzania. He also said that he  has  a  sister  in  Tanzania  who  is
       married with a family, and that that his parents are there.

   35. The evidence given by the  appellant's  wife  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal is also set out in that determination, and I have  taken  it
       into  account.  Her  witness   statement   is   summarised   in   the
       determination, the statement referring to having friends in  the  UK,
       the length of time she has been here (since 2001), her work  and  her
       involvement with the Church. The statement continues that she did not
       know what she would do without the  appellant,  that  they  had  been
       together for five years and work as a team. She said that it would be
       very difficult for her to cope with their daughter  without  him  and
       she thought that she would have to give up work. She has a sister  in
       the UK with indefinite leave to remain and she  states  that  she  is
       very close to her and her children. She explains in the statement why
       it would be better for her daughter to remain in the UK; her  school,
       her friends, that she does not want to go to Tanzania  and  that  the
       education there would not be as good for her.

   36. In cross-examination she said that in Tanzania she  has  her  mother,
       father, three sisters and a brother. However, she said that they have
       their life in the UK and life in Tanzania would not be best for their
       daughter. She had not  found  out  specifically  what  the  education
       facilities are like in Tanzania.

   37. I also note the evidence given on behalf of the appellant before  the
       First-tier Tribunal by JRM  who  described  the  closeness  of  their
       relationship and their respective families, as well as the effect  on
       him if the appellant and his family were no longer here.

   38.  Mr  Jaisri  submitted  that  the  appellant's   wife   was   granted
       discretionary leave in 2009 in order to preserve  the  family  unity.
       Likewise in 2013, being granted leave until 2016.  It  was  submitted
       that the recent grant of leave to the appellant's wife "watered down"
       the Secretary of State's position in relation to the appellant  given
       that the decision to refuse the appellant leave to remain was made in
       March 2013 which the Secretary of State would  of  course  have  been
       aware of.

   39. So far  as  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  daughter  are
       concerned, ordinarily it is in a child's best interests to be brought
       up by both parents. I accept  that  she  is  settled  and  is  making
       progress in school.  I  note  the  letter  from  the  school  in  the
       appellant's bundle at page 55 and the accompanying School report. She
       has friends here. I take into account all the evidential  matters  to
       which I have referred.

   40. However, I do not accept that the evidence  establishes  that  it  is
       necessarily in her best interests to remain in the UK, or to  put  it
       another way, that her best interests are only served by her remaining
       here. There is no evidence to indicate that she would not be able  to
       receive an education in Tanzania. She has close family there, on both
       her parents' sides, including both sets  of  grandparents.  Up  until
       now, she will have been primarily focused on  her  immediate  family,
       being her parents and then the wider family in the UK. She  has  been
       in the UK since her birth in January 2008, and is now  only  just  6.
       She would be able to resume her  family  life  with  her  parents  in
       Tanzania and start to build a private life there.

   41. Whether or not she would be  apart  from  the  appellant  depends  on
       whether the appellant's wife decides to join him in  Tanzania.  Their
       daughter  would  plainly  go  with  her.  The  appellant's  wife  has
       established a private life here and that  would  be  interfered  with
       were she to leave. Again however, she  would  be  able  to  resume  a
       private life in Tanzania. It would not be the  same  as  her  private
       life here but there is no reason to suppose that  she  would  not  be
       able to undertake Church activities there. No evidence was adduced to
       the effect that she would not be able to work in Tanzania or that the
       appellant would not be able to pursue his part-time studies there.

   42. The appellant's wife has only ever been granted permission to stay on
       a temporary basis. She could not have had any  expectation  that  her
       stay was anything other than temporary.

   43. I do not accept that the fact  of  her  being  granted  discretionary
       leave on two occasions weakens the Secretary of State's  argument  in
       favour of the proportionality of removal. Certainly up until December
       2012 the appellant had leave to remain himself. The basis of the more
       recent grant of leave to the appellant's wife does not amount  to  an
       acceptance by the Secretary  of  State  that  the  appellant  himself
       should also be permitted further leave.

   44. Although the appellant is not able to meet the  requirements  of  the
       Immigration  Rules,  that  fact  alone  is  not  the  answer  to  the
       proportionality enquiry. Nevertheless, it is  necessary  to  bear  in
       mind that the Immigration Rules are an expression of the Secretary of
       State's view of where the public interest lies in cases which rely on
       private or family life. The appellant does not meet  those  rules  in
       several respects, including in terms of the length of time  that  his
       daughter has lived in the UK which is expressed in E-LTRPT.2.2 (d) as
       "at least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of  application"
       (which was 15 October 2012).

   45. The appellant, his wife and daughter could reasonably be expected  to
       live together  as  a  family  in  Tanzania.  The  evidence  does  not
       establish that that would compromise  the  best  interests  of  their
       daughter. Were the appellant's wife to decide to leave  the  UK  with
       him that would undoubtedly have an impact on her and others in  terms
       of her private life. However, the fact that she has leave  to  remain
       until 2016 does not mean that she, and the appellant, are  unable  to
       make the choice for her and their daughter to return to Tanzania with
       him.

   46. Similarly, even if the decision is made for the appellant  to  return
       to Tanzania without  his  wife  and  daughter,  that  does  make  the
       respondent's decision a disproportionate one in Article 8  terms.  It
       would be a decision that would only involve temporary separation  but
       I accept that visits and communication from afar is no substitute for
       a full family life. Their separation, even if only  temporary,  would
       no  doubt  have  an  impact  on   their   daughter   in   particular.
       Nevertheless, the appellant returning on his own would be a  decision
       for the appellant and his wife to make. The making of  that  decision
       by them does not translate into a conclusion  that  the  respondent's
       decision is a disproportionate interference with the appellant's, his
       wife's or their daughter's Article 8 rights.   There  is  no  analogy
       here with cases where there is a 'false choice'  between  staying  in
       the UK and returning with the person who is required to  leave.  Here
       the appellant's wife only has temporary leave.

   47. It is not difficult to understand why  the  appellant  and  his  wife
       would prefer the family, and in particular their daughter, to  remain
       in the UK. Nevertheless,  considering  all  the  circumstances  I  am
       satisfied that the respondent has established that the decision is  a
       proportionate response to the legitimate  aim  pursued.  Accordingly,
       the appeal under Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  as  well  as  under  the
       Immigration Rules, is dismissed.

  Decision

   48. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
       set aside and the decision re-made dismissing the  appeal  under  the
       Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
     24/02/14
