
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12598/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 February 2014                           |On 27 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                          mr efren lambarte bansale
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No one attended
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   In this matter I will refer to the parties in  the  order  and  by  the
    description set out before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born 14 April  1961.   He
    applied for variation of leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   He
    last entered this country in August 2010  with  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse valid until February 2012.   In  refusing  the  application  the
    respondent's refusal notice dated  3  April  2013  indicated  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules had not been met
    as no English language certificate had been produced in compliance with
    the Rule.  The appellant's appeal against  that  decision  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Britton on 18 September  2013.   Judge
    Britton dismissed the appeal "under the Rules" but allowed  the  appeal
    under Article 8 ECHR.

3.   The Respondent sought leave to appeal which was  granted.   The  matter
    then came before me in the Upper Tribunal on 28 November  2013.   In  a
    decision notice dated 6 December 2013, and  for  the  reasons  set  out
    therein, I found an error of law in respect  of  the  Judge's  decision
    under Article 8 and that part  of  the  decision  was  accordingly  set
    aside.

4.   In paragraph 12 of my decision I indicated  that  before  the  decision
    could be remade it was necessary for evidence to be taken so  that  the
    outstanding aspect of the appeal could be  concluded.   I  specifically
    indicated that the conclusions of the judge with regard to  the  appeal
    under the Rules had not been challenged  and  were  preserved.   As  an
    interpreter was not available it was necessary for me to  adjourn  that
    hearing for a "resumed  evidential  hearing".   Hence  the  matter  was
    relisted before me on 18 February 2014.

5.   At the time the hearing commenced Mr Richards was present  but  neither
    the appellant nor his representatives  appeared.   A  Tribunal-financed
    interpreter was available.  I  caused  enquiries  to  be  made  of  the
    representatives and after  some  delay  a  faxed  letter  was  received
    indicating that the appellant was unable to attend the hearing  due  to
    "some personal  issues".   The  letter  contained  a  request  for  the
    outstanding issues to be decided on  "available  evidences"  (sic).   I
    therefore considered it appropriate to proceed.

6.   Mr Richards  indicated  that  he  relied  upon  the  original  decision
    letter.

7.   It  is  indeed  unfortunate  that  the  appellant  has  not  sought  to
    prosecute the outstanding aspect of his appeal.  The decision of  Judge
    Britton was preserved  along  with  his  findings  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's appeal against the refusal under the Rules.  The only issue
    before me was in respect of the appellant's Article 8 claim.

8.   The Appellant's representatives asked  me  to  take  into  account  the
    available evidence.  Regrettably there is very little.  I  consider  it
    appropriate at this stage  to  set  out  Judge  Britton's  findings  in
    respect of the appeal as a whole in which he said as follows:

         "18. The appellant's wife came to the United Kingdom  in  2004  and
             the appellant joined her with their  children  in  2010.   The
             appellant said he took his English Language test in 2008.   He
             failed that test but has not attempted to take  it  again.   I
             find it is surprising that he had lived in this country  since
             2010 and has made no attempt to take the test again.  I do not
             accept that there are exceptional circumstances which  prevent
             the appellant from being able to  meet  the  requirements  and
             thus being exempt from the English  Language  requirement.   I
             find there are no insurmountable obstacles to family life with
             his wife in the Philippines.  His wife and children  are  also
             Filipino nationals.  he has his mother and  sister  and  other
             family members in the Philippines.  I find  the  appellant  is
             trying to circumvent the Immigration Rules by not  taking  his
             English Language test.  The appellant  been  in  this  country
             since 2010 and therefore has not lived in this country for  20
             years continuously, and has not eroded  all  cultural,  social
             and family ties to the Philippines.  Therefore his application
             to vary his leave under the Immigration Rules is dismissed."

9.   The appellant's original bundle contained very little information  that
    I find of assistance.  There was a witness statement dated 12 September
    2013 along with wage slips, utility bill and bank statements.   I  have
    also noted the contents of the appellant's original grounds of appeal.

10.  I have no reason  to  doubt  the  findings  of  Judge  Britton  at  his
    paragraph 18.  Indeed they remain unchallenged.  I adopt those findings
    and note in particular there were  no  exceptional  circumstances  with
    regard  to  the  English  language  test  and  that   there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles to the family continuing family  life  in  the
    Philippines.  The appellant, his wife and  children  are  all  Filipino
    nationals and he has family members in  that  country.   Judge  Britton
    found that the appellant was trying to circumvent the Immigration Rules
    and I believe that that was  a  reasonable  conclusion  to  draw.   The
    appellant has only spent three or four years in the United Kingdom  and
    Judge Britton found that he had not eroded  all  cultural,  social  and
    family ties to his home country.

11.  I accept that the appellant and his wife are both working and that  two
    of the children are studying.   I  have  no  further  information  with
    regard to the personal circumstances of  the  appellant,  his  wife  or
    children.

12.  I have reminded myself with regard to the provisions of  Article  8  as
    to family and private life.  I have reminded myself of  the  provisions
    of reported cases in particular Razgar and the case of Gulshan (Article
    8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).

13.  As indicated above, I endorse Judge Britton's findings with  regard  to
    the lack of insurmountable obstacles preventing family life  continuing
    in the Philippines.   Adopting  the  five-step  approach  suggested  in
    Razgar I have considered  the  question  of  proportionality.   I  have
    reminded myself that a form of balancing act  must  be  conducted  with
    regard to the personal interests of the appellant and  his  family  and
    the public interest.  The respondent has a duty in respect of effective
    immigration control.  Article 8 provisions are to an extent included in
    certain provisions of the Immigration Rules and the appellant has  been
    found wanting with regard to those Rules.

14.  Whilst I accept that both the appellant and his wife are in  employment
    and at least some of the  children  are  in  education  in  the  United
    Kingdom  I  have  little  additional  evidence  to  suggest  that   the
    respondent's original decision was disproportionate.  I  conclude  that
    it was not.

15.  Having found that the original  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contained an error of law in respect of the Article 8  decision  I  set
    that decision aside and remake it.  The appellant's appeal  in  respect
    of Article 8 is dismissed.

16.  No anonymity direction was made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  no
    application was made before me.   Accordingly  no  anonymity  order  is
    made.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge N Poole

