
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/12288/2013
     ia/12172/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 February 2014                            |On 20 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                             Mrs kamaljeet kaur
                               mr avtar singh

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms D Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel instructed by Berkleys
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are wife and husband.  Both  and  are  Indian  nationals
    born on 20 April 1981 and 6 February 1980 respectively.  They arrive in
    the UK on 14 March 2011, the first appellant  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student and the second appellant as  her  dependant  with  leave  valid
    until 28 July 2012.  On 27 July 2012 the first  appellant  applied  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant  under  the  Points-
    Based System, whilst the second appellant  applied  for  leave  as  her
    partner.

2.    On  4  April  2013  the  respondent  refused  the  first   appellant's
    application under paragraph  322(1A)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  for
    having submitted false documents.  The second  appellant's  application
    was refused in consequence.  At the same time, the  respondent  decided
    to remove the appellants from the UK by way of directions under Section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.   By  a  letter
    dated 14 August 2013 the respondent withdrew the Section 47 decision.

3.   In support of her application, the first appellant submitted  documents
    from the Oriental Bank of Commerce, Allahabad Bank and the  State  Bank
    of India in respect of funds said to be held by her sponsors.  However,
    as a result of enquiries made with the banks concerned, the  respondent
    was satisfied that these documents were false, resulting in a mandatory
    refusal under paragraph 322(1A).

4.   The appeals of the  appellants  were  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Scott.

5.   Judge Scott made the following findings:-

         "17. While it is true that the DVR has been redacted, perhaps to an
             extent that is more than necessary, I am not persuaded that it
             is thereby  rendered  meaningless.   The  DVR  still  contains
             details of the enquiries  made  and  the  responses  received.
             Contact was made with the banks by an initial telephone  call,
             followed by an email copying  the  relevant  document  to  the
             bank.  A further telephone call was then made  on  receipt  of
             the bank's response and finally attempts were made to  contact
             the account holders.  No doubt it would have  been  better  if
             the emails had been copied in the  respondent's  bundle  along
             with the responses, but the DVR is a record of what the author
             was told by the bank's  representatives  and  by  one  of  the
             account holders.  On the face of it, the DVR was  prepared  by
             the person who made the relevant enquiries.


         18.  In respect of the accounts with the  Allahabad  Bank  and  the
             State Bank of India, it is true to say that the DVR  does  not
             actually assert  that  the  documents  submitted  were  false,
             simply that the term deposits in question were no longer held.


         19.  It is also the case that the documents purporting to have come
             from the Oriental Bank of Commerce are not called  "false"  in
             the DVR, but the result of the enquiries made was clearly that
             the certificate purporting to be from the bank was not in fact
             issued by the bank, which must mean that it was  false.   That
             conclusion is reinforced by the information said to have  been
             gleaned from the account holder himself.


         20.  The appellant sought to show, by  reference  to  Mr  Makwana's
             letter and the various documents attested by him, that all  of
             the documents submitted with  the  application  were  genuine.
             However, while the documents so attested may have been genuine
             and actually held by the person who appeared before him, there
             is nothing to connect these items to the first  appellant  and
             nothing which explains the certificate which the Oriental Bank
             of Commerce denied having issued.


         21.  The question in this case is whether  the  DVR  by  itself  is
             sufficient to discharge the burden of proof which rests on the
             respondent.  The appellants' grounds  of  appeal,  which  were
             expressly relied upon in submissions, draw  attention  to  the
             respondent's  Immigration  Directorates'   Instructions,   now
             contained in the Modernised Guidance, Section 4, v13.0,  valid
             from 21st March 2013, which includes the following:-


                        'This  page  explains  what  to  consider  when   an
                  applicant applying for leave to remain has given  a  false
                  document with their application.  This relates to  general
                  grounds for refusal under paragraphs 332(1A) and 322(2) of
                  the Rules.


                  Standard of Proof


                  To  confirm  that  a  document  is  false  you  must   get
                  independent  evidence.   Ideally  you   should   ask   the
                  authority which issued  the  document  or  information  to
                  confirm in writing that it is not genuine.  When  this  is
                  not possible, you should consider whether you  can  refuse
                  the application for substantive reasons'.


         22.  That instructions or guidance was not followed in  this  case.
             There is no independent evidence  to  show  that  any  of  the
             documents submitted by the first appellant are  false.   There
             is nothing in writing from any  of  the  issuing  authorities.
             There is no explanation for the lack of such written  evidence
             and no apparent reason why it could not have been obtained.


         23.   In  these  circumstances,  bearing  in   mind   the   serious
             consequences for the appellants of a refusal  under  paragraph
             322(1A), I find that the respondent  has  not  discharged  the
             burden of proof in this case."

6.   DIJ Zucker granted the Secretary of  State  permission  to  appeal  the
    judge's decision in the following terms:-

         "3.  The issue before the Judge was whether  Document  Verification
             Reports ("DVR") obtained by the Respondent were sufficient for
             the Respondent to be able to discharge  the  burden  of  proof
             that was upon her.  The Judge found that they were not because
             the Respondent's evidence was found  not  to  conform  to  the
             Respondent's  own  guidance  as  to  what  would   amount   to
             sufficient evidence.


         4.   The grounds continue to  assert  that  the  documentation  was
             false and reliance is placed upon AA (Nigeria) v Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 773.


         5.   At paragraph 21 the Judge has  set  out  an  IDI.   There  are
             arguably two parts.  One requires  independent  evidence;  one
             suggests evidence in writing.  Arguably the Judge has  treated
             both parts as mandatory and has fallen into  error  as  it  is
             arguable that the Respondent  did  have  independent  evidence
             obtained when  speaking  to  the  bank  with  the  independent
             evidence recorded in the DVR."

7.   Mr Saunders relied on the grounds and  the  grant  of  permission.   He
    said that the judge based his decision on the IDI and if  he  is  right
    about what the IDI says then his reasoning is adequate.   However,  the
    instruction in the IDI to caseworkers is to get as much information  as
    they can.  There is no stipulation as to how many  pieces  of  evidence
    and what sort of evidence is required.  The  respondent's  argument  is
    that the DVRs do constitute evidence sufficient to sustain the  refusal
    because, in particular, the documents from  the  three  banks  and  the
    responses to enquiries  to  all  three  showed  that  there  were  some
    problems with the documents.  The judge rightly sets out at  paragraphs
    18 and 19 what the difficulties were.  He argued that the Secretary  of
    State has done enough by way of enquiries and the nature  of  the  DVRs
    adequately described at paragraph 17 are enough to bear the  weight  of
    the respondent's refusal.

8.   Mr Saunders asked me to take into account the  responses  to  enquiries
    that came from the banks themselves.  The countervailing evidence comes
    from somebody not connected to the banks.  The banks know better.

9.   He submitted that the judge made a material error of law and  I  should
    reverse his decision.

10.  Counsel asked me to maintain the judge's decision.  She relied  on  the
    skeleton argument drafted by the appellant's solicitors.  Counsel  then
    took me through what she considered to be  the  defects  in  the  DVRs,
    stating that there were no details in relation to the account number at
    the Oriental Bank, the name or the balance in the account.   There  was
    nothing to indicate what enquiries had been made.  The result page  was
    blank.  The contact history did not contain full details.  It  did  not
    identify who the British High Commission official was  talking  to  and
    there was no evidence of the trailing of email.  The same was  said  of
    the DVR Report in respect of the Bank of Baroda.   With  the  Allahabad
    Bank she said that Mr Chavada does not have an account with this  bank.
    He has an account with the State Bank of India.

11.  I made the point  to  Counsel  that  there  was  no  challenge  in  the
    skeleton argument against the findings the judge made in respect of the
    DVRs.  Indeed the appellants had  not  cross-appealed  those  findings.
    Consequently, those findings remain and I cannot go behind them.

12.  Counsel then argued that the judge did not apply too  high  a  test  by
    requiring independent  evidence  because  it  could  be  asserted  with
    confidence that the  DVRs  had  independent  evidence  to  support  the
    Secretary of State's decision.

13.  I find that the judge made a material error of law.  The IDI relied  on
    by the judge is an instruction to caseworkers  what  they  must  do  in
    order to confirm that a  document  is  false.   I  find  that  that  is
    precisely what the caseworker did.  He asked the authority that  issued
    the document, namely the banks for information about the reliability of
    the bank documents.  Although there was no  written  confirmation  from
    the banks, the information as to their falsehood was contained  in  the
    DVRs.  The judge accepted  that  the  DVRs  contained  details  of  the
    enquiries made and  the  responses  received.  He  also  accepted  that
    enquiries were made by an official of the British  High  Commission  to
    the banks that issued the documents.  He  identified  the  difficulties
    that had arisen following  the  enquiries  made  by  the  British  High
    Commission.  In the circumstances I find that for the judge applied too
    high a test to require further independent evidence  and  not  identify
    where that independent evidence was to come from.  By so doing  he  had
    treated both parts of the IDIs as mandatory  and  therefore  fell  into
    error.  I agree with what DIJ Zucker said at paragraph 5 of  his  grant
    of permission.  The respondent did have independent  evidence  obtained
    when speaking to the bank with the independent evidence recorded in the
    DVR.

14.  I find that the judge materially erred in  law.   His  decision  cannot
    stand.

15.  I re-make the decision and dismiss the appeals of the appellants.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

