
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12876/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2016                              |On 12 May 2016                |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           muhammad suleman iqbal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Malik, HUMD Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer in this decision to the respondent as the  appellant  and
    to the appellant as  the  respondent  (as  they  appeared  respectively
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal).   The  appellant,  Muhammad  Suleman
    Iqbal, was born on 10 April 1981 and is a male citizen of Pakistan.  He
    had applied for indefinite leave to remain as the spouse  of  a  person
    present and settled in the United  Kingdom  (Farhat  Shaheen)  but  his
    application was refused  by  a  decision  dated  27  March  2015.   The
    appellant had submitted with his application a pass notification letter
    indicating that he had undertaken and passed a Knowledge of Life in the
    United Kingdom test at the Best  Training  Centre  in  Sheffield  on  3
    October 2014.  Certificate number (3246962) had not  been  recorded  by
    the respondent on her database of  results  and,  in  consequence,  the
    respondent had concluded that the appellant had provided a  counterfeit
    certificate.  The appellant appealed against the refusal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Turnock) which, in a  decision  promulgated  on  9
    September 2015,  allowed  the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The Presenting Officer before the First-tier  Tribunal  explained  [25]
    that the process of testing took place electronically that the  results
    were  electronically  communicated  from  the  test   centre   to   the
    respondent.  The Presenting Officer had also submitted  [26]  that  the
    appellant had failed to produce any evidence  from  the  Best  Training
    Centre explaining why it was that there was nothing on the database if,
    as he claimed, the appellant had taken and passed  the  test.   In  his
    decision, he judge went on to write this:

         "The difficulty with the case from the respondent's point  of  view
         is  the  absence  of  any  satisfactory  evidence  as  to  how  the
         electronic database actually operates and what checks were made  on
         the system to make sure that the absence of any  entry  meant  that
         nothing had been submitted to them.  A printout of the database was
         itself inaccurate, showing the name  of  the  appellant  as  "iqbal
         Muhammad suleman).  There is clearly the possibility that there was
         an error in  the  details  of  the  test  not  transmitted  to  the
         respondent.   Balanced  against  that  is  the   absence   of   any
         confirmatory evidence from the appellant although it  is  the  case
         that he passed the test on 1 May 2015.   That  was,  of  course,  a
         number of months after the date he first submitted the test and  he
         would have had the opportunity to conduct further studies."

 3. The grounds of appeal confirm that there was only one  record  for  the
    appellant having passed the test (his later attempt  on  1  May  2015).
    The certificate from 3 October 2014 contained spelling and  grammatical
    errors which, the respondent has  submitted,  should  have  caused  the
    judge to view the result with caution.  The grounds  repeat  the  point
    made by the First-Tier Tribunal the Presenting Officer, namely that the
    appellant had not produced any evidence from the training  provider  or
    the test centre to show that he had passed the  test  in  October  2014
    and/or that there was some problem with the electronic notification  to
    the respondent.  Other than one other issue (which I deal  with  below)
    the grounds are as I have summarised them.

 4. The judge considered both the spelling and grammatical errors [25]  and
    "agreed that this layout of the certificate was somewhat unprofessional
    although there was  no  comparator  certificates  issued  by  the  Best
    Training Centre to indicate that  the  certificate  was  not  of  their
    normal standard".  The judge, therefore dealt with the point raised  in
    the grounds of the Upper Tribunal as he did with the  subsequent  point
    regarding the absence of any "confirmatory evidence from the appellant"
    (see  my  quotation  of  the  judge's  [27]  above).   The  judge  has,
    therefore, dealt with the issues raised in the  grounds  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The  question  remains  whether  he  was  entitled,  on  the
    evidence before him, to reach  the  decision  that  the  appellant  had
    passed the test in October 2014 that there had been some  breakdown  in
    the  electronic  communication  of  the  result  to   the   respondent.
    Conversely, the question arises as to whether such a  finding,  on  the
    evidence, would be perverse, in the sense that no reasonable First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, faced with the same evidence,  would  come  to  such  a
    conclusion.  Having considered the matter carefully, I  find  that  the
    conclusion which  the  judge  reached  was  available  to  him  on  the
    evidence.  He has dealt  with  the  questions  of  the  layout  of  the
    certificate, the spelling  and  the  grammar  and  the  fact  that  the
    appellant appears to have chosen not to obtain additional  confirmatory
    evidence from the test provider.  Given that the outcome of the  appeal
    was not perverse, the Upper Tribunal should hesitate before seeking  to
    substitute its own view of the evidence for that reached by the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge is charged with finding the facts having considered
    both the oral and documentary evidence in detail.  Given that there was
    no error of the judge's approach to the evidence and his analysis of it
    was not perverse I have decided  not  to  interfere  with  the  judge's
    decision.  I acknowledge that a differently  constituted  Tribunal  may
    have reached a different result; however, that is not the  point.   For
    the reasons which I have given, the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 20 April 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

