

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/12375/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at:  Field House                   |  Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 4th July 2016                        |  On: 20th July 2016              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                YACINE CHAMI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting
                       Officer
For the Respondent:    M C. Lam, David Tang & co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Algeria born on the 26th January  1978.
    On the 9th December 2015 Judge Wyman of the First-tier Tribunal allowed
    his appeal with reference to the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006. The Secretary of State now has permission  to  appeal
    against that decision[1].


 2. The matter in issue in the appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    whether Mr Chami's marriage to Hungarian national  Szilvia  Pecsek  was
    one of convenience, entered  into  for  the  purpose  of  circumventing
    immigration control. By  way  of  letter  dated  19th  March  2015  the
    Secretary of State had refused to grant Mr Chami any confirmation of  a
    right of residence in the UK because she believed the  marriage  was  a
    sham. Mr Chami and his wife had been interviewed  at  length,  and  the
    Secretary of State found that the answers given had disclosed a "litany
    of discrepancies" such as to establish that they  were  not  a  genuine
    couple.   The letter identified  those  discrepancies,  which  included
    matters such as where the couple had spent New Year's  Eve  2014,  when
    marriage had been proposed and the sum paid to Ms Pecsek as  her  dowry
    as part of the Islamic marriage contract.

 3. On appeal before the First-tier Tribunal both Mr Chami  and  Ms  Pecsek
    gave oral evidence.   They were each cross examined by  a  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer and were then asked some questions by the Judge. The
    answers given are summarised in the determination. At paragraph 49  the
    Judge records that he has carefully considered the documentary and oral
    evidence.   The Tribunal directs itself to the  guidance  in  Papajorgi
    (EEA Spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012]  UKUT  00038.  The
    determination records Mr Chami's acceptance that some  of  the  answers
    given  were  discrepant.  The  Tribunal   describes   some   of   these
    discrepancies as being "relatively minor" whereas "others may have more
    weight".  The Tribunal finds that the "vast majority"  of  the  answers
    given were "correct".  The determination then says this:

         "55. I asked the appellant and his wife  various  questions,  which
         they could have had no prior knowledge of. This  included  what  is
         their favourite food, what hours do they work, what  is  their  day
         off and what  do  they  like  to  do  together.  The  answers  were
         completely consistent.


         56. I also accept the fact that the appellant's wife had chosen  to
         convert to Islam before she came to the United Kingdom  and  before
         she met Mr Chami. She appeared very sincere in her answers in  this
         regard.


         57. Had the couple not been living together, I do not believe  that
         they would have been able to "simply learn" the correct answers  to
         the numerous questions that were asked at the interview and at  the
         appeal hearing. Some of the answers that  were  initially  seen  as
         incorrect at the lengthy marriage interview were explained later by
         the appellant and his wife. One example  of  this  is  asking  what
         happened on New Year's Eve. Mr Chami  has  explained  that  he  was
         working on New Year's Eve and therefore got back late. However they
         did celebrate together after he returned from work.  Accordingly  I
         accept there is no inconsistency in this answer".

 4. The appeal was thereby allowed.


 5. The Secretary of State now appeals on the ground  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal has not given sufficient reasons for its conclusions, and that
    it has failed to  resolve matters of dispute between the  parties.  The
    grounds reproduce the various points made in the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter, and submit that the determination has not adequately  addressed
    these matters.



    The Submissions


 6. The grounds set out verbatim the eight discrepancies, identified in the
    refusal letter, which arose from the interviews conducted with Mr Chami
    and his wife. Although the determination makes express reference to one
    of these matters, it is submitted that the Secretary  of  State  cannot
    know the Tribunal's conclusions as to the rest of them, since any  such
    conclusion  is  not  articulated.   Although  the  grounds  are  fairly
    detailed, in his submissions Mr Bramble  distilled  them  to  make  one
    central point: the Secretary of State went into this  appeal  believing
    that she had shown very  good  grounds  as  to  why  this  was  a  sham
    marriage, and has come out not understanding why she lost.  Mr  Bramble
    pointed to the Tribunal's acknowledgement that some of the points  made
    had "more weight" and questioned where those matters  were  weighed  in
    the balance.  The fact that the couple lived together (ie in  the  same
    house) was not actually in issue so the comment at 57 was troubling and
    appeared to indicate that the tribunal had misunderstood the test to be
    applied.


 7. Mr Lam made a robust defence of the determination. He pointed out  that
    the couple had, between them, answered in excess of 1500  questions  in
    two very long interviews which had only been served very shortly before
    the hearing. The eight discrepant answers had  to  be  viewed  in  that
    context, and indeed that is exactly what the Tribunal had done.   There
    was no need for the determination to have set out chapter and verse  of
    the refusal letter, because it was apparent to all what  the  case  was
    about. There was one central issue:  was  this  a  sham  marriage.  The
    determination demonstrates that in answering that question the Tribunal
    had applied the correct burden and standard  of  proof  (in  line  with
    Papajorgi) and had taken all relevant information into account. The two
    witnesses had appeared before Judge Wyman and he had had an opportunity
    to assess the credibility of the witnesses for himself.  Questions  had
    been put that the couple could not have been prepared for had this been
    a sham.  Their evidence had  included  lengthy  witness  statements  in
    which each and every one of the points made was addressed.




    My Findings


 8. The questions raised in this appeal are whether the  Tribunal  properly
    weighed in the balance the case for the Secretary of State and  whether
    sufficient reasons were given for rejecting that case.


 9. I am satisfied that the Tribunal was fully cognisant of  the  case  for
    the Secretary of State. At paragraph  9  the  determination  notes  the
    point that there was a "litany of discrepancies"  relating  to  matters
    such as the parties religion, respective immigration  history  and  the
    proposal  of  marriage.   The  determination  then  records  that   the
    witnesses had adopted their witness statements,  wherein  they  address
    the points made in the refusal letter in detail. It is  quite  apparent
    that the Tribunal understood why the case was before it.

10. The real question is whether the decision gives sufficient  reasons  as
    to why the  Tribunal  found  in  the  (then)  appellant's  favour.  The
    complaint is that the determination does not go  through  each  of  the
    discrepancies methodically before reaching an overall  conclusion.  The
    answer, in my view,  lies  in  the  passage  from  Papajorgi  cited  at
    paragraph 52 of the determination:

         "In summary, our understanding is that, where the issue  is  raised
         in an appeal, the question before the Judge will therefore  be  'in
         light of the totality of the information before me,  including  the
         assessment of the claimant's answers and any information  provided,
         am I satisfied that it is more probable than not  that  this  is  a
         marriage of convenience?'"


    [emphasis added].

11. The Tribunal could not have ignored the points raised by the  Secretary
    of State since they were at the  centre  of  the  appeal.  Those  eight
    discrepant answers were however assessed in the round with all  of  the
    other evidence. That included the other 1500+ answers given which  were
    consistent, and the oral evidence, tested by an experienced  Presenting
    Officer. It included the  fact  that  the  couple  answered  additional
    questions put to them by the Tribunal to  its  satisfaction,  and  that
    there were two additional witnesses who testified to the fact that this
    couple, known to  them  personally,  presented  as  perfectly  genuine.
    Taking all of that evidence together, the Tribunal was entitled to find
    the burden had not been discharged.  I am satisfied that there  was  no
    error in describing some of the discrepancies  as  "relatively  minor";
    that appears to have been the language used by the  Presenting  Officer
    in her submissions [at 43].




12. In Papajorgi, and indeed Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14,  it  was  held
    that the legal burden of proving a marriage to be  one  of  convenience
    lies on the Secretary of State. In this case  the  Secretary  of  State
    relied on a select number of points arising from  what  were  extremely
    long and detailed interviews. In the case of Ms Pecsec,  the  interview
    was conducted using an interpreter over the telephone, hardly an  ideal
    situation. She had given evidence that  this  had  led  her  to  become
    confused about what she was being asked, and this evidence was accepted
    by the Tribunal. The result was that the burden was  not  found  to  be
    discharged. There was no error of law in that finding.



      Decisions

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.


14. I was not asked to make an anonymity direction and on the facts  I  see
    no reason to do so.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               18th July 2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 13th May 2016  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
PJM Hollingworth


