
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/12644/2014
                                                               IA/12647/2014
                                                               IA/12649/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th June 2015                    |On 18th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                         Mrs Marilou Capito Herrera
                      Mr Manuel Luis Villareal Herrera
                  Master Emmanuel Capito Herrera (a minor)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Jeshani, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of the Philippines.  The first  and  second
    Appellants are born respectively on 30th September 1969 and 19th August
    1962.  The third Appellant is their son born  on  13th  December  1996.
    The Appellants' immigration history is set out in detail at paragraph 5
    of a Notice of Refusal  dated  21st  February  2014.   That  Notice  of
    Refusal was in response to  an  application  made  by  way  of  letters
    requesting the reconsideration of a decision dated 5th  June  2013  and
    with reference to a letter dated 20th June 2013 whereby the  Appellants
    asked that their cases be considered  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention of Human Rights.

 2. The Appellants appealed the Notice  of  Refusal  and  the  appeal  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Blake sitting at  Taylor  House
    on 9th February 2015.  In a decision promulgated on 6th March 2015  the
    Appellants' appeals were allowed so far  as  the  third  Appellant  was
    concerned  pursuant  to  the  Immigration  Rules  and  so  far  as  all
    Appellants  are  concerned  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.

 3. On 17th March 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contended firstly that the judge had
    arguably failed to properly apply Rule 276ADE(1) and secondly that  the
    judge had arguably failed to properly consider Article 8.

 4. On 7th May 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Foudy noted that the grounds argued that the  judge  had
    erred in his approach  to  Article  8  and  paragraph  276ADE  and  his
    assessment of whether it was unduly harsh to expect  the  Appellant  to
    return to the Philippines.  It was also noted that the  grounds  argued
    that the judge  had  failed  to  attach  sufficient  weight  to  public
    interest factors in reaching his decision.  Judge Foudy noted that  the
    judge had recognised the need to consider as  a  primary  consideration
    the best interests of the minor Appellant, however  it  was  not  clear
    what factors weighed in the judge's mind when  he  decided  that  there
    were exceptional  features  of  the  Appellant's  case  that  justified
    allowing the appeal.  Neither did she consider that it was  clear  that
    due weight was given to the public interest factors set out in  Section
    117 of the 2002 Act and that this lack of  reasoning  was  an  arguable
    error of law.

 5. No reply pursuant to Rule  24  appears  to  have  been  served  by  the
    Appellants' solicitors.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  For the purpose  of  continuity  throughout
    the proceedings the Herrera family are referred to  as  the  Appellants
    and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.  The Appellants appear by
    their instructed Counsel  Mr  Jeshani.   Mr  Jeshani  has  considerable
    knowledge and understanding of this case.  He appeared before the First-
    tier Tribunal and he is the author of the Appellants' skeleton argument
    that was before that Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appears  by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Ms Brocklesby-Weller.

Submissions/Arguments

 7. As a preliminary issue Mr Jeshani  points  out  that  at  the  date  of
    decision the third Appellant was aged under 18 and submits that he  met
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  He points  out  that  the
    judge went on to make findings in the alternative because at  the  date
    of the hearing the third Appellant was aged over 18 but under 25 and he
    had been in the UK for half of his life.

 8. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submits that the Appellant could not succeed under
    paragraph 276ADE(v) as the relevant date for consideration of the issue
    is the date of application.  Further she submits that if you  took  the
    date of decision it is the Secretary of  State's  contention  that  the
    third Appellant had spent more of his time in the Philippines  in  that
    he would have spent nine years five months 26 days in  the  Philippines
    and since his arrival in the UK seven years eight months.  However,  it
    is conceded that the Appellant could not  meet  paragraph  276ADE(1)(v)
    and consequently Ms Brocklesby-Weller submits that the  analysis  comes
    down to a reasonableness assessment and that the best  interests  of  a
    child are  different  from  reasonableness.   She  submits  that  wider
    consideration is to consider the family unit as  a  whole  and  whether
    allowing the appeal  is  reasonableness.   She  acknowledges  that  the
    Appellant enjoyed private life in the  UK  but  it  is  necessary  when
    assessing the concept of reasonableness to  consider  the  seven  years
    that he spent in the Philippines.  She concludes by submitting that the
    judge has failed to complete the balancing exercise in that he had  not
    factored in other matters which he should have done  and  submits  that
    there is an error of law and the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge should be set aside.

 9. In response Mr Jeshani submits that paragraph 276A(0)  does  not  apply
    when Article 8 is raised and that the relevant  date  is  the  date  of
    hearing and that pursuant to EV (Philippines) the Rules  could  not  be
    met thereunder.  However, he points  out  that  when  looking  at  Rule
    276ADE(iv) the test is one of reasonableness and the judge has  carried
    out that exercise and come to a conclusion that he was entitled to.  He
    refers to his skeleton argument that was before the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge and he again relies upon  it.   In  particular  he  takes  me  to
    paragraphs 18 to 21 and sets out paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) submitting the
    third Appellant satisfies that paragraph of the Immigration  Rules  and
    that the judge has, in his  analysis,  considered  this  and  that  the
    Appellant meets the Rule.  He submits that the judge has looked at  all
    avenues and reminds me that this is an in-country appeal and  therefore
    the judge is entitled to look at all factors up to the date of hearing.

10. He submits that the decision is a valid decision.  He  agrees  that  it
    was appropriate for Section 117 of the 2002 Act to be looked at by  the
    judge and that he has done so.  He indicates there are effectively  two
    approaches that he would urge me to consider both of  which  ultimately
    mean the third Appellant succeeds.   He  urges  me  that  there  is  no
    material error of law but even if I were to find that there  were  then
    the Appellant would succeed under 276ADE(v) especially if  he  were  to
    make a further application now.

11. In her final response Ms Brocklesby-Weller reminds me that it  was  not
    possible for the Appellant to succeed under 276ADE(iv) bearing in  mind
    the time that he had spent in the Philippines and resubmits  that  this
    is a matter of reasonableness.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

14. Whilst appreciating the comments made by Ms Brocklesby-Weller on behalf
    of the Secretary of State the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has  analysed
    the evidence in some detail and at  paragraphs  113  to  119  gave  due
    consideration  as  to  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  satisfied  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules paragraphs  276ADE(iv)  and  (v).
    Thereafter when drawing together all  the  threads  of  his  facts  and
    findings concluded that the overall position of  the  family  was  such
    that  their  removal  would  engage  Article  8.    In   addition   due
    consideration was given to the  skeleton  of  Mr  Jeshani  which  makes
    substantial reference to case law and the First-tier Tribunal Judge has
    specifically indicated that he gave due and full consideration to that.
     The judge has analysed the factual evidence  and  concluded  that  the
    third Appellant satisfies paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, namely that (a) at the date of decision he was a child under the
    age of 18 (b) at the date of decision he had lived continuously in  the
    United Kingdom for at least seven years and this  is  accepted  by  the
    Respondent and (c) that at  the  date  of  decision  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom given that he  was
    in his first year of A-levels and the disruption that that would  cause
    him at such a  critical  time  in  his  life,  in  his  education,  his
    integration into British society  and  the  strong  ties  that  he  has
    developed with individuals both in  and  out  of  school/college  which
    would otherwise be disrupted and severed.

15. Ms Brocklesby-Weller acknowledges  that  the  issue  comes  down  to  a
    reasonableness assessment and this is  something  that  the  judge  has
    carried out.  In such circumstances the submissions of the Secretary of
    State both written and oral amount to little  more  than  argument  and
    disagreement with the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   He
    has given due and proper consideration to the reasonableness  test  and
    has made finding thereon which are  sustainable  and  do  not  disclose
    therefore a material error of law.

16. Based on that finding the judge was thereafter  perfectly  entitled  to
    conclude that the  first  and  second  Appellant  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with the third Appellant and it  could
    not be deemed reasonable, and that it would be  contrary  to  the  best
    interests of the third Appellant, to return back to the Philippines and
    for the Appellants to all return back to the Philippines  as  a  family
    unit.  He therefore made a finding, albeit that  he  did  not  go  into
    great detail with regard to case law, that the removal  of  the  family
    would be such as to engage Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  of
    Human Rights.  However he has referred to Razgar  and  I  am  satisfied
    that he has done enough to show that the  criteria  is  met.   In  such
    circumstances I am satisfied that there is no material error of law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and the appeal of the Secretary
    of State is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 18/08/2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 18/08/2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
