
IAC-AH-pc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12139/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2015                            |On 4 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Sullemana Abubakari
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not present or represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Sullemana Abubakari, was born on 22 June 1980 and is  a
    male citizen of Ghana.  The respondent was refused a residence card  as
    confirmation  of  a  right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    Regulation 17 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 by a decision dated 24 February 2014.  He appealed  that  decision
    at the First-tier Tribunal (Judge McGinty) which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 11 August 2014, allowed the appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the  Upper  Tribunal.   I  shall
    hereafter  refer  to  the  appellant  as  the  respondent  and  to  the
    respondent as the appellant (as they appeared respectively  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal).

 2. This is a proxy marriage case, the appellant having claimed to marry  a
    Portuguese national.   Judge  McGinty  found  that  the  appellant  had
    produced a marriage certificate issued by  a  competent  authority  and
    that the marriage certificate had been issued in  accordance  with  the
    registration rules of Ghana where the marriage had  taken  place.   The
    grounds of appeal rely on Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT
    24 and also TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana  [2014]  UKUT  00316
    (IAC).  The  respondent  asserts  that  the  Tribunal  was  obliged  to
    consider Portuguese law  in  order  to  determine  whether  this  proxy
    marriage would be treated as valid and legal  in  that  EU  state.   By
    failing to consider whether the marriage  was  valid  under  Portuguese
    law, the judge had erred in law.

 3. The appellant did not attend the hearing in Manchester  on  20  January
    2015.  I am satisfied that he was aware of the date and  place  of  the
    hearing.  Indeed, on 19 January 2015 I had refused  an  application  by
    him for an adjournment.  The appellant wished to  submit  his  marriage
    certificate to the Portuguese Embassy in London in order that it  might
    be "verified" by the embassy.  It is not clear what  such  a  procedure
    would achieve; it was clear  that  the  appellant  had  not  previously
    sought to adduce any evidence from the Portuguese Embassy  or,  indeed,
    as regards to the status of proxy marriages in Portuguese law  when  he
    had appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In the absence  of  any  such
    evidence, it was not possible for the First-tier Tribunal to allow  the
    appeal without erring in law, as the grounds assert.  Judge McGinty has
    dealt thoroughly with this proxy marriage in terms of its  legality  in
    Ghana; however, he says nothing  in  his  determination  regarding  its
    status in Portuguese law.  That failure  leads  me  to  set  aside  his
    determination and to  remake  the  decision.   The  appellant's  appeal
    against the respondent's decision refusing  him  a  residence  card  is
    dismissed.

DECISION

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 11  August  2014
is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appellant's  appeal  against
the respondent's decision dated 24 February 2014 is dismissed.



Signed        Date 2 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
