
IAC-YW-LM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/12789/2014
     IA/12800/2014
     IA/12803/2014
     IA/12816/2014
     IA/12857/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 January 2015                           |On 2 February 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

|PARVIN AKTHAR                         |First Respondent |
|MALIHA MAHEK HAQUE                    |Second Respondent|
|SANGITA HAQUE                         |Third Respondent |
|YASIN HAQUE                           |Fourth Respondent|
|AMINUL HAQUE                          |Fifth Respondent |


                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Akhter, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1.  No  application  has  been  made  for  an  anonymity  order  in  these
    proceedings and no reason was put before me today  why  such  an  order
    should be made.

 2. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellants are all citizens of Bangladesh.   The  first  and  fifth
    appellants are husband and wife and the parents of  the  second,  third
    and fourth appellants.

 4. The first, third and fifth appellants arrived in the United Kingdom  on
    25 November 2005 as visitors.  They have remained in the United Kingdom
    since that date.  The second and fourth appellants  were  born  in  the
    United Kingdom.  In 2011 and 2013  the  family  applied  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of their life in  the  United
    Kingdom and once their eldest child, Mahek, had completed seven  years'
    residence.  Decisions to  remove  the  appellants  were  served  on  25
    February 2014.  The appellants appealed those decisions.  Their appeals
    were heard at Hatton Cross Hearing Centre by Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal L K Gibbs who in a decision promulgated  on  3  November  2014
    allowed their appeals.  The third appellant's appeal was allowed  under
    the Immigration Rules and the other appellants under Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.

 5. At the hearing in the First-tier the  judge  heard  evidence  from  the
    first, third and fifth appellants as  well  as  the  first  appellant's
    mother and brother.

 6.  The  judge  first  gave  consideration  to  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).  It was submitted on behalf  of
    the  third  appellant  that  she  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) which at the time of the decision stated:-

         "(iv)     is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
             in the UK for at least seven years (discounting any period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or ..."

 7. The HOPO submitted that there was insufficient evidence to satisfy  the
    judge that it would be unreasonable for the third  appellant  to  leave
    the United Kingdom and that there was contradictory evidence  regarding
    her ability to speak Bengali and no evidence to say that she could  not
    resume her studies in Bangladesh.  Further, it was highlighted that  in
    entering the United Kingdom as visitors to circumvent  the  Immigration
    Rules the first and fifth appellants had never intended  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and that their immigration  conduct  was  something  the
    judge should take into account.  The judge took this into  account  and
    was satisfied that the conduct of the first and fifth appellants was as
    submitted by the HOPO.  Moreover, although not utilising public  funds,
    the first and fifth appellants accessed  the  NHS  services  and  state
    education.  The judge construed paragraph 276ADE(iv) to mean  that  her
    focus must be on the third appellant, notwithstanding  the  conduct  of
    the first and fifth appellants.

 8. The judge acknowledged that the third appellant's best interests were a
    primary concern for her and relied on the guidance in Azimi-Moayed  and
    Others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) Iran [2013]  UKUT
    197 (IAC) in coming to her conclusion.

 9. I set out paragraph 1 of the headnote to Azimi-Moayed here:-

         "(1) The  case  law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the
             following principles to assist in the determination of appeals
             where children are affected by the appealed decisions:

             i)   As a starting point  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
                  children to be with both their parents and if both parents
                  are  being  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the
                  starting point suggests that so should dependent  children
                  who form part of their household unless there are  reasons
                  to the contrary.

             ii)  It is generally in the interests of children to have both
                  stability  and  continuity  of  social   and   educational
                  provision and the benefit of growing up  in  the  cultural
                  norms of the society to which they belong.

             iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state  of
                  origin can lead to  development  of  social  cultural  and
                  educational  ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate   to
                  disrupt, in  the  absence  of  compelling  reason  to  the
                  contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear
                  cut but past and present policies  have  identified  seven
                  years as a relevant period.

             iv)  Apart from the terms of published policies and rules, the
                  Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to
                  be more significant to a child that the first seven  years
                  of life.   Very  young  children  are  focussed  on  their
                  parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.

             v)   Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
                  leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or
                  remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely
                  to give rise to private life deserving of respect  in  the
                  absence of exceptional factors.  In any event,  protection
                  of the economic  well-being  of  society  amply  justifies
                  removal in such cases.

10. The judge found from that authority that it  was  clear  that  cultural
    continuity is important as well as social  and  educational  provision.
    For the third appellant she found that Bangladesh would not represent a
    break in her cultural experience because she speaks Bengali  to  family
    members and is close to her extended family members, all of whom are of
    Bangladeshi origin.  Further, having regard to the photos  and  letters
    of support from the family it appears that a great deal of the family's
    time is spent with people of a similar background.  However, the  judge
    found that the facts nonetheless remain that the  third  appellant  has
    been living in the United Kingdom for nearly nine years and  this  time
    started when she was 4 years of age.  While satisfied that she  remains
    in touch with her Bangladeshi culture it is more probable than not,  in
    the judge's findings, that  she  is  equally  comfortable  with  United
    Kingdom culture and the judge placed weight on the fact that she speaks
    fluent English and has had  her  entire  schooling  within  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge also found that the third appellant was settled  at
    school, achieving excellent results at primary school and, according to
    the documentary evidence before her,  settling  in  well  to  secondary
    school where she has an excellent attendance and academic record.   The
    judge concluded by finding that the third appellant "is  integrated  in
    the UK".

11. The judge noted that seven years has long been a yardstick by which the
    residence of a child has been measured when  assessing  the  impact  of
    having to leave the United Kingdom and that the third appellant arrived
    in the United Kingdom  aged  4,  which  when  applying  the  principles
    detailed in Azimi-Moayed would be a significant time.   She  also  took
    into account and acknowledged that  the  third  appellant's  return  to
    Bangladesh would be within her family unit  but  when  looking  at  the
    position in the round found that the length of time the third appellant
    had lived in the United Kingdom led to a conclusion that it  would  not
    be reasonable for her to leave the United Kingdom.  She found therefore
    that the third appellant met the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(iv)
    of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).

12. At paragraph 19 of her  decision  the  judge  records  that  the  third
    appellant of course could not remain in the United Kingdom without  her
    parents and siblings and it would not  be  in  her  best  interests  to
    suggest that she could.  The judge found that the first, second, fourth
    and fifth appellants should also be allowed to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  She acknowledged the first and  fifth  appellants  would  now
    satisfy Appendix FM, specifically R-LTRPT, were they to  make  a  valid
    application for leave to remain as parents but that she was  unable  to
    allow the appeals on  that  basis  as  no  such  application  had  been
    submitted.  Therefore she went on to  consider  the  situation  of  the
    remaining four family  members  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   She
    considered appropriate authorities including Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  and
    took  into  account,  as  she  was  obliged  to,  Section  117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).  In light of
    her  findings  in  relation  to  the  third  appellant  the  judge   in
    considering paragraph 117B(6) applied and consequently, notwithstanding
    the conduct of the first and fifth appellants, the public interest does
    not require their removal.  A decision to remove the  remaining  family
    members would, the judge found, be a disproportionate one.

13. The respondent sought permission to appeal and in  giving  his  reasons
    for granting it Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Cruthers  identified
    the crux of the  respondent's  grounds  in  the  second  of  his  three
    reasons.  They state:-

         "1.  By a decision  promulgated  on  3  November  2014,  First-tier
             Tribunal Judge LK Gibbs allowed these appeals.  The first  and
             fifth appellants are a  wife  and  husband,  the  other  three
             appellants are their children  (paragraph  1  of  the  judge's
             decision).  It was the judge's assessment that the  appeal  of
             the oldest child of the family, Mahek, succeeded by  reference
             to the criteria in paragraph 276ADE of the immigration  rules,
             HC 395.  Having reached that conclusion (in her paragraph 18)
             the judge went on to allow  the  appeals  of  the  other  four
             appellants  by  reference  to  article  8  of   the   European
             Convention on Human Rights.

         2.   The  crux  of  the  grounds  on  which  the  respondent  seeks
             permission to appeal is that the judge's reasoning  as  to  it
             not being reasonable to  expect  Mahek  to  leave  the  United
             Kingdom is flawed - especially in  the  light  of  authorities
             such as Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 0074,  27  November  2013  and  EV
             (Philippines) [2014] EWCA  Civ  874.   Asserting  that  it  is
             reasonable to expect Mahek to relocate to Bangladesh  as  part
             of her family unit, the respondent further asserts  that  none
             of these five appeals should have been allowed.

         3.   The grounds are arguable - especially  in  the  light  of  the
             immigration history of  the  two  adult  appellants,  and  the
             judge's findings in relation to that immigration history  (her
             paragraphs 13 and 14)."

14. Today Mr Bramble relied on the grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal.
    He argued that, whilst accepting that seven years is a relevant  period
    of  time  insofar  as  it  is  the  requisite  period  under  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) to engage that
    provision, the accrual of seven years is not, in itself, enough  to  be
    determinative.  The judge has materially erred in concluding that  this
    is a determinative factor.  Further, the fact that the third  appellant
    has strong ties to the Bangladeshi community within the United  Kingdom
    is a weighty factor in favour of the reasonableness of refusal and  the
    fact that she is "equally comfortable" within the culture of the United
    Kingdom does not establish that it would be  unreasonable  for  her  to
    leave the United Kingdom with her  family.   Whilst  natural  that  the
    third appellant would be engaged, to some extent, in the  community  in
    which she lives, it remains material that she has retained  equal  ties
    to her Bangladeshi  culture.   Moreover,  the  reliance  on  the  third
    appellant's education is a further misdirection in  the  assessment  of
    reasonableness and it must be remembered that she could have no "future
    right" to access services in the United Kingdom, nor could  her  family
    members.

15. I was referred to the authority of Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC  74,  and
    in particular the following from paragraph 24:-

         "...  No doubt it would have been possible  to  have  stated  that,
         other things being equal, it was  in  the  best  interests  of  the
         children that they and their parents stayed in the  United  Kingdom
         so that  they  could  obtain  such  benefits  as  health  care  and
         education which the decision-maker recognised might be of a  higher
         standard than would be available in the Congo.   But  other  things
         were not equal.  They were not British citizens.  They had no right
         to future education and health care in this country.  ..."

16. He also relied on EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    874 with regards to entitlement and in particular paragraphs 59, 60 and
    61 which state:-

         59.  On the facts of  ZH  it  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
             children to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because
             the family would  be  separated  and  the  children  would  be
             deprived of the right to grow up in the country of which  they
             were citizens.

         60.  That is a long way from the facts of our case.   In  our  case
             none of the family is a British citizen.  None has  the  right
             to remain in this country.  If  the  mother  is  removed,  the
             father has no independent right to remain.  If the parents are
             removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the children
             to go with  them.   As  the  immigration  judge  found  it  is
             obviously  in  their  best  interests  to  remain  with  their
             parents.  Although it is, of course a question of fact for the
             tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of being educated
             at public expense in the UK can outweigh the  benefit  to  the
             children of remaining with their parents.  Just as  we  cannot
             provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate
             the world.

         61.  In fact the immigration judge weighed the  best  interests  of
             the children as a primary consideration, and  set  against  it
             the economic well-being of the country.   As  Maurice  Kay  LJ
             pointed out in AE (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home
             Department [2014] EWCA Civ  653  at  [9]  in  conducting  that
             exercise it would have been appropriate to consider  the  cost
             to the public purse in providing education to these  children.
             In fact that was not  something  that  the  immigration  judge
             explicitly   considered.    If   anything,   therefore,    the
             immigration judge adopted an approach too  favourable  to  the
             appellant."

17. He contended  that  on  the  facts  of  this  appeal  it  was  entirely
    reasonable  for  the  third  appellant  to  accompany  her  family   to
    Bangladesh and, whilst there might be an initial period of  disruption,
    such interference is pursuant to the public interest and  proportionate
    in line with the legitimate aims pursued.

18. As to Article 8 he submitted that, for the reasons in relation  to  the
    third appellant argued earlier, it was reasonable for her  to  go  with
    her family and therefore the decision to allow the appeals on Article 8
    grounds in respect of the other family members fell away.  It was  open
    to all the appellants to maintain contact  with  their  UK  based  ties
    through modern communicational means and visits.  Article  8  does  not
    confer a choice of domicile and is not a general dispensing power.

19. Ms Akhter resisted all of  Mr  Bramble's  arguments.   She  focused  on
    whether the judge had erred in law and argued  that  she  had  not  and
    there was no material error within her decision.   She  maintains  that
    the respondent's position before me is no more than a disagreement with
    the findings of the judge who had properly assessed the totality of the
    evidence.  Further, the authorities of Zoumbas and EV (Philippines) did
    not assist the respondent.  In Zoumbas,  unlike  here,  the  appellants
    were in the United  Kingdom  illegally  and  in  EV  (Philippines)  the
    children  had  nowhere  near  the  seven  year  period  required  under
    paragraph 276ADE.

20. I have carefully considered the decision of the judge  along  with  the
    submissions of both  representatives  and  the  authorities  that  were
    handed to me.   In  particular,  I  note  that  Zoumbas  sets  out  the
    principles applicable where the best  interests  of  a  child  must  be
    assessed.  I recognise the Section 55 duty of the Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 to have regard to the need  to  safeguard  and
    promote the welfare of children in the United Kingdom.  Judges have  to
    make an assessment of a child's best interests as part of  the  overall
    assessment, be it under Article 8 or otherwise.  Those  best  interests
    are an integral part of the proportionality  assessment  and  the  best
    interests of a child are a primary consideration, but  not  necessarily
    the only one and they do not amount  in  themselves  to  the  paramount
    consideration.  The best interests of a  child  can  be  outweighed  by
    other factors.  On my reading of  the  judge's  decision  that  is  the
    approach she has adopted.  In so doing she  has  recognised  and  taken
    into  account  the  guidance  set  out  regarding  the  best   interest
    assessment in EV (Philippines).  To the extent that those two cases can
    be distinguished from that before me,  as  asserted  by  Ms  Akhter,  I
    accept that that is the position.  Nonetheless they are important cases
    which guide judges in these matters and which, without mentioning them,
    Judge Gibbs's decision does not veer from.

21. The judge has also taken  account  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  the  guidance
    therein.  In so doing she has recognised that the starting point is the
    best interests of the children to be with both their  parents  and  has
    considered in the round the stability  and  continuity  of  social  and
    educational provision so far as it  relates  to  the  third  appellant.
    There is no overemphasis in this.  It  was  an  integral  part  of  the
    evidence in relation to the third appellant and upon  which  the  judge
    was entitled to attach weight.

22. The judge has  rightly  given  consideration  to  the  time  the  third
    appellant has been in the United Kingdom.  It is  in  excess  of  seven
    years.  The judge rightly attaches weight to the fact that it runs from
    the third appellant being aged 4 years.

23. The judge was entitled to come to the decision that she did in relation
    to the third appellant meeting the Immigration Rules, just as  she  was
    entitled to find that as a consequence the  other  appellants'  appeals
    succeeded under Article 8.

24. Further, the judge has looked at all she was expected to, including the
    provisions of Section 117 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, and was entitled to come to the conclusions that she did,  in
    particular in relation to Section 117B(6).

25. On the totality of the evidence, and in the context of a well  reasoned
    decision, the judge was entitled to come to the  conclusions  that  she
    did and in so doing has not materially erred.

26. I find that the grounds  put  forward  by  the  respondent  essentially
    amount to an argument with findings and  reasoning  which  are  legally
    adequate and which take proper account of both law and evidence.

27. The conclusions of the judge were open to her to be  made  in  all  the
    circumstances.

Conclusion

The making of the previous decision involved the making of  no  error  on  a
point of law and I do not set aside the decision but  order  that  it  shall
stand.



Signed        Date 2 February 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
