
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/12606/2015
     IA/12616/2015
     IA/12621/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st June, 2017 and                         |                              |
|Sent to promulgation                          |                              |
|On 10th June 2017                             |On 10th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                  [Saira W]
                                  [Waqar A]
                                    [A A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Bellara of Counsel, instructed by Ilford Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The  three  appellants  are  citizens  of  Pakistan.   The  first-named
    appellant was born on [ ] 1984 and she first entered the United Kingdom
    on 10th October, 2012 with entry clearance granted as a Tier 4  Student
    valid for the period 26th September, 2011 until  21st  November,  2013.
    The second-named appellant was born on [ ]  1982  and  the  third-named
    appellant born on [ ] 2007 and they both entered the United Kingdom  on
    10th October, 2011 with entry  clearance  granted  as  Tier  4  Student
    dependants valid from 26th September, 2011 until 21st November, 2013.

2.   The first appellant applied for further leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4
    Student on 26th November, 2012 and this was granted  until  27th  July,
    2015.  The second and third appellants were granted leave in line  with
    the first appellant.

3.   On 3rd December, 2014 the first, second  and  third  appellants'  leave
    was curtailed to 6th February, 2015.

4.   On 5th February, 2015 the appellants applied for  leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom on the basis of their private lives  in  the  United
    Kingdom, claiming that to remove them  would  breach  their  Article  8
    rights.  That application was refused by the respondent on 16th  March,
    2015 and they appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  basis  that
    removal would breach their Article 8 rights.  A Notice  of  Appeal  was
    received by the Tribunal on 30th March, 2015 but unfortunately  no  fee
    was submitted.  The Tribunal notified the  appellants'  representatives
    on 13th April, 2015 and subsequently a fee was received.

5.   Notice of Hearing was sent to the appellants and their  representatives
    on 2nd June, 2015 advising them that  the  appeal  would  be  heard  at
    Nottingham Justice Centre on 25th November, 2015.  Those proceedings on
    25th November, 2015 were adjourned and on 7th December,  2015  a  fresh
    Notice of Hearing was sent to the parties advising them that the matter
    would be heard on Tuesday, 22nd March, 2016 at the  Nottingham  Justice
    Centre.

6.   On 11th February, 2016 the appellants'  representatives  wrote  to  the
    Tribunal  requesting  an  adjournment.   Imperium   Group   Immigration
    Specialists' explanation for the adjournment request was that they  had
    conduct of this matter and a separate case listed on the  same  day  at
    Richmond Magistrates' Court and the appellants had indicated that  they
    did not wish to change their  representative  or  instruct  alternative
    Counsel because of the cost of the matter.

7.   Not surprisingly, the Designated Judge who considered  the  application
    refused it on the basis that there was sufficient time  for  agents  or
    Counsel to be instructed to represent the appellants.

8.   At the hearing on 22nd March, 2016 the appellants were  represented  by
    Mr N Lawrence of Counsel.  There appears to have been problems with the
    Tribunal's bundles  of  documents.   There  was  also  a  note  to  the
    appellants' general medical practitioner, a Dr Ryan at Central Surgery,
    Oadby,  dated  22nd  March,  2016  from  the  Emergency  Department  of
    Leicester Royal Infirmary which included information  that  the  first-
    named appellant had attended the  Leicester  Royal  Infirmary  on  21st
    March presenting  with  "severe  abdo  pain".   There  was  a  list  of
    investigations being carried out and the  A&E  diagnosis  was  "gastro-
    intestinal - constipation".  The basis of the  application  to  adjourn
    was that the appellant was ill.

9.   Notice of adjourned Hearing was issued by the Tribunal on  15th  April,
    2016 advising the parties that the appeal  was  to  be  heard  on  20th
    October, 2016 at Nottingham Justice Centre.  On  30th  June,  2016  the
    Tribunal received notification from  Haque  &  Hausmann  Solicitors  of
    Whitechapel that they had recently been instructed by  the  first-named
    appellant in this matter.

10.  On 19th October, 2016 at 17.25 hours the appellants' solicitors,  Haque
    & Hausmann, wrote the following:


         "Please note that the lead appellant, Mrs Waqar, has been suffering
         from sciatica, a kind of severe pain around lower back and leg, for
         a number of years; however,  it  becomes  unbearable  during  every
         winter.


         Since last two  weeks,  as  the  cold  approached,  it  has  become
         unbearable for the appellant and has been on medication; please see
         the letter  from  GP  for  your  ease  of  reference.   Hence,  the
         appellant cannot attend the hearing due to her ill  health  as  she
         can hardly stand or stay sitting for more than few minutes.


         We have waited to see her conditions until this afternoon in  order
         to assess her suitability to attend the Tribunal  tomorrow  morning
         to give evidence and found to  have  been  not  favourable  as  her
         husband latterly confirmed.


         Please note that it's an appeal against refusal of a  human  rights
         application where evidence of two applicants  is  crucial  and  the
         learned judge cannot be assisted without their presence.


         In the light of the above, we shall respectfully  ask  the  learned
         Duty Immigration Judge to grant a short  adjournment  in  order  to
         accommodate the  evidence  of  the  appellants.   As  a  result  no
         representation would be made from this office tomorrow."


11.  The  judge  proceeded  to  hear  the  appeal  and  in  the  absence  of
    satisfactory evidence from the applicant and dismissed the appeal.

12.  Applications for permission to appeal were submitted on behalf  of  the
    applicants and on 23rd  March,  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  J
    Gillespie said this:

         "2.  The ground  of  appeal  advanced  is  procedural  irregularity
             causing unfairness to the applicants, in that  a  request  for
             adjournment  was  refused   without   good   reason   and   in
             circumstances where the matter could not safely be  determined
             in the absence of oral evidence.


         3.    The  dissatisfaction  of  the  judge   with   the   extremely
             presumptuous and manipulative proceedings by  the  appellants'
             solicitors was clear and well-founded.  Those solicitors, in a
             manner which I consider unprofessional, sent a belated written
             request for adjournment, the evening before  the  hearing,  in
             circumstances when there were no  witness  statements  by  the
             appellant  before  the   Tribunal.    They   were,   moreover,
             apparently advising the appellants not to attend the  hearing.
             They intimated in the written request that they too would  not
             attend.  I recognise this as a deplorable abuse of process and
             suggestive of a degree of contumely.


         4.   It is nevertheless the case, that in deciding not to be swayed
             by such irresponsible conduct,  the  learned  judge  committed
             himself to  making  a  decision  on  the  papers,  potentially
             without adequate  evidence  for  the  appellants,  written  or
             otherwise, and even without representation by the Home Office.
              It is arguable that to do so was  a  procedural  irregularity
             amounting  to  an  error  of  law  and  that   the   righteous
             dissatisfaction entertained towards the  solicitors  ought  to
             have been addressed in a manner other than proceeding with the
             appeal in the absence of the applicants."

13.  At the  hearing  before  me  the  appellants  were  represented  by  Mr
    Bellara.  I drew his attention to the letter of 19th October, 2016 from
    Messrs. Haque & Hausmann and to the letter which  accompanied  that  of
    19th October, 2016 signed by Dr L Ryan of Central Surgery, Oadby  which
    said:

         "I can confirm that this lady attended  the  surgery  on  17/10/16
         with symptoms of pain in the back and right leg.  We  are  treating
         her for sciatica with pain relief."

     I asked Counsel if he had evidence that, as at that  date,  the  first-
    named appellant was unable to travel and attend the hearing  date.   He
    told me that the appeal concerned complicated  issues,  but  the  judge
    effectively proceeded with a paper hearing unfairly.   He,  Mr  Bellara
    submitted, should not have done so.

14.  Counsel told me that there was no further medical evidence  to  satisfy
    the Upper Tribunal that, as at the  date  of  the  hearing  before  the
    judge, the appellant was unwell and not able to attend the hearing.   I
    pointed out to Mr  Bellara  that  there  were  in  fact  no  statements
    submitted on behalf of the appellant either.  There  were  none  before
    the First-tier Tribunal  and  there  are  none  now  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  As a result, Mr Bellara asked me whether I  would  agree  to
    the matter being adjourned today.  He indicated that were I  minded  to
    grant a brief adjournment it  should  be  possible  to  obtain  further
    evidence  from  the  appellants'  medical  practitioner  and  for   the
    appellants' solicitors to submit written statements.   He  pointed  out
    that the rights  of  the  child  need  to  be  considered  because  the
    appellant has a child.

15.  Mr Wilding opposed any adjournment.  He pointed out  that  the  grounds
    of appeal had been submitted by Ilford Law Chambers on  behalf  of  the
    appellant some seven months earlier, during which they  had  had  ample
    time to obtain evidence and submit witness statements, were they minded
    to do so.  I declined to grant an adjournment and  advised  Mr  Bellara
    that those instructing him  appeared  to  me  to  have  had  more  than
    adequate time in which to obtain medical evidence to show  that  as  at
    the date of the hearing before the judge the appellant  was  not  in  a
    position to attend the hearing, but had apparently  done  nothing.   Mr
    Bellara told me that in the circumstances one could not  criticise  the
    judge.  It would however, he suggested, be in the interests of  justice
    to grant the application in order that the appeal could be heard afresh
    and the appellant be given a further opportunity to adduce evidence  to
    a judge.  He accepted that the appellant had been very badly  let  down
    by her advisers.

16.  Mr Wilding told me he had nothing to say.

17.  I reserved my decision.

18.   Paragraph  28  of  the  Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 provides at paragraph 28:-

         "If a party fails to attend a hearing the Tribunal may proceed with
         the hearing if the Tribunal -


         (a)  is satisfied that the party has been notified of  the  hearing
             or that reasonable steps have been taken to notify  the  party
             of the hearing; and


         (b)  considers that it is in the interests of  justice  to  proceed
             with the hearing."

19.  For many years now the  Tribunal  and  its  predecessors  have  advised
    immigration practitioners that applications for adjournments on medical
    grounds should be accompanied by evidence  from  a  registered  medical
    practitioner indicating that an appellant is  not  fit  to  attend  the
    hearing and giving adequate reasons for reaching that conclusion.   The
    judge clearly considered the medical evidence which had been  submitted
    and at paragraph 25 of the determination was  not  satisfied  with  the
    explanation given for the appellant's absence.  There  was  no  medical
    evidence before the judge that the appellant was not  sufficiently  fit
    to attend the Tribunal hearing.  In the letter of 19th  October,  2016,
    Haque & Hausmann seek to give further evidence as  to  the  appellant's
    condition by suggesting that the appellant was suffering from

          "...a kind of severe pain around the lower back and  leg,  for  a
         number of  years;  however,  it  becomes  unbearable  during  every
         winter".

     That is not the medical evidence which was before the judge, which  was
    that the appellant presented with symptoms of  pain  in  the  back  and
    right leg and that she was being treated for sciatica with pain relief.
     There was nothing there to suggest that the appellant  was  unable  to
    travel to the hearing and give oral evidence.  The judge was  satisfied
    that the parties had been notified of the date, time  and  place  fixed
    for the hearing and considered that it was in the interests of  justice
    to proceed with the hearing.  The appeal hearing had been adjourned  on
    two earlier occasions.

20.  It is surprising that even today there is still no medical evidence  to
    suggest that on the date of the hearing  the  appellant  was  suffering
    with a medical condition which prevented her from attending the hearing
    to give oral evidence on her behalf and neither has  any  statement  of
    the appellant been submitted

21.  In all the circumstances I am satisfied that  the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Colyer did not involve the making of an error on  a
    point of law.  I uphold the judge's findings.

Notice of Decision

The appellants' appeals are dismissed.

There is no anonymity direction


Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal.




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award.


Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
