

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12496/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 23 January 2015                    |On 3 February 2015                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                                    N I A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M L Youssefzan of Counsel instructed by D J Webb
                    & Co, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria whose date of birth is 4
    December 1976. His appeal against the decision of the respondent
    refusing him further leave to remain on the basis of his relationship
    with a British citizen dependent child was heard by Judge Perry, a
    Judge of the First Tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross on 21 October 2014.
    The Judge dismissed the appeal for reasons set out in the determination
    promulgated on 5 November 2014. The appellant sought and was granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by Judge Robinson, a Judge
    of the First Tier Tribunal on 18 December 2014. The Judge was satisfied
    that the grounds of appeal submitted by the appellant raised arguable
    errors of law in the determination.

 2. In the grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal,
    the appellant had contended that the Judge had made material errors of
    law in that the Judge had attached weight to immaterial facts in
    finding that the appellant did not have sole responsibility for his 2
    year old British citizen daughter; that the Judge had made no findings
    on family life enjoyed by the appellant in the UK with his daughter and
    the assessment of best interests of the child was in error of law and
    furthermore in concluding that the principles set out in the case of
    Ruix- Zambrano did not apply in this case.

 3. At the hearing before me Counsel for the appellant amplified his
    written grounds of appeal most ably making appropriate references to
    the relevant parts of the determination as well as the case law. Mr
    Walker in his submission said that the determination of the First Tier
    Judge was "confusing" and that the Judge had indeed given weight to
    irrelevant matters in finding that the appellant was not solely
    responsible for the upbringing of his infant child. He drew attention
    to a letter in the bundle of documents from Evolution Health, which the
    First Tier Judge had failed to consider and which in his view was very
    favourable to the claim of the appellant that he was the sole carer of
    the child. He agreed with the submissions of Counsel that the
    principles of law established by case law namely ZH (Tanzania) [2011]
    UKSC, Sanade [2012] UKUT 00048(IAC), Moayed [2013] UKUT00197 (IAC) and
    Ruiz-Zambrano when properly applied to the facts of this case, made the
    decision of Judge Perry unsustainable. Mr Walker quite rightly conceded
    that the decision was in material error of law for the reasons
    identified in the appellant's grounds of appeal.  The parties asked
    that I remake the decision on the facts before me as neither party
    wanted to submit any fresh evidence. I remake the decision as follows:

 4. The appellant first entered the UK on 10 October 2009 as a Tier 4
    (General) Migrant with leave to remain valid until 12 December 2012. He
    joined the HM Armed Forces and took the oath of allegiance on 23
    February 2010. In September 2011 he volunteered for an operation in
    Afghanistan and on 23 September 2011 he was granted residence permit
    with exempt status. He narrowly missed the selection to be mobilised to
    Afghanistan but continued to serve in the HM Forces as a territorial
    soldier assisting with security operations during the 2012 Olympics and
    attending annual training exercise in Cyprus. It was in recognition of
    his service to the country that his daughter became a British citizen.

 5. I have read the witness statement of Mrs I E with care and I accept it
    to be a truthful account. She states that she came to the UK from
    Nigeria on 1 September 2007. She met her husband, W K, in 2008 and they
    were married on 28th of March 2009.  Mrs I E had an affair outside of
    marriage, which led to her unplanned pregnancy with the appellant who
    she met whilst working at the Drive Care Home. On 24th of October 2012
    S was born. Mrs E lived at home with her husband and S for a few months
    but her husband was very unhappy. Her husband insisted that, for their
    marriage to work, S had to live elsewhere. Mrs E informed the appellant
    of this and he was happy to have S to live with him.

 6. According to Mrs E, S loves her Dad, the appellant, and that she is
    "actually quite impressed by how good a father the appellant is. He is
    gentle with her. He is always thinking of ways to make her happy. He
    decided that the daughter should be in a playgroup so that she can make
    friends and interact with as many people as possible. She says in her
    statement that she visits the appellant's house from time to time,
    contributing in their life in her own way. She loves her daughter so
    much that she cannot live without or bear to see her live outside of
    the United Kingdom. She states that she is in a very difficult position
    and should she has to find a balance between being there for her
    daughter and being there for her husband. The current arrangement,
    according to her, is the best possible option. Her relationship with
    her daughter is loving and caring and she knows that if separated from
    her it would have a huge adverse impact upon S. I find the evidence of
    Mrs E wholly credible, as I do the evidence of Mr W K who, inter alia,
    says in his witness statement that he does not want to be responsible
    for another man's baby. He states that his wife can have contact with
    the baby so that the baby can grow with the love of the mother.

 7. On the evidence before me, I have no doubt that the appellant has the
    sole responsibility in the upbringing of his British citizen daughter.
    She lives with her father and he makes all the important decisions I
    her life. He has made adjustments to his own life to ensure that S gets
    the best possible care from him. I give due weight to the letter from
    Evolution Health dated 26 September 2014, confirming that the appellant
    is the main carer for the child: letters from doctors and from NHS
    addressed to the child residing with the appellant.

 8. Upon a proper application of principles set out in ZH and Zambrano, I
    find that the best interests of S lie with her continued stay in the
    United Kingdom with both her parents. It is completely unreasonable to
    expect a two-year-old child who is a British citizen to be removed from
    the United Kingdom to Nigeria, thus denying her access to her mother
    who will continue to live in the United Kingdom.

 9. I note that the appellant has never been a burden on the state and that
    he has no criminal record. He has sole responsibility for a British
    citizen infant. His record of service to the United Kingdom has been
    exemplary.

10. Taking all the facts together, I find that the appellant qualifies for
    leave under E-LTRPT 2.3 of Appendix FM.I also find that for the
    exceptional reasons set out hereinabove the appellant meets the
    Appendix FM. I agree with Judge Perry that the correct approach to
    applying Article 8 is the well-known 5-stage Razgar test. However
    unlike him, I find that whilst the interference with his rights under
    Article 8 may well be legitimate, it s surely not proportionate to
    remove the appellant and his infant child to the legitimate public end
    sought to be achieved.

11. I allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules as well as under Article
    8 of the ECHR.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
30 January 2015



DIRECTIONS REGARDING ANONYMITY:

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymously. No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of the family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  the
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

