
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12290/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke on Trent                         |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 October 2014                              |On 10 November 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                              Muneeb Ur Rehman
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Hussain, instructed by Trent Chambers
For the respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Muneeb Ur Rehman, date of birth 7.9.92, is a citizen  of
    Pakistan.

 2. This is his appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge North promulgated 22.7.14,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent, dated 12.7.13, to  refuse  his  application
    made on 27.6.12 for leave to remain in the UK and to removed him by way
    of  directions  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration   Asylum   and
    Nationality Act 2006. The Judge heard the appeal on 8.7.14.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott Baker granted permission to  appeal  on
    8.8.14.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 24.10.14 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the determination of Judge North should be set aside.

 6. The relevant background to the appeal  can  be  summarised  briefly  as
    follows. The appellant first entered the UK on 18.2.11 with leave as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student, expiring on 27.6.12. On that date he made  an
    application for leave to remain  under  the  same  category  under  the
    Points Based System (PBS). He submitted a  Confirmation  of  Acceptance
    for Studies (CAS) for an extended diploma in management at the Business
    and Computing College of West London. The licence of that establishment
    was revoked on 26.6.12, thus the submitted CAS was no longer valid.  On
    15.2.13,  before  making  a  final  decision  on  his  application  the
    respondent gave the appellant 60 days to make a fresh application  with
    a new CAS for a different college. No such new  application  was  made,
    and on 12.7.13 the application was refused because  the  submitted  CAS
    number was not valid. The appellant could not qualify for the necessary
    30 points under Appendix A.

 7. Concluding on the evidence that the appellant did not have a valid CAS,
    Judge North dismissed the appeal.  The  judge  took  into  account  the
    appellant's claim that he had not received notice that his  educational
    sponsor had been closed down by UKBA. He claimed that he became ill and
    was told that his application was still in progress. He was in hospital
    for several months from 16.8.13,  as  confirmed  by  medical  evidence.
    Although he had been discharged from hospital, the  appellant  did  not
    attend the appeal hearing. The application was made on 27.6.12, over  a
    year before he was admitted to hospital and thus Judge  North  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant's illness was associated with  any  reason
    as to why he could not produce a valid CAS.

 8. The grounds of application for permission to  appeal  assert  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge made material errors of law by  a  procedural
    unfairness in that the appellant had not been served with a copy of the
    respondent's bundle, that there had been a delay in  the  consideration
    of the application which was unfair,  and  that  the  appellant  had  a
    legitimate expectation that he would benefit from  any  policy  of  the
    respondent.

 9. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Scott Baker  noted  that,  "the
    issue in the appeal is narrow. The appellant had applied to extend  his
    leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student on 27.6.12 and had submitted a  CAS
    dated 26.6.12, with an expiry of 27.12.12. The refusal decision was not
    made until 12.7.13, by which time the CAS had not only expired but  the
    college's licence had been surrendered. A copy of the CAS  showing  all
    of this information was at Appendix C of the respondent's bundle  which
    the appellant asserts he had not seen. The determination is  silent  on
    that point.

10. "It is clear from the determination that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    had made an error of fact at [7] as the appellant held a valid  CAS  at
    the time of application. Further he had failed to consider any  of  the
    case law relating to procedural irregularities and the  policy  of  the
    respondent in cases where sponsor licences  are  revoked.  The  grounds
    disclose arguable error of law. Permission to appeal is granted."

11. The grant of permission to appeal is flawed. It is  beyond  doubt  that
    the appellant did not hold a valid CAS at the date of application.  The
    day before the application the college's licence was revoked  and  thus
    no CAS issued could be valid at the date of application. There  was  no
    error of fact in the determination.

12. Neither do I accept that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was in
    error by failing to take account of any procedural irregularity.  I  am
    satisfied on the evidence that the respondent sent the 60-day letter to
    the appellant on 15.2.13 at 117 Ilkeston Road, Nottingham. There was no
    requirement to send it by recorded delivery.

13. I gave leave to the appellant  to  given  evidence  under  Rule  15  in
    support of the error of law argument. I also allowed Mr Hussain to take
    further instructions outside of the courtroom on two separate occasions
    in relation to my queries as to the chronology.

14. The appellant claimed he had not received  the  60-day  letter.  Having
    heard the evidence, for the reasons set out below, I did not accept the
    appellant was truthful about that matter. His account makes no sense in
    relation to the chronology.

15. The appellant told me he lived at 117 Ilkston Road until December 2013,
    but said that he had only lived there some 4-5 months. That  cannot  be
    right, his application gave that address when made on 27.6.12. He  said
    that he first became ill in February 2013 and was admitted to  hospital
    on 16.8.13 and discharged on a date he could not identify  in  2014.  I
    note his appeal was not lodged until 10.3.14, giving his address as  in
    hospital. He told me he was still in  hospital  in  December  2013  and
    agreed that he could not have been living then at 117 Ilkston Road,  as
    he was in hospital. He told me that he received the refusal letter when
    he was in hospital, but  that  was  sent  on  12.7.13,  before  he  was
    admitted to hospital, to the Ilkston Road address. Even though he  knew
    of the refusal in 2013 he did not appeal until March 2014 and has never
    sought an alternative educational sponsor in all that time. Whenever it
    was that he  left  Ilkston  Road,  he  took  no  steps  to  notify  the
    respondent of any change of address, that he had stopped  studying,  or
    even that he was in hospital.

16. When I asked Mr Hussain  what  the  appellant  was  doing  between  his
    application in June 2012 and February 2013, when he first  became  ill,
    he went out to take some further  instructions  and  sought  to  adduce
    further oral evidence from the appellant.

17. In the further oral evidence the appellant claimed that his new  course
    for which he had obtained the CAS in June 2012 started on 2.7.12. Asked
    how long he studies on that course, he first said "a couple of  weeks."
    When questioned as to what date, he said 26.9.12.  Asked again, he said
    he did not know the exact date. When  I  asked  why  he  had  mentioned
    26.9.12, he said that was the date on  the  letter  from  the  college.
    Asked if he knew the college's licence had been suspended  or  revoked,
    he said he didn't. He insisted that he started the course and then said
    that he had studied 4-5 months. Asked then why  he  had  first  said  a
    couple of weeks, he could offer no credible  explanation  and  appeared
    either unwilling or unable to answer my question or offer  any  further
    explanation. Mr Hussain did not seek to clarify the evidence by further
    questions of the appellant.

18. In the circumstances, I found the appellant an entirely untruthful  and
    not credible witness in his own cause. His chronological account  makes
    no sense. He  was  neither  in  hospital  nor  ill  when  he  made  his
    application. His account to have studied either a couple of weeks or 4-
    5 months is not credible when the  college's  licence  was  revoked  on
    26.6.12. If he did not receive the refusal letter, which I find he did,
    sent to him at the address where he was living at the date of both  his
    application and the refusal letter, he has not  explained  how  he  was
    able to appeal the decision in March 2014, having been in the  hospital
    since August 2014 until at least the date of his  appeal.  His  illness
    has no real bearing on this appeal since the  application  and  refusal
    all took place before he went into hospital and left the  Ilkston  Road
    address in August 2013. I reject his grounds  of  appeal  account  that
    before going into hospital in August 2013 he contacted UKBA  about  his
    application and was told by UKBA that it was still  in  progress.  That
    cannot be true. It had been decided by refusal in July 2013. Whilst the
    appellant was in hospital at the date of appeal, he had  asked  for  an
    oral hearing but then said he  could  not  afford  to  attend  an  oral
    hearing. He was no longer in hospital at the date of the hearing before
    Judge North and thus there was no reason why he could not attend.

19. I find there  is  no  procedural  irregularity  or  unfairness  in  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal. I find that  the  appellant
    did not have a valid CAS and that he had been given an  opportunity  to
    find a new course but failed to do so. I further find  that  he  cannot
    have studied at the college as claimed, but  even  if  he  did  he  has
    offered no credible explanation as  to  why  he  ceased  studies  after
    either a couple of weeks or 4-5 months from July 2012,  all  before  he
    became unwell. Even on his own account he must have  known  before  the
    end of 2012 that the college no longer  had  a  licence  to  operation,
    perhaps explaining the college letter of  26.9.12  he  referred  to  in
    evidence. It is clear that the appellant must have known that  the  CAS
    was not valid before the end of 2012, but even if he did  not,  he  was
    notified by the respondent in February 2013, long  before  he  went  to
    hospital.

20. Neither the grounds of appeal nor  Mr  Hussain  raised  any  article  8
    private life issue and thus I do not address that in this decision.



Conclusions:

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.
Signed: [pic]     Date: 31 October 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed and thus there can be no fee award.

Signed: [pic]     Date: 31 October 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
