
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/12490/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29 October 2015                   |On 30 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                             Mr SIMRANJIT SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel (instructed by Louis Kennedy
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A FijiwalIa, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.     The Appellant appealed with permission granted by Upper Tribunal
         Judge McWilliam on 30 July 2015 against the determination of First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Lingam who had dismissed the Appellant's appeal
         against the Secretary of State's decision dated 28 February 2014 in
         a determination promulgated on 17 December 2014.  The Appellant  is
         a national of India, who had applied for further leave to remain as
         a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant,  which  was  refused  on  the
         grounds that (a) the Appellant  had  submitted  a  false  document,
         i.e., an official transcript from London Thames College and (b) the
         Appellant had not submitted a current IELTS certificate to B2 level
         from an approved provider. The certificate which the Appellant  had
         provided post dated the CAS and so could not have been  taken  into
         account when the CAS was issued. The  reasons  for  refusal  letter
         conveying the decision to refuse to vary the  Appellant's  existing
         leave incorporated a second decision to remove  the  Respondent  by
         way of directions under section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and
         Nationality Act 2006. The appeal had been determined by  the  judge
         on the papers as the Appellant had requested.

    2.     Judge McWilliam considered despite the grounds of  appeal  which
         were in parts incomprehensible that it was arguable that  the  test
         provider was City  and  Guilds  which  appeared  on  a  version  of
         Appendix O of the  Immigration  Rules,  if  this  was  the  correct
         version, and thus was duly authorised.

    3.     A rule 24 notice dated  21  August  2015  opposing  the  onwards
         appeal was filed on behalf of the Secretary of State.   Because  no
         English language certificate was submitted with the CAS the  appeal
         failed.  The Appellant had been  given  a  reconsideration  of  his
         original application made on 21 November 2012.  A CAS was  assigned
         to him on 28 December 2013 but the English language  test  was  not
         completed until 7 January 2014.  Thus it could not have  been  used
         to assess the Appellant's English. Judge Lingam's  finding  in  the
         Appellant's favour on the false document issue was  not  challenged
         by the Secretary of State.

    4.      Mr  Bellara  for  the  Appellant  candidly  accepted  that  the
         Appellant's decision to have his appeal determined  on  the  papers
         without representation had been unwise.  The facts  had  been  more
         than averagely complicated, as the judge had noted at [13]  of  her
         decision.  The Home Office decision had originally  been  taken  in
         2012 but was subject of a reconsideration on 28  February  2014.  A
         further difficulty was finding the correct version of Appendix O of
         the Immigration Rules.  Counsel had been unable to do more  in  the
         time available than to consult the City and Guilds  website,  which
         stated that the City and Guilds had ceased to be  a  test  provider
         from  6  April  2015  onwards.   That  implied  that  it  had  been
         registered at the material time.  His  instructing  solicitors  had
         provided a version of Appendix O  which  confirmed  that  City  and
         Guilds were duly authorised at the date the Appellant sat the test.

    5.     Counsel further submitted that  the  evidence  showed  that  the
         reason why the Appellant had submitted  a  test  certificate  which
         post dated his CAS was as he explained  in  his  witness  statement
         that he had mislaid the original.  It had  been  easier  simply  to
         obtain a replacement.  This was a situation where  there  had  been
         unfairness to the Appellant and the decision should be found to  be
         not in accordance with the law and sent to the Secretary  of  State
         to be remade.

    6.     Ms Fijiwala for the Appellant relied on the rule 24 notice which
         the Respondent had served indicating that the  onwards  appeal  was
         opposed.  Ms Fijiwala confirmed that she, too, had been  unable  to
         find an authoritative text of Appendix O as  at  the  date  of  the
         remade decision.

    7.     Mr Bellara reiterated by way of reply that the decision ought in
         all fairness to the Appellant to be remade.

    8.     At the conclusion of submissions, the tribunal indicated that it
         found that there  were  material  errors  of  law,  such  that  the
         original decision should be set aside and remade.  The judge cannot
         be blamed for those errors, as this was a case which was not  ideal
         for a determination on the papers.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  has
         power to require an oral hearing, but that  power  should  only  be
         exercised in exceptional cases, as it involves use of public funds.
          The present appeal could not be described as exceptional and so it
         was right that the judge did her best on what was before her.   The
         Appellant must accept some of the blame for what went wrong.

    9.     It was for the Appellant to provide the correct copy of Appendix
         O of the Immigration Rules.  He failed to do  so  until  the  Upper
         Tribunal  hearing,  and  even  then  there  was  doubt.   Even  the
         Secretary  of  State's  representative  admitted  that  there  were
         difficulties in finding the correct version.  The tribunal forbears
         from  further  comment  about  that.   The  tribunal  is,  however,
         satisfied  from  Mr  Bellara's  researches  that  City  and  Guilds
         remained  authorised  until  6  April  2015.   The  tribunal  takes
         judicial notice of the fact that City and  Guilds  are  a  City  of
         London institution of high standing.  The tribunal also infers that
         it is highly improbable that the Appellant who was seeking  to  put
         right a previous erroneous decision of the Secretary  of  State  in
         2012 would have gone to a test provider which was  not  authorised.
         He would not have wanted to have waste his time and money  in  that
         way.  The Appellant  was  familiar  with  the  procedures  and  had
         already sat  a  number  of  language  tests.   Unfortunately  these
         questions were  insufficiently  considered  by  the  judge,  mainly
         because they were not brought to her attention.

    10.    There was a further difficulty with  the  judge's  decision,  in
         that the judge was not satisfied  with  the  explanation  that  the
         Appellant had given for relying on a English language  test  result
         which post dated the CAS.  In the context  of  the  facts  of  this
         appeal, in the tribunal's judgment that explanation was relevant to
         the fairness of the Secretary of State's  decision-making  process.
         It did not automatically follow that  the  college  had  failed  to
         assess the Appellant's English language ability  when  issuing  the
         CAS.  On its face, that was a recipe for future problems  with  the
         Home Office and thus an unwise course.  The Appellant had  provided
         an explanation, which was plausible, namely that he had mislaid the
         original certificate.   The  Respondent  should  thus  have  sought
         further information from  him,  applying  paragraph  245AA  of  the
         Immigration Rules.

    11.    In  the  result,  the  tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the  judge
         inadvertently reached incorrect conclusions in what  was  a  papers
         only appeal.  Given the general confusion which  the  tribunal  has
         found, not least as to the status of City  and  Guilds  as  a  test
         provider so far as Home Office is concerned, the tribunal considers
         that the  right  outcome  is  that  the  2014  decision  should  be
         revisited by the Secretary of State, because it was not made fairly
         and thus was not in accordance with the law.    The  tribunal  adds
         that it may well be  that  any  further  leave  to  remain  to  the
         Appellant may be literally academic,  in  that  he  may  well  have
         finished the course in question and intend  to  depart  the  United
         Kingdom.  No doubt this can be established  when  the  decision  is
         remade.  The nature and type of any further leave granted will be a
         matter for the Secretary of State

    12.    The onwards appeal is  accordingly  allowed.   The  decision  is
         remade to the extent that the tribunal finds that the Secretary  of
         State's decision dated 28 February 2014 was not in accordance  with
         the  law  and  must  be  remade  following  the  guidance  in  this
         determination.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of  a  material
    error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside and  is  remade  as
    follows:

    The Secretary of State's decision dated 28 February  2014  was  not  in
    accordance with the law and must be remade following  the  guidance  in
    this determination.




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell






    TO THE RESPONDENT
    FEE AWARD

    Although the appeal has been allowed to limited extent, no fee award is
    appropriate




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


