
S-T
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/12270/2014
                                                               IA/12271/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 5 June 2015                       |On 11 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                           OMAR OLIVER ANDREWS (1)
                          AJANI DEMARIO ANDREWS (2)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Vatish, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellants are citizens of Jamaica born on 29 December  1979  and
       11 August 2011 respectively. They  are  father  and  son.  They  have
       appealed with the permission of the First-tier Tribunal  against  the
       decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  A  W  Khan  dismissing
       their appeals against decisions of the respondent to remove  them  to
       Jamaica, having refused their applications for  leave  to  remain  on
       human rights grounds.  The decisions were made on 20 February 2014.

    2. The first appellant claimed to have entered the UK on 16 October 2002
       as a visitor. He met his partner, Ms Shena Easton, in 2005  and  they
       have lived together since  2007.  On  12  September  2012  the  first
       appellant applied for leave to remain with the  second  appellant  as
       his dependant. The respondent decided the  first  appellant  did  not
       meet the requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of the rules
       and there were no compassionate circumstances demanding  a  grant  of
       leave outside the rules. Detailed reasons were provided in  a  letter
       dated 19 February 2014.

    3. At the beginning of the hearing  before  Judge  Khan  the  appellants
       sought an adjournment due to the fact a decision  was  awaited  on  a
       similar application which had been made by Ms Easton on 15  September
       2014.  The  judge  refused  the  application  because  there  was  no
       realistic timescale for when a decision would be made in her case.

    4. The judge heard oral evidence from the first appellant and Ms Easton.
       The first appellant said he had no  family  in  Jamaica  because  his
       brothers had migrated to the USA. He did not know where  his  parents
       were and he had no extended  family.  He  could  not  go  to  Jamaica
       because Ms Easton's children were born here and he would be unable to
       obtain work. In particular, Ms Easton's son, Tyrese, who was aged 12,
       would find it very difficult to adapt to life in Jamaica.  Ms  Easton
       said she came to the UK in 2000 with her grandmother  as  a  visitor.
       She was then 17 years of age. She fell pregnant  and  gave  birth  to
       Tyrese. She had had two children with the appellant.  All  her  three
       children were in the UK, having been born here. Her mother, brothers,
       aunts and uncles were in Jamaica. She had been in the UK 15 years and
       could not adapt to life in Jamaica. Tyrese had no  contact  with  his
       natural father. He was British.

    5. The judge found the first  appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
       partner route in Appendix FM because Ms Easton  was  neither  British
       nor settled in the UK. Nor could he succeed under  the  parent  route
       because, although Tyrese was British, the appellant did not have sole
       responsibility for him and Ms Easton was neither British nor settled.
       The second appellant could not succeed under the child route  because
       the first appellant had not succeeded.

    6. Turning  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  the  judge  found  the  first
       appellant had not shown he had no ties (including social, cultural or
       family) with  Jamaica.  He  did  not  accept  the  first  appellant's
       evidence that he had severed all ties with Jamaica,  even  though  he
       had lived in the  UK  since  2002.  He  found  the  real  reason  the
       appellant did not wish to return was that he  would  be  in  a  worse
       state  economically.  However,  he  had  skills   in   painting   and
       decorating,  computing  and  accounting  and   therefore   he   could
       reintegrate in Jamaica as far as his social and  cultural  life  were
       concerned even if he had no family there.

    7. On the question  of  whether  there  were  exceptional  circumstances
       existing outside the rules, the judge found there was no valid reason
       the first appellant could not resume his  life  in  Jamaica  and  the
       second appellant was still only 3 years of age.  Ms  Easton's  status
       was still undetermined and the children, being young, could enter the
       Jamaican educational system without much difficulty as Jamaica is  an
       English-speaking country.

    8. In assessing article 8, the judge referred to  the  difficulty  being
       Tyrese's situation. He is British and 12  years  of  age.  The  first
       appellant had undoubtedly taken on a parenting role with  respect  to
       him. In paragraph 30 the judge said he would have  no  difficulty  in
       finding the first appellant, the two younger children and  Ms  Easton
       could all resume life in Jamaica with Ms  Easton's  extended  family.
       With regard to Tyrese, his best interests  lay  in  his  joining  his
       parents and the other children in Jamaica. In paragraph 32 the  judge
       accepted there would be hardships in this but concluded it would  not
       be "unduly harsh". The  judge  applied  the  same  reasoning  to  his
       conclusion in paragraph 34 that  it  would  not  be  unreasonable  to
       expect Tyrese to leave the UK for purposes of section 117B(6) of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. He found  the  decision
       proportionate and dismissed the appeal on article 8 grounds.

    9. The  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  made  six  points  but
       permission to appeal was  refused  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Deans,
       sitting as a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, save on the point that
       the judge had arguably erred by applying a test of undue hardship  in
       paragraph 32, which was a higher test than reasonableness.

   10. On 10 December 2014,  five  days  after  Judge  Khan's  decision  was
       promulgated, the respondent granted Ms Easton and her child,  Kymani,
       born in 2009, discretionary leave to remain until 9 June 2017 due  to
       the exceptional circumstances in their case. The  reasons  appear  to
       have been the presence of Tyrese.

   11. The respondent also filed a rule 24  response  opposing  the  appeal.
       However, this  was  filed  without  having  had  sight  of  the  full
       decision.

   12. I heard submissions on the question of whether Judge  Khan  erred  in
       law.

   13. Ms Vatish essentially made two points. Firstly, she argued the  judge
       erred by applying too high a test in paragraph 32 and, secondly, that
       the judge failed to give any reason for his finding in paragraph  34.
       She pointed out that Ms Easton now has leave, although that  was  not
       the case when the judge made his decision.

   14. Ms Brocklesby-Weller argued that the decision as a whole  showed  the
       judge directed himself correctly.  She  suggested  the  reference  to
       "unduly harsh" in paragraph 32 was intended as "unjustifiably harsh",
       which was the test formulated in R (Nagre) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720
       (Admin). She argued that the judge's conclusion about the  impact  on
       Tyrese was one which it was open to him to  reach  because  having  a
       British child was not a 'trump card'.

   15.  Ms  Vatish  reminded  me  that  the  Supreme  Court  emphasized  the
       significance of the child's nationality in ZH (Tanzania) [2011]  UKSC
       4.

   16. Having heard submissions I reserved my decision on error of law.

   17. I start by noting  the  decision  is  thorough,  detailed  and  well-
       structured. Submissions were made to Judge Khan, which he recorded in
       paragraph 19, that Tyrese was  not  familiar  with  the  culture  and
       educational system in Jamaica and it would be exceptionally hard  for
       him to be "removed" (sic).  It would also be unjustifiably  harsh  to
       uproot the other two children. The judge gave reasons, which are  not
       the subject of challenge, why the first appellant could  not  succeed
       under Appendix FM either as a partner or a parent.  I pause to  note,
       although it is not strictly relevant, that  this  position  has  been
       unaltered by the grant  of  discretionary  leave  to  Ms  Easton  and
       Kymani.

   18. The judge begins  his  consideration  of  whether  the  circumstances
       warrant examination of article 8  principles  outside  the  rules  in
       paragraph 26. Although he does  not  say  so  expressly,  he  plainly
       considered the position of Tyrese warranted  such  consideration.  He
       highlights the salient facts concerning Tyrese in  paragraph  29.  In
       the following paragraphs he reminds himself that the  best  interests
       of a child are a primary consideration but not  a  'trump  card'.  In
       paragraph 31 he cites the  leading  authorities  on  this  area.  His
       conclusion, stated in paragraph 30, is that Tyrese's  best  interests
       lie with joining his parents and siblings in Jamaica. In paragraph 32
       he states that, taking into account all relevant  matters,  it  would
       not be against Tyrese's best interests to go to Jamaica  as  part  of
       the family unit. There would be no separation and, at the age  of  12
       and having Jamaican "heritage", it was reasonable to expect he  would
       be able to integrate into Jamaica in  the  foreseeable  future.   His
       education could continue in Jamaica. He then said:

           "I accept there would be a degree of hardship for a time  but  I
           do not find that this would constitute a  situation  whereby  it
           would be unduly harsh to expect Tyrese  to  be  able  to  go  to
           Jamaica with his family."

   19. As noted, it is the judge's use of the  words  "unduly  harsh"  which
       caused Upper Tribunal Judge Deans to grant permission to  appeal.  As
       Judge Deans explained, the correct test, as found in section 117B(6),
       is whether,

           "(b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom."

   20. It is clear that to apply a test of undue harshness in the context of
       section 117B(6)(b) would be a material misdirection because it  is  a
       more demanding test. However, in my judgment, reading the decision as
       a whole, Judge Khan was not applying too high a test.  I  reach  that
       conclusion because Judge Khan introduces paragraph 34 by referring to
       the section. After dealing with the earlier subsections, he states:

           "Tyrese is a qualifying child under section  117B(6)(a)  but  it
           would not be unreasonable to expect him to leave  the  UK  under
           section 117B(6)(b) for the reasons set out at paragraph 32."

   21. In the circumstances, it is sufficiently clear that the judge had the
       correct test in mind when conducting  the  proportionality  balancing
       exercise and the reference in paragraph 32 to "unduly harsh" was  not
       a material misdirection. I construe  the  reference  there  to  undue
       harshness as the judge acknowledging  the  hardship  which  would  be
       caused to Tyrese by expecting him to accompany his family to  Jamaica
       but also indicating that it did not tip the scales in favour  of  the
       appellants.

   22. The judge's decision is adequately reasoned and it was a decision  it
       was open to him to reach on the evidence. He dealt with the  evidence
       with care and was careful to treat the children's best interests as a
       primary consideration. I find there is no material error  of  law  in
       the decision.

NOTICE OF DECISION

  The First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of  law  and  its
  decision dismissing the appeals is confirmed.

  No anonymity direction made.






                               Signed        Date 8 June 2015


                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
