
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12372/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd October 2015                 |On 29th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HOLGATE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                            Mr Mohammad Jawad Zeb
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal (instructed by Britain Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant, a citizen  of
    Pakistan born on 30th March 1984.  He came to the UK in January 2007 as
    a student and was granted further leaves until January  2012.   He  was
    then granted leave as a post-study worker until 2014 when  he  made  an
    application as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur).  It was  the  refusal  of  that
    application on 25th February 2014 which has led to  this  appeal.   The
    application was refused by the Secretary of State on the basis that  he
    was not entitled to be awarded 75  points  required  under  Appendix  A
    because he was not working at an occupation skilled at level NQF  4  or
    above.

 2. He appealed  that  Decision  and  the  appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Eldridge sitting at Hatton Cross on 10th February  2015.
    In  a  Decision  promulgated  on  18th  February  2015  Judge  Eldridge
    dismissed the appeal.  He found the Decision to be in  accordance  with
    the Immigration Rules.  The separate Decision to remove  the  Appellant
    was not in breach of any duty owed and the entire appeal was dismissed.

 3. Permission  to  appeal  was  sought  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    initially refused but granted on a further application  direct  to  the
    Upper Tribunal by a Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  on  22nd  July  2015.
    Thus it comes before us today.

 4. The grounds upon which permission to appeal  was  granted  are  two  in
    number.  The grounds are not terribly clear. However, the first  ground
    seems to suggest that the judge was wrong to consider the circumstances
    at the date of the Decision because Section  85A  applied  which  meant
    that only evidence  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  with  the
    application could be considered.  That is a rather odd submission as it
    complains about an error which assisted the Appellant. The  judge  took
    into account oral evidence by the Appellant  which  was  clearly  post-
    decision evidence.  We would clarify  at  this  point  that  there  are
    errors in both the First-tier Tribunal's Decision and in the  grant  of
    permission.

 5. At paragraph 12 of the First-tier Decision the judge says:

         "Because  of  the  nature  of  the  application,  being   for   the
         acquisition of points under  a  points-based  system,  I  may  only
         consider evidence relevant to the circumstances appertaining at the
         date of the Decision to refuse the original application."

    The relevant date the judge says is the date of the Decision.  That  is
    wrong because being a points-based application Section 85A of the  2002
    Act applied and that specified that only evidence that was in front  of
    the Secretary of State at the time of the application could  be  relied
    upon by the Appellant.

 6. The Upper Tribunal Judge who granted permission himself fell into error
    by suggesting that in relation to  applications  by  Tier  1  migrants,
    s.85A  was  repealed  on  20th  October  2014  and  not  saved  by  the
    transitional provisions.  It was indeed repealed on 20th  October  2014
    by  the  Immigration  Act  2014.    On  that  date  article  2  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014  (Commencement  No.  3,  Transitional  and  Saving
    Provisions) Order 2014 brought into force Part 4 of Schedule 9, subject
    to the saving provisions in articles 9, 10 and 11.  Part 4  relates  to
    all points-based  applications.  Repealing  s.85A  was  made  necessary
    because for Points Based System  applicants  after  20th  October  2014
    there is no right of appeal and thus s.85A is redundant.  However,  the
    effect of article 9 read together with article 1(2)(d) and (e) is  that
    for persons other than those referred to in articles 10 and 11, neither
    of which apply here,  s.  85A  is  saved,  which  means  that  for  all
    outstanding points-based appeals s. 85A continues to bite.  It is clear
    that s. 85A did apply in this case.

 7. We heard a submission in support of Ground 1 that the judge should have
    considered the documentary evidence identified in paragraph 20  of  the
    determination because it did not refer  to  the  documents  but  rather
    referred to the nature of the business.  However, that point  has  been
    previously litigated and ruled upon by the Vice President of the  Upper
    Tribunal sitting with a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge in the Decision  of
    Ahmed and Another (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT  00365  (IAC).
    That was a Decision promulgated on 21st July 2014 and decided:-

 1) Where a provision of the Rules (such as that in para 245DD(k)) provides
    that points will not be awarded if the decision-maker is not  satisfied
    as to another (non-points-scoring) aspect of the Rule, the  non-points-
    scoring aspect and the requirement for points are inextricably linked.

 2) As a result, the prohibition  on  new  evidence  in  s  85A(4)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies to the non-points-
    scoring aspect of the rule: the  prohibition  is  in  relation  to  new
    evidence that goes to the scoring of points.

 8. That then disposes of Ground 1 as being without merit.

 9. Ground 2 argues that the judge was wrong to interpret  the  Immigration
    Rules as he did.  The application was  made  under  Rule  245D  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  which  is  the  Rule  in   relation   to   Tier   1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrants. The provisions about leave to remain  on  that
    basis are contained  in  paragraph  245DD  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    245DD(b) requires 75 points under paragraphs 35 to 53 of Appendix A  to
    the Immigration Rules.  Under  the  heading;  "Attributes  for  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur), paragraph 35 of Appendix A  states  that  an  applicant
    must score 75 points  for  attributes  and  paragraph  36  states  that
    available points for leave to remain are shown in Table  4.   Paragraph
    (d) of Table 4, relied on by this Appellant, awards 25 points  provided
    that the applicant:-

         "(i) is applying for leave to remain;

         (ii) has or was last granted leave as a Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
             Migrant;

         (iii)    was on a date falling within the three months  immediately
             prior to the date of application

             (1)  registered with HM Revenue & Customs as self-employed or

             (2)  registered as a new business in which he is a director or

             (3)  registered as a director of an existing business;

         (iv) is engaged in business activity other than the work  necessary
             to administer his business in an occupation which  appears  on
             the list of occupations  skilled  to  National  Qualifications
             Framework level 4 or above, as stated in the Codes of Practice
             in  Appendix  J,  and  provides  the  specified  evidence   in
             paragraph 41-SD.   'Working' in this context  means  that  the
             core service his business provides to its customers or clients
             involves the business delivering a service in an occupation at
             this level.  It excludes any work involved in  administration,
             marketing or website functions for the business."

10. It is sub-paragraph (d)(iv) that is relevant to the submission made  to
    us.

11. It was argued  that the requirement in (d)(iv), interpreted  literally,
    would lead to absurd results and the grounds give examples at paragraph
    12 of where in the author's view the results would be absurd :-

         "How about a chartered accountant who sets up a cash and carry shop
         and reserves accountancy work to himself and delegates other chores
         to his staff?  How about a  solicitor  who  takes  a  franchise  of
         Domino's Pizza and  reserves  all  legal  matters  to  himself  and
         employs staff for other chores?   An  HR  manager  for  DFS  sofas?
         Marketing manager for a carwash?  These businesses do  not  provide
         services at NQF level 4  but  the  services  that  these  personnel
         provide are certainly above NQF level  4.   Therefore  the  learned
         judge is wrong in his construction of the Rule because it  produces
         absurd results."

12. With the greatest of respect,  we  disagree.   This  is  not  a  person
    seeking leave to remain in the UK for the purposes of a  specific  type
    of occupation but it is someone seeking  permission  to  remain  as  an
    entrepreneur.  That is what the Rule is about  and  that  is  why,  one
    assumes, the Secretary of State saw fit to specify  that  the  business
    itself must be above a certain level.  Whilst of course it is true that
    a chartered accountant can set up a cash and carry shop if he wishes he
    would not be entitled to leave as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  on  that
    basis.  A solicitor taking on a franchise of Domino's Pizza can  do  so
    if he wishes but he  will  not  be  entitled  to  leave  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) on that basis.  To qualify as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant he would have to set up a legal  practice.  The  definition  of
    "working" in paragraph d(iv) is perfectly  clear  on  this  point.  The
    Appellant's argument disregards that definition.

13. There was no Article 8 challenge to the determination  before  us  this
    afternoon.

14. For the reasons we have indicated we do not find merit in either ground
    and the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 28th October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 28th October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

