
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12002/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 March 2016                          |On 6 April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between


                              echezona alasoro
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Ume-Ezeoke, instructed by Apex Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Bell,  promulgated  on  31  July  2015,  in  which  she
    dismissed his appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to
    issue a permanent residence  card  as  confirmation  of  his  right  to
    reside.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "It is arguable as asserted the FtTJ erred in reaching  conclusions  on
    the rights of the appellant to the issue of a residence card.  The FtTJ
    may have erred in dismissing the appeal rather than in concluding  that
    the  application  awaited  a  lawful  decision  having  found  in   the
    appellant's favour on the marriage of convenience allegation."


 3. At the hearing Mr. Jarvis accepted that there had been a material error
    made in paragraph [38] onwards relating to  the  five  year  period  of
    cohabitation.  He said that he would have indicated this prior  to  the
    hearing date, but he had needed to speak to the Presenting Officer  who
    appeared at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.   The  Presenting  Officer
    had confirmed that the question of five years' residence had  not  been
    in play at the hearing.  Mr. Jarvis accepted that the judge  had  acted
    in a way which was procedurally irregular,  thus  making  the  decision
    unfair at common law.


 4. He accepted the finding at paragraphs [32] to [35] that the Appellant's
    marriage was not a marriage of  convenience.   He  submitted  that  the
    application should now be remitted to the Respondent  to  consider  the
    issue of five years' residence.   He  accepted  that  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter had not dealt with the issue of the five year period  of
    residence.


 5. Having heard this concession on behalf of the  Respondent,  and  having
    heard brief submissions from Mr. Ume-Ezeoke, I found that the  decision
    contained an error of law.  I remade the decision, allowing the  appeal
    it  to  the  extent  that  it  be  remitted  to  the   Respondent   for
    consideration of whether or not to grant a residence card.  I  set  out
    my reasons in full below.


Error of law


 6. In paragraph [32] the judge states:


    "Taking all this into account I am not satisfied that what emerged from
    the interviews was sufficient evidence to show that there were  factors
    which support the suspicions for  believing  the  marriage  is  one  of
    convenience or that there were reasonable grounds for  suspecting  that
    this was the case."


 7. In paragraph [33] she states that, as the initial burden of  proof  was
    on the Respondent, she  was  not  satisfied  that  the  Respondent  had
    discharged this burden.  In paragraph [34] she found  that  the  burden
    therefore did not  shift  to  the  Appellant,  and  in  paragraph  [35]
    concluded that it had not been demonstrated that  the  marriage  was  a
    marriage of convenience.




 8. The reasons for refusal letter considered the marriage to be a marriage
    of convenience, but did not go on to consider the issue of five  years'
    residence.  However, in paragraph [36] the judge went  on  to  consider
    whether or not the Appellant had demonstrated that he  had  resided  in
    accordance with the  Regulations  for  a  period  of  five  years.   In
    paragraph [38] she found that there were some significant doubts as  to
    whether they had been living together continuously for  the  last  five
    years.


 9. I find that, given that the Respondent had not considered  this  issue,
    and given that it was not raised at the hearing, the appropriate course
    of action was to find that the marriage was not one of convenience, and
    to allow the appeal to that extent, remitting it to the Respondent  for
    consideration of the application for a residence card on the  basis  of
    five years residence.  The judge should not have gone on  to  make  the
    findings in paragraphs [38] and [39], given that this was not an  issue
    which was before her.


10. Further evidence was provided to this Tribunal on 21 December 2015.  As
    stated by Mr. Jarvis,  this  further  evidence  should  be  taken  into
    account by the Respondent when considering whether or not  to  grant  a
    permanent residence card on the basis of five years' residence.



Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.


12. The finding  that  the  Appellant's  marriage  is  not  a  marriage  of
    convenience is preserved (paragraphs 1 to 35).  The  remainder  of  the
    decision is set aside.


13. I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's  appeal  to  the  extent
    that the application be remitted to the Respondent for consideration of
    whether or not the Appellant is entitled to a permanent residence card,
    given the finding that the Appellant is married to the Sponsor.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 29 March 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

