
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12510/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th August 2015                  |On 16th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     D B
                           (ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Miss A Bhachu instructed by Messrs J M Wilson


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. D B is a citizen of Jamaica born on 12th March 1974.  He  has  been  in
    this  country  since  the  year  2000,  initially  as  a  visitor   but
    subsequently as an overstayer, apart from a  period  between  2006  and
    2007 when he had leave  to  remain.   I  will  refer  to  him  as  "the
    Claimant".  In 2011 he made a further application for leave  to  remain
    on  the  basis  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention  in  the  light   of
    relationships in this country.  That application was  refused  on  21st
    February 2014 and a decision taken to remove him to Jamaica.

 2. The Claimant's appeal against that decision was heard before  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Freer, who in a decision  promulgated  on  16th
    September 2014 dismissed the appeal  with  regard  to  the  Immigration
    Rules but allowed it under Article 8 ECHR.  Although the judge  clearly
    had reservations about elements of the evidence he heard he  found  (at
    paragraph 83 of his decision) that

         "Taking  all  the  material  before  me  in  the  round  with   the
         reservations I have expressed I find that DB has a genuine parental
         relationship with two children of the household and  a  step-parent
         relationship with two other children of the household.  Although he
         has on the record had trouble involving other children there is  no
         indication disclosed to me that the police or  social  workers  are
         concerned about his relations with the four children in his present
         household."

    The judge found in the following paragraph that two young children born
    to the Claimant and  his  current  partner  were  entitled  to  British
    citizenship, being born to a British mother, who themselves  had  human
    rights.  He also found that would not be reasonable  for  the  children
    with whom the Claimant lived to have to go to Jamaica.

 3. The judge had already found (at paragraph 80) that

         "There is so much disruption envisaged in so many people's lives by
         removal  of  this  Appellant  that  I  find  there  are  cogent  or
         compelling exceptional reasons to consider this outside the code of
         the Immigration Rules.   There  are  step-children  who  cannot  be
         expected to migrate or lose their mother, for example."

 4. He then went on to set out Sections 117B and 117D of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  At paragraphs 85 and 86 he found that
    in the  light  of  subsection  117B(6),  which  he  described  as  "the
    statutory direction", notwithstanding his previous negative findings he
    allowed the appeal.  He went on in subsequent paragraphs to  note  that
    the Claimant did have some criminal background but he did  not  qualify
    as a "foreign criminal" or a  person  shown  to  have  caused  "serious
    harm".  He found that little weight was required to  be  given  to  the
    Claimant's relationship with his partner VJ in the light of  subsection
    117B(4)(b) and  that  in  the  light  of  117B(4)(a)  and  117B(5)  the
    Claimant's private life provided a much weaker argument than his family
    life.  He allowed the appeal in respect of family life only.

 5. The Secretary of State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   In  the
    grounds of application, which now stand as the Grounds  of  Appeal,  it
    was submitted that the judge had misidentified the relevant  test.   It
    was said that Section 117B(6) did not say that the public  interest  in
    removal was defeated but only that  public  interest  did  not  require
    removal where the party involved had a genuine and subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.  It was argued  that  the
    relevant provisions of the amended Immigration Rules set  out  how  the
    different factors in Section 117B were to be balanced in  a  particular
    case to determine whether removal was justified.  For example where the
    maintenance of immigration control was in the public interest  but  the
    factors in 117B(6) applied the Rules set out the circumstances when the
    former outweighed the latter.  It was therefore necessary  to  continue
    to look to the Rules to see  how  those  competing  factors  should  be
    balanced.  Where the applicant failed to meet the requirements  of  the
    Rules, as was the case with  the  current  appeal,  unless  there  were
    exceptional circumstances the public interest factors in  Section  117B
    would cumulatively justify removal.  The findings  made  by  the  judge
    clearly pointed to the correct outcome  being  the  dismissing  of  the
    appeal.

 6. In granting permission Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    McClure noted that whilst there was some difficulty in going behind the
    plain wording of the statute given the issues raised  it  was  arguable
    the judge had misdirected himself as to the meaning and effect  of  the
    provision.  In response to  the  grant  the  Claimant's  representative
    submitted a response under Upper Tribunal  Procedure  Rule  24  arguing
    that the grounds related to a disagreement with the findings, the judge
    had properly directed himself and had considered all relevant  factors.
    The  judge,  it  was  said,  had  found  there  were   compelling   and
    compassionate circumstances and  it  was  open  to  him  to  reach  the
    conclusion he did.  On this basis the appeal came before me.

 7. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Richards  for  the  Secretary  of
    State said that it was a fine and nice point as to  the  interpretation
    of Section 117B(6).  He perceived that the judge had allowed the appeal
    with reluctance.  The Applicant had not impressed the judge but he felt
    hamstrung by the wording of Section  117B(6).   Mr  Richards  confirmed
    that the Claimant's  relationship  with  qualifying  children  was  not
    challenged but said that the judge had considered that Section  117B(6)
    had put an end to the public interest issue.   He  submitted  that  the
    words "does  not  require"  did  not  put  an  end  to  the  matter  of
    proportionality.  There was still room for a balancing exercise.

 8. In response Miss Bhachu for the Claimant said that the judge had  found
    that there were cogent or compelling exceptional  reasons  to  consider
    the appeal outside the code of the Immigration Rules in  the  light  of
    the interests of the children.  Their interests were not covered by the
    Rules.  She submitted that when the judge was considering whether there
    were such compelling exceptional reasons he was  already  conducting  a
    balancing exercise.  She submitted that  in  any  event  there  was  no
    material error as the judge had taken all  factors  into  account.   He
    expressly stated  that  he  placed  little  weight  on  the  Claimant's
    relationship with  his  partner.   The  Claimant  was  not  subject  to
    deportation and did not come within Section 117C. She described Section
    117 as like a jigsaw puzzle in which all the elements fitted  together.
    This was a family splitting case.  The  judge  took  all  factors  into
    account and she submitted no other conclusion was  reasonably  open  to
    him in the absence of a deportation order.  It was open to the judge to
    decide what weight to attach  to  the  phrase  "does  not  require"  in
    Section 117B(6).  Taking account of the interests of  the  children  if
    there were any error it would not be material.  Mr Richards had nothing
    further to add on behalf of the Secretary of State.

 9. Having heard those submissions I reserved my decision which I now give.
     The decision and reasons of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is a careful
    and thoughtful document.  The judge considered whether all  issues  had
    been covered under the Rules or whether it was necessary to  go  on  to
    consider matters under Article  8  outwith  the  Rules.   He  gave  his
    reasoning at paragraph 80, which I have referred  to  above.   He  then
    went on, at paragraph 81, to set out in full Sections 117B and 117D  of
    the 2002 Act.  He was clearly aware of those provisions.   His  finding
    that the Claimant had a continuing genuine parental  relationship  with
    the children involved, which undoubtedly equates to  family  life,  was
    not challenged.  Although the judge did not formally refer to Razgar it
    is implicit that he found the first four of  Lord  Bingham's  questions
    set out at paragraph 17 of that  judgment  as  being  met.   The  issue
    therefore rested on proportionality.

10. The judge clearly gave great weight to subsection 117B(6), which he had
    earlier recited in the context of the  whole  of  the  subsection.  The
    thrust of the appeal on behalf of the Secretary of State  is  that  the
    judge  should  have  viewed  the  Section  through  the  prism  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Claimant had already failed to  establish  that
    he met the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  the  judge  had
    found that there were compelling circumstances requiring  consideration
    under Article 8 proper.  The reason for that was the  circumstances  of
    the children which implicitly  the  judge  found  were  not  adequately
    covered by the Rules in the particular circumstances of this case.   It
    would  have  been  otiose  for  the  judge   then   to   have   decided
    proportionality according to the Rules.   Had  the  Claimant  succeeded
    under the Rules there would clearly have been no cause to have gone  on
    to consider Article 8 beyond the Rules.  Although Section  117  of  the
    2002 Act certainly does mandate the approach to  proportionality  under
    Article 8 the Rules themselves do not do so.  In  Forman  (SS117A  -  C
    considerations) [2015] UKUT  00412  (IAC)  the  panel  chaired  by  the
    President stated (at paragraph 12)

         "... however in cases such as the present where the starting  point
         is that the Claimant does  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
         Rules, with the result  that  the  sole  question  is  whether  his
         Article  8  claim  can  be  successfully  established  outwith  the
         framework of the Rules, we consider that the latter form a backdrop
         but little more in the context of an exercise which differs sharply
         from that just mentioned ...".

    That does  not  indicate  a  significant  influence  by  the  Rules  in
    interpreting Section 117.

11. Subsection 117B(6) reads

         "In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

    The subsection refers to the public interest.  In subsection 117A(2) it
    is stated that in considering the public interest the court or Tribunal
    must in particular have regard to the considerations  in  Section  117B
    (we are not here concerned with a deportation case).  In  subsection  3
    it is stated "The 'public interest  question'  means  the  question  of
    whether an interference with a person's right to respect for private or
    family life is justified under Article 8(2)."

12. That is the very issue of proportionality  that  falls  to  be  decided
    under the fifth of Lord Bingham's questions.  Subsection 117B(6) is  in
    express terms and clearly weighed heavily with the judge.   I  was  not
    referred to and am not aware of any decision of the Upper  Tribunal  or
    of the Court  of  Appeal  addressing  in  clear  terms  the  effect  of
    subsection 117B(6).  It was stated by the Tribunal in Bossade (SS117A -
    D - interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC) at paragraph 39



         "We have noted  above  that  certain  provisions  of  part  5A,  in
         particular Section 117B(6) and Section 117C(4)-(6) might be  argued
         to operate as a self-contained set of legal requirements  providing
         a complete answer to the 'public interest  question'  and  we  have
         noted that decision on such issues is best left to future  case  or
         cases.  All that we would observe here is that even if one or  both
         sets of provisions were found to be determinative  of  the  'public
         interest question' in a particular case, it remains that part 5A is
         silent about what this means for  the  success  or  failure  of  an
         Article 8 claim  or  about  a  person's  consequential  immigration
         status."

13. In Forman it was stated (at paragraph 17)

         "... we are not required to decide  in  the  present  case  whether
         there is any tension between  Section  117A(2)  which  obliges  the
         court  or  Tribunal  concerned  to  have  regard  to  the  list  of
         considerations listed  in  Section  117B  and,  where  appropriate,
         Section 117C and the contrasting terms of Section 117B(5)  and  (6)
         which are framed as an instruction to  the  court  or  Tribunal  to
         attribute little weight to the two considerations specified ..."

14. The judge clearly gave considerable weight to 117B(6) and that  is  not
    surprising in the light of its express terms.  That he did  not  regard
    it as the sole element to be considered is indicated by the  fact  that
    he also referred to other elements of Section 117.  He was  aware  that
    the Claimant had a conviction and caution  but  he  did  not  meet  the
    threshold of "foreign criminal" in the statutory provisions.  Indeed  I
    note that in the refusal letter (paragraph 60) it was accepted that the
    Claimant's application did not  fall  for  refusal  under  any  of  the
    suitability grounds at Sections S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3 and S-LTR 3.1 in
    Appendix FM.  The Secretary of State had not refused the application on
    that basis.

15. Reading the decision as a whole the judge was clearly  aware  and  took
    account of Section 117 of the 2002 Act, he had already found that there
    were compelling circumstances with regard to the  children,  warranting
    going beyond the Rules themselves, he referred to  aspects  of  Section
    117B other  than  subsection  (6).  The  weight  to  be  attributed  to
    subparagraph (6) was, in the absence of perversity or irrationality,  a
    matter for him.  Whilst he might  have  expressed  the  proportionality
    assessment in a different and fuller way, having regard to all  of  his
    findings I do not find that he erred materially in his approach.

Notice of Decision

There was no material error of law in the making  of  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal and the  decision  that  the  appeal  be  allowed  under
Article 8 ECHR therefore stands.

As the interests of the children are involved I  make  the  anonymity  order
below.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

I order that the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely  to  lead
members of the public to identify the Claimant or members of his  family  is
prohibited.  Any breach of this order may lead to proceedings  for  contempt
of court.


Signed   Date 04 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

