
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12549/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th January 2015                          |On 16th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                EHTSHAMUL HAQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIon not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss B Poynor, Counsel, instructed by Windfall
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State from the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Chamberlain  to  allow  the  Respondent's  appeal
    against the refusal of his application for leave to remain on the basis
    of his relationship with a female in the UK and upon family and private
    life grounds.

 2. For reasons of exposition and clarity I propose hereafter to  refer  to
    the parties according to their status in the First-tier Tribunal;  that
    is to say, I shall refer to the Secretary of State  as  the  Respondent
    and Mr S Ehtshamul Haq as the Appellant.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was  born  on  5th  February
    1977.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the
    Respondent which was made on 21st  February  2014.   The  Secretary  of
    Stats refused his application for leave to remain on  various  grounds.
    However, only one of these is  relevant  for  present  purposes.   That
    reason can be found in paragraphs 10 and 11 of the Reasons for  Refusal
    Letter, which is also dated  21st  February  2014.    In  view  of  its
    centrality to the Respondent's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  I  will
    quote those paragraphs in full:

         10.  In your client's representations, he [the Appellant] maintains
             that a fax from the Home Office dated 7  April  2011  confirms
             that the Home Office confirms his grant of indefinite leave to
             remain in the United Kingdom.  The fax was sent in response to
             a telephone conversation, it is a general  response  based  on
             the  assumption  that   client   holds   valid   documentation
             regularising his  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  person
             responding refers to 'our caseworkers' so the response is  not
             from a caseworker who has consulted the applicant's file  held
             by the Home Office. The fax  refers  to  the  high  volume  of
             applications  being  dealt  with   by   caseworkers   and   is
             highlighting possible delay. It is clear from other  responses
             from the Home Office dated  6  September  2010,  17  September
             2010, 8 December 2011, 23 March 2012  and  17  September  2012
             plus the fact that your client's passport had been returned to
             the Pakistani Embassy as notified in the  Home  Office  letter
             dated 6 September 2010, that the Home Office  did  not  accept
             that your client was eligible for ILR.  Furthermore  to  quote
             from the Home Office letter dated 17 September  2012,  'On  10
             June 2012 your client made an application for  No  Time  Limit
             stamp to be placed in their current  Pakistani  passport.   As
             evidence to support the application your client provided their
             previous Pakistani passport number KB833066 with  a  stamp  on
             page 8 of that passport purporting to give your client No Time
             Limit in the UK. That stamp was  found  to  be  a  counterfeit
             stamp by the  National  Forgery  Unit  and  the  passport  was
             therefore returned to  the  Pakistan  Embassy.  Your  client's
             application was refused on 6 September 2010.  In  addition  it
             should be noted that your client's Home Office  file,  a  file
             that was only created in 2010 in  response  to  your  client's
             initial NTL application and on our electronic  records,  there
             is no evidence that your client has ever been granted  ILR  in
             the UK at  any  time.   Hence  the  further  refusal  of  your
             client's second  NTL  application  on  6  October  2011  on  8
             December 2011 on the basis of the counterfeit stamps and there
             being no evidence on file or  electronically  of  your  client
             having ILR in the UK.

        11.  Your  client  has  therefore  provided  false  information  in
             support of his claim to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.  Your
             client fails to satisfy the  suitability  requirements  at  S-
             LTR.2.2 and consequently fails  to  qualify  for  leave  under
             Article 8 family and private life of the Immigration Rules.

 4.  At  the  outset  of  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    Respondent's Presenting Officer made application  for  an  adjournment.
    She submitted that the Appellant's bundle had  been  received  on  22nd
    April 2014 and that there  were  serious  counter  allegations  in  the
    Appellant's bundle regarding the position of the passport stamp and  in
    a letter from the Respondent.  The Presenting Officer accepted that the
    Respondent had not produced a document verification report and, because
    she relied on the fact that the passport stamp and letter  were  false,
    fairness required an adjournment in order  that  the  Respondent  might
    obtain a document verification report and a section  9  statement  from
    the author of such a report.   That  application  was  opposed  by  the
    Appellant's representative and was refused  by  the  judge.  The  judge
    concluded that, having regard to the history of  the  proceedings,  the
    Respondent had had ample time to provide evidence to  substantiate  her
    claim and that it was far too  late  to  seek  an  adjournment  on  the
    morning of the hearing. The judge also found that  the  health  of  the
    Appellant was relevant because he is said to suffer from  memory  loss.
    Finally he bore in mind that some three witnesses had taken the trouble
    to attend the  hearing  and  that  it  would  cause  them  considerable
    inconvenience if they were required to attend on another  day.   Having
    had regard to the overriding objective, he decided that  the  fair  and
    just way was to proceed with the appeal.

 5. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal dealt with the issue of the  false
    documents allegation  at paragraphs 16 to 18:

          "16.    It is not in dispute that the Respondent had not  provided
             any DVR or other evidence in support or  allegation  that  the
             passport stamp in the 2003 letter were false.  The  Respondent
             had not provided the passport itself or even  a  copy  of  the
             relevant page of the passport  showing  the  stamp  which  she
             alleges is false. I find that the  Respondent  has  failed  to
             substantiate her claim that the passport stamps  in  the  2003
             letter are false.

         17.  I find on the balance of probabilities the  Appellant  applied
             for asylum  in  1998  and  was  granted  ILTR  in  2003.   The
             Appellant's representatives made an application under the Data
             Protection Act in  connection  with  this  application.  As  a
             result of this they received from the Respondent the documents
             found at C1 to C7 of the Appellant's  bundle.   This  includes
             the letter dated 18 April 2003 in which the Respondent  states
             'I am writing to say that there are no longer any  restriction
             on the period for which you may remain in the  United  Kingdom
             ... . You can now remain indefinitely in the United Kingdom."

         18.  I find that while there is no evidence to show how this letter
             was generated, and where it came from originally,  it  is  for
             the Respondent to show  that  this  is  a  false  letter.  She
             provided it to the Appellant's representative as part  of  the
             Data Protection Act application and there is no indication  in
             the Respondent's covering letter that she considered the  2003
             letter to be  false.   This  covering  letter  refers  to  the
             Appellant by name.  It states 'We have processed your  request
             and confirm that the data held at  UKBA  on  the  above  named
             subject  confirms  that  he  is  currently   subject   to   no
             restrictions'."

    Having made those findings, the judge then went on at paragraph  20  to
    note that the mere making of a bare assertion that the  passport  stamp
    and letter of the 18th April were false was not sufficient to discharge
    the burden of proof.  He thereafter allowed the appeal.

 6. Many months later, and long after the time when  permission  to  appeal
    ought to have been lodged, the Respondent sought permission  to  appeal
    out of time. The Appellant's Rule 24 response takes issue with  whether
    the judge who granted permission to appeal  should  have  admitted  the
    application so far out of time.   However,  Miss  Poynor  realistically
    conceded that that is not a matter that I can deal with in my  capacity
    as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal hearing a statutory appeal.  It may be
    subject to judicial review, but that is another matter.

 7. In view of the way that Mr Whitwell has put his case  today,  it  is  I
    think worth reciting the Grounds of Appeal.

         "1.  The First-tier Tribunal allowed this  appeal  because  it  was
             found that the Secretary of State had not satisfied the burden
             of proof to make out the  assertion  that  the  Appellant  had
             relied upon false documents and  that  no  evidence  had  been
             served on this point. It is respectively  submitted  that  the
             Tribunal erred in reaching this conclusion.

         2.   As part of the Home Office bundle before  the  Tribunal  there
             are two references to the evidence before the court.

             .    At page 2 of the PF1 bundle there is a reference  in  the
                  index of documents: '(g) copy of NDFU forgery report'.

             .    At page G1 of the bundle is the NDFU forgery report which
                  notes that the relevant document contained  a  false  Home
                  Office stamp and was accompanied by a  false  Home  Office
                  letter.

         3.   The Tribunal had no regard to this evidence in its findings on
             this case even though the  document  was  clearly  before  the
             Tribunal.  It  is  therefore  submitted  that   the   Tribunal
             determination  is  unsafe  because  of  incomplete   findings.
             [Emphasis added]

 8. I next refer to the document at G1 to which specific reference is  made
    in the Grounds of Appeal.  It is  headed  "NDFU  Forgery  Report".   Mr
    Whitwell made the point, and I think  that  this  was  accepted  by  Ms
    Poynor, that in the case of an in-country application such as this, any
    allegation of forgery or false document would usually be  supported  by
    something called an 'NDFU Forgery Report'. 'NDFU' stands  for  National
    Document Fraud Unit.  However, the document to which the judge referred
    and which the Presenting Officer sought an application to obtain, was a
    so-called 'document verification report'. This latter title is given to
    a similar report prepared in respect  of  out-of-country  applications.
    It may therefore be that the judge was misled into thinking that  there
    should  also  have  been  something  called  a  'document  verification
    report'. However, as the Secretary of State  says  in  her  Grounds  of
    Appeal, G1 was plainly referred to in  the  list  of  contents  of  the
    Respondent's bundle of documents. It was thus there to be read,  and  I
    simply cannot believe that  a  conscientious  Presenting  Officer,  the
    Appellant, and the judge, all managed to overlooked its existence.

 9. The documents that are referred to in the NDFU  Forgery  Report  are  a
    document numbered KB83306 and a letter of  the  18th  April  2003.  The
    former document was  the  Appellant's  'old'  passport  containing  the
    questioned Home Office stamp.  The material part of the report reads as
    follows:

         The National Document Fraud Unit examined  the  above  document  on
         22nd June 2010.

         It  was  found  to  contain  (an)  altered  stamp(s)   /counterfeit
         stamp(s).

    Paragraph 4 of the report is headed "Comments". This reads as follows:

         Page 8 of the document contains a counterfeit Home Office  personal
         date stamp  number  276ADE  dated  18.4.2003.  The  application  is
         accompanied by a purported Home Office letter which is  also  false
         as it bears the same false Home Office stamp.

10. Thus, whilst the judge did not explicitly refer to the  report  by  the
    title that appears in the list of documents, it is clear to me that his
    reference at paragraph  20  to  the  Respondent  having  made  "a  bare
    assertion that the passport stamp and letter of 18th April were  false"
    was intended to be a reference to the NDFU forgery report that I quoted
    in the previous paragraph (above).  It is equally clear to me that  the
    Presenting Officer at that time accepted that  that  report  failed  to
    provide any explanation or supporting evidence for its  assertion  that
    the documents bore false Home Office stamps, and was  thus  seeking  an
    adjournment in order to obtain the same.

11. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Whitwell accepted that he  was,  so  to
    speak, 'stuck' with the rather limited report that was before the First-
    tier  Tribunal.  He   nevertheless   argued   that   there   had   been
    circumstantial evidence which the First-tier  Tribunal  ought  to  have
    taken into account as supporting the bare assertion of forgery that had
    been made by the author of the report.  Firstly, he  submitted  that  a
    person who had presented precisely the same identity  details  as  this
    Appellant (date of birth and so forth) had applied for entry  clearance
    on 8 March 2002, and yet it was the Appellant's case that he  had  been
    in the UK at that time.  Secondly, he drew attention to the  fact  that
    the Home Office had no record of  the  Appellant  having  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain, whether in 2003 as stated in the questioned
    document, or at all.  Finally, he claimed that the reference number  on
    the Home Office letter is not one that is used by the Home Office.

12. So far as Mr Whitwell's first argument is concerned, namely the fact of
    an entry clearance application being made by a person  who  shared  the
    details of the Appellant, Mr Whitwell was right to say  that  this  had
    been referred at paragraph 20 of the letter explaining the reasons  for
    refusal:

         The existence  of  these  refused  entry  visas  dated  1998,  2002
         together with the lack of any  evidence  of  entry  to  the  United
         Kingdom or any asylum  application  casts  further  doubt  on  your
         client's claim to have been resident in the  United  Kingdom  since
         1999 and to have been granted ILR in 2003.

    However, casting doubt upon the veracity of a document is not the  same
    thing as proving that it is false.  It was for the Respondent to adduce
    cogent evidence to prove, on a balance of probabilities,  that  it  was
    false.  In a sense, Mr Whitwell's second argument was  similar  to  his
    first in that it was essentially based upon the  lack  of  evidence  to
    support the hypothesis that  the  document  might  have  been  genuine.
    However, the absence of a Home Office record to show that the appellant
    had been granted indefinite leave did  not  suffice,  in  my  view,  to
    establish that no  such  grant  had  been  made.   In  relation  to  Mr
    Whitwell's last point, I do not have any evidence  that  the  reference
    number that appears upon the questioned document is  not  one  that  is
    used by the Home Office, and neither did the First-tier Tribunal. I  do
    not therefore accept the substance of Mr Whitwell's arguments.

13. Moreover, and in any event, I am  persuaded  by  Miss  Poynor  that  Mr
    Whitwell's arguments go well beyond those that were put to the judge in
    the First-tier Tribunal and, for that matter, those that are  contained
    within the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Until the arguments
    that were put before me today, it has always been the position  of  the
    Respondent  that  these  documents  were   not   merely   of   doubtful
    authenticity  but  that  they  were  forgeries.   The  Respondent   had
    singularly failed to submit any direct evidence of forgery to the First-
    tier Tribunal. It was the claim that  the  Appellant's  documents  bore
    false Home  Office  stamps  which  had  provided  the  sole  basis  for
    contending that the Appellant's documents were false,  and  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was  right  to  conclude  that  the  Respondent  had  not
    submitted any evidence at all to support the basis for that contention.



14. This appeal is accordingly dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Anonymity is not directed



Signed        Date 16th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly

