


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/12540/2015
     IA/12542/2015 & IA/12543/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 25 May  2017                             |On : 05 June 2017            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                             mrs ayten satilmis
                                   [a a s]
                                    [a s]

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Peterson, instructed through Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants, a mother and her two children, are citizens of Turkey,
      born respectively on 20 August 1977, [ ] 2004 and [ ] 2009. They  have
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  Grant,   dismissing   their   appeals   against   the
      respondent's decision to  refuse  their  applications  for  indefinite
      leave to  remain  as  the  dependants  of  a  Turkish  EC  Association
      Agreement  (ECAA)  businessperson,  Mr  Serdal  Satilmis,  the   first
      appellant's husband and the father of the children.

   2. Mr Satilmis, the sponsor, first come to the UK under the provisions of
      the Ankara Agreement with limited leave valid  until  31  August  2014
      granted under paragraph 21 of HC 510.  In accordance with paragraph 35
      of HC 509 the appellants were granted limited leave commensurate  with
      the sponsor's leave, valid until 31 August 2014, and entered the UK on
      11 June 2014 to join him. On 27 August 2014 the sponsor, together with
      the appellants, applied for indefinite leave to remain under paragraph
      28 of HC 510. The sponsor was granted indefinite leave to remain on 12
      February 2015. The appellants' applications were, however, refused  in
      a decision dated 11 March 2015.


   3. The respondent refused the appellants' applications under paragraph 41
      of HC510 which outlined  the  business  requirements  under  the  1973
      immigration rules. The respondent relied on page 66  of  the  Business
      Applications under the Turkish  EC  Association Agreement  modernised
      guidance which required that  the  first  appellant  had  been  living
      together in the UK with the Turkish ECAA business person for a  period
      of at least two years. The respondent was not satisfied that  she  had
      been living with the sponsor for a period of at least two  years.  The
      second and third appellants' applications were  then  refused  on  the
      basis that the respondent was not satisfied that  both  their  parents
      were lawfully present in the UK.


   4. The appellants appealed against that decision. Their appeal was  heard
      on 15 December 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge E  B  Grant.  It  was
      argued before the judge that the  modernised  guidance  had  made  the
      exercise by a Turkish national of the freedom of establishment in  the
      UK subject to more restrictive conditions than those applicable at the
      date of entry into force of the Additional Protocol and was  therefore
      impermissible and unlawful  under  Article  41(1)  of  the  Additional
      Protocol. It was argued further that the restrictive  conditions  were
      only to be found in the guidance, and not the  1973  Rules,  and  were
      therefore unlawful, in accordance with the principles set out in Alvi,
      R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
      [2012] UKSC 33.  It was also argued that the  respondent  had  applied
      the wrong part of HC 510, as paragraph 41  applied  to  EEA  citizens;
      that the respondent ought to have applied paragraph 28 of HC 510;  and
      that the refusal was not in accordance with the law and was in  breach
      of the appellants' Article 8 rights.


   5. Judge Grant found that paragraph 41 was not the relevant provision  to
      apply, as it applied to EEA citizens. She found that paragraph 28  was
      the relevant provision, but that there was no mandatory requirement in
      paragraph 28 for permission to be granted,  as  in  the  case  of  EEA
      family members. She found that it was irrelevant whether  or  not  the
      modernised guidance applied as there was  no  requirement  within  the
      original Ankara Agreement Rules  for  the  appellants  to  be  granted
      indefinite leave to remain in line with the sponsor. She dismissed the
      appeals on that basis and on Article 8 grounds.


   6. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on
      the grounds that the judge had failed  properly  to  engage  with  the
      legal arguments before her and had upheld an unlawful decision made by
      the respondent.


   7. Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused,  but  was  subsequently
      granted on a renewed application on 9 November 2016 on the basis  that
      it was arguable that the modernised guidance imposed  conditions  more
      restrictive than those in place as  at  the  date  of  the  Additional
      Protocol (Art 41(1)) and was therefore unlawful.

Appeal Hearing

   8. The matter came before me on  25  May  2017,  having  previously  been
      adjourned to await the outcome of the President's decision  in  R  (on
      the application of Aydogdu  )  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department (Ankara Agreement - family  members  -  settlement)  [2017]
      UKUT 167.

   9. Ms Peterson  advised  me  that  the  appellants  were  pursuing  their
      appeals, despite the findings in Aydogdu.  There  then  followed  some
      discussion as to the position further  to  the  decision  in  Aydogdu,
      which concerned facts identical to those of the appellants before  me,
      albeit in the context of judicial review  proceedings  rather  than  a
      statutory appeal. It was agreed by all parties  that  the  appellants'
      appeals fell within the old appeals system, prior to the changes  made
      by the Immigration Act 2014, and thus the full  range  of  grounds  of
      appeal under section 84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
      2002 were open to them, including the ground  "that  the  decision  is
      otherwise not in accordance with the law", as stated  in  the  refusal
      decision.


  10. It was noted that the Secretary of State, in the case of Aydogdu,  had
      expressly acknowledged that  the  refusal  of  the  application  under
      paragraph 41 of HC 510  in  that  case  was  fundamentally  in  error.
      Indeed, the outcome of the proceedings was that the  decision  in  the
      application was quashed. It was also acknowledged that  the  Secretary
      of State had, as a result of the decision in Aydogdu, since  withdrawn
      the modernised guidance and was revising the guidance.


  11. Ms Peterson submitted that, whilst it remained her position,  contrary
      to the findings in Aydogdu, that there was  provision  for  settlement
      under paragraph 28, the position following the decision in Aydoglu was
      that there were no categories under which the  appellants  could  have
      applied. She did  not  accept,  as  suggested  in  Aydogdu,  that  the
      appellants' application ought to have been considered  under  Appendix
      FM, since that imposed more restrictive conditions than under the 1973
      rules and was thus not permitted under the  "standstill  clause".  Her
      submission was that the respondent had made an unlawful  decision  and
      that Judge Grant ought, therefore, to have allowed the appeals on  the
      basis that the decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and
      referred the matter back to the Secretary of State to  make  a  lawful
      decision, either by granting settlement under paragraph 28 of  HC  510
      or by creating a new category for people lawfully in the UK under  the
      Ankara Agreement. She therefore asked  that  the  appeal  be  allowed,
      Judge Grant's decision set aside and that the decision  be  remade  by
      allowing the appellants' appeal on the  basis  that  the  respondent's
      decision was otherwise not in accordance with the law.

  12. Mr Wilding accepted that there was logic to the  suggestion  that  the
      matter be remitted to the Secretary of State, but submitted that  that
      did not properly dispose of  the  issue  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
      namely whether Judge Grant had made an error of law in  her  decision.
      He submitted that the judge had not made  any  error  of  law  in  her
      decision. She had not needed to consider or follow the  principles  in
      Alvi, as she did not dismiss the appeal on the basis of the  guidance.
      The basis upon which she had dismissed the appeal was  that  paragraph
      28 of HC 510, the relevant rule, did not require that  the  appellants
      be granted settlement. Such a conclusion had been confirmed in Aydogdu
      as the  correct  one.  The  President,  in  Aydogdu,  found  that  the
      sponsor's settled status took him and his family  outside  the  Ankara
      Agreement and therefore the question of Ankara Agreement  rights  fell
      away, which is what Judge  Grant  found.  Mr  Wilding  relied  on  the
      decision in  CP  (Section  86(3)  and  (5);  wrong  immigration  rule)
      Dominica [2006] UKAIT 00040 in submitting that it  was  not  the  case
      that the only proper course would be for the matter to be remitted  to
      the  Secretary  of  State  when  the  wrong  rule  had  been  applied,
      particularly when there was no right rule that could be applied.

Consideration and Findings

  13.  The outcome of the case of Agdogdu, and the possible  lacuna  in  the
      immigration rules identified in that case,  has  somewhat  complicated
      matters in this appeal. However, after some considerable  deliberation
      I find myself in agreement with the submissions made  by  Mr  Wilding.
      Whilst, in a case such as the appellants' where it  is  accepted  that
      the respondent applied the wrong immigration  rules,  a  logical  step
      would be for the matter to be remitted to the Secretary of State for a
      decision to be made within the correct immigration  rules,  that  does
      not necessarily mean that Judge Grant  erred  in  law  in  making  the
      decision that she did. Mr Wilding relied on the case of CP  (Dominica)
      in which similar issues arose. In that case, the Upper Tribunal  found
      as follows (I have highlighted the most pertinent sections):
   1. "Reading these provisions together, we are left in no doubt that  they
      impose a legal duty upon decision-makers acting to regulate entry  and
      stay in the UK to apply the immigration rules  and,  specifically,  to
      apply the correct immigration rule applicable to the circumstances put
      forward by the individual in his application to entry or stay  in  the
      UK. The matter can, perhaps, be tested in this way. If it were not for
      the appellate system operating in immigration cases, legal  challenges
      to decisions by those officials making decisions under the Immigration
      Acts and the immigration rules would be brought by way of applications
      for judicial review in the Administrative Court. We have no doubt that
      an Administrative Court Judge would have no difficulty  in  concluding
      that the decision-maker acted unlawfully if he had applied  the  wrong
      immigration rule. It is axiomatic in  a  public  law  context  that  a
      decision-maker acts unlawfully if he makes a  decision  on  the  wrong
      legal basis, for instance  by  applying  the  wrong  legal  provision.
      Mutatis mutandis, with the appellate system we actually have in place,
      such a decision is "not in accordance with the law ".
   1. What does this mean for the application of sections 86(3) and  (5)  of
      the 2002 Act? It seems to signify that the appeal, at  least  to  some
      extent, should be allowed under section 86(3). We emphasis  the  words
      "to some extent" because, for the reasons we now give,  in  the  usual
      case the immigration judge will go on to determine the appeal  on  the
      basis of the correct rule and the evidence before him.  The  effective
      outcome of the appeal will be determined by that process.
   1. It is within the collective experience of the members of the  Tribunal
      sitting in this case that the approach taken at  the  hearing  is  the
      normal one followed where  the  original  decision-maker  applies  the
      wrong immigration rule. Of course, an Immigration Judge is  not  under
      an obligation to "embark upon a roving expedition among the rules" for
      a rule that applies to the claimant's case (Uddin v IAT [1991] Imm  AR
      134 at p 144 per McCowan  LJ).  However,  once  the  correct  rule  is
      identified, it is the Immigration Judge's  obligation  to  apply  that
      rule, subject to the requirements of fairness so that the parties have
      a proper opportunity to deal with the relevant  evidential  and  other
      issues that arise. The issue of fairness will most likely arise  where
      the substance of the correct rule differs from  that  applied  by  the
      decision-maker or where the appellant is unrepresented at the hearing.


   1. If the appellant succeeds on the evidence under the correct rule,  the
      appeal will, of course, be allowed in substance and not merely because
      the original decision was legally defective having been made under the
      wrong rule.
   1. If, by contrast, as in this case any (or all) of the  requirements  of
      the correct rule are not satisfied, the appeal will  be  dismissed  in
      substance. For the reasons we have already given, the decision is "not
      in accordance with the law" but the fault in the decision as  made  is
      for all practical purposes cured by the appellate process. The  appeal
      must be allowed to that limited extent  but  the  appellant's  victory
      will be Pyrrhic.  There  is  no  outstanding  application  before  the
      decision-maker and no question  of  the  Immigration  Judge  directing
      further consideration of the appellant's application.
   1. The practical effect of the approach we set out above is that cases of
      this sort will be, if at all possible, decided by  Immigration  Judges
      on the evidence at a hearing. The legislation does,  after  all,  give
      the Tribunal a fact-finding role in immigration cases. It  will  avoid
      the unnecessary cycle of  appeals  being  routinely  allowed  for  the
      original decision-maker to consider the appellant's application again"
  14. Accordingly, whilst it was open to Judge Grant  to  have  allowed  the
      appeals on the basis that the decision was not in accordance with  the
      law, that was not the only option to her and, following  the  guidance
      in CP (Dominica),  she  proceeded  to  consider  what  the  appellants
      submitted, and she identified, was the only available applicable rule,
      namely paragraph 28 of HC 510. She went on to  give  full  and  cogent
      reasons for concluding that the appellants could not benefit from that
      provision because it did not give rise to  any  mandatory  requirement
      for indefinite leave to remain to be given  to  dependants  of  Ankara
      Agreement sponsors. As Mr Wilding submitted, such a conclusion was the
      same as that reached in Aydoglu where the  President  found  that  the
      sponsor's settled status took him and his dependants outside the scope
      of the Ankara Agreement and the "stand-still clause",  and  there  was
      therefore no purpose served by remitting the matter to  the  Secretary
      of State in circumstances where there was no other  rule  under  which
      the applications could be considered.

  15. I am also in agreement with Mr Wilding's submission in response to the
      grounds asserting that  the  judge's  consideration  of  the  guidance
      failed to take account of the principles in Alvi. It  is  clear  that,
      whilst the judge gave consideration to the  guidance,  both  the  2008
      guidance and the modernised guidance, she did so in  response  to  the
      grounds of appeal and submissions made before her, but  that  did  not
      form the basis of her decision. Her findings at  [16]  made  it  plain
      that her decision was based upon paragraph 28 of HC 510 and the Ankara
      Agreement Rules in general, irrespective of the guidance.


  16. For all of these reasons I conclude that the  judge  was  entitled  to
      reach the conclusions that  she  did  in  regard  to  the  appellants'
      eligibility under the Ankara Agreement. It was open  to  her  to  deal
      with the appeals in the  way  that  she  did  and  there  was  nothing
      unlawful about her approach or in the decision that she  reached.  The
      grounds do not challenge her findings on Article 8 and I find, in  any
      event, that she was entitled to conclude as she did in that regard.  I
      therefore uphold the judge's decision and find that she did not err in
      law. There are no material errors of law in her decision.

DECISION

  17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law requiring it to be set aside. The  decision
      to dismiss the appeals stands.



Signed:[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  26 May 2017
