

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/12478/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Promulgated on               |
|On 7 March 2014                               |On 3 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             OLEKSANANDR NOVIKOV


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Nazir, instructed by Copland Immigration Services


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent (whom we shall call 'the claimant')  is  a  national  of
    Ukraine.  He is married to a French  national  working  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He entered the United Kingdom on 1 May 2006 with his wife and
    on application was granted a residence card valid until  29  May  2012.
    He now claims that he is entitled to permanent residence, on the  basis
    of his having been here for more than five years as  the  spouse  of  a
    national of a Member State who is herself exercising treaty rights.  He
    has made two applications.  It is the refusal  of  the  second,  on  27
    March 2013, that gives rise to the present proceedings.

 2. The claimant appealed against that refusal to the First-tier  Tribunal,
    where Judge Quigley allowed his appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals, with permission, to this Tribunal.

 3. The problem is this.  The claimant's right to  permanent  residence  in
    the United Kingdom arises, if  at  all,  from  the  Citizens  Directive
    2004/38/EC as implemented in the  United  Kingdom  by  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, SI 2006/1003  (as  amended).
    Regulation 6 defines a  'qualified  person'.   A  qualified  person  is
    necessarily an EEA national.  Regulation 7 defines 'family member':  as
    her spouse, the claimant is a family member of his wife.  As  such,  he
    is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom under reg  14(2),  "for  so
    long as he remains the family member of  the  qualified  person".   His
    permanent right of residence, if any, would be on the  basis  that,  in
    the words of reg 15(1)(b), he is:

        "A family member of an EEA national who  is  not  himself  and  EEA
        national but who has resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
        national in accordance with  these  regulations  for  a  continuous
        period of five years."

 4. Looking now at the same regulations in reverse order, it is clear  that
    in order to acquire the permanent  right  of  residence,  the  claimant
    would have to have resided in the United Kingdom  for  five  years  "in
    accordance with these regulations", which means  that  for  those  five
    years his residence must have been residence permitted  by  reg  14(2).
    That in turn requires the resident for that period to have been as  the
    family member of a  'qualified  person'.   The  question  therefore  is
    whether, for the period of five years in question, the claimant's  wife
    was a 'qualified person'.  For present purposes it is sufficient to say
    that the definition of 'qualified person' includes both a worker and  a
    student.  Both of those terms are defined in reg 4.  We do not need  to
    set out the definition of a 'worker', but, by reg 4(1)(d):


        "(d) 'student' means a person who -
               i) is enrolled, for the principal  purpose  of  following  a
                  course of study (including  vocational  training),  at  a
                  public or private establishment which is -
                    (aa) financed from public funds; or
                    (bb) otherwise recognised by the Secretary of  State  as
                    an establishment  which  has  been  accredited  for  the
                    purpose of providing such courses or training within the
                    law or administrative practice of the part of the United
                    Kingdom in which the establishment is located;
    ii) has comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the  United  Kingdom;
        and
   iii) assures the Secretary of State, by means of a  declaration,  or  by
        such equivalent means  as  the  person  may  choose,  that  he  has
        sufficient  resources  not  to  become  a  burden  on  the   social
        assistance system of  the  Untied  Kingdom  during  his  period  of
        residence."


 5. Paragraphs (3) and (4) of the same regulation make further provision in
    relation to the assurance required by reg 4(1)(d)(iii).

 6. The claimant's wife has been at various  times  during  the  period  in
    question a worker.  She has  also  been  a  full-time  student  at  the
    University of  Glasgow.   At  the  hearing  before  Judge  Quigley  the
    Secretary of State pointed out that time in the United Kingdom spent as
    a  student  could  count  as  residence  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
    Regulations.  It is not clear whether the Presenting Officer  drew  the
    judge's attention to the requirements of reg 4.  The judge  found  that
    the claimant's wife was a full-time student from September  2008  until
    July 2012.  During that period she had sometimes  undertaken  part-time
    and vocation work.  There were however, two periods when  she  was  not
    employed, that is to say from September 2010 until May 2011,  and  from
    September 2011 until  January  2012.   The  judge  allowed  the  appeal
    because  she  thought  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to
    appreciate that the period of time during which the claimant's wife was
    a full-time student  counted  towards  her  residence  as  a  qualified
    person.  When she was not working, she was nevertheless a student.

 7. That, however, as is clear from the regulations we have  set  out,  was
    not sufficient.  Whilst the claimant's wife was  a  worker  (presumably
    including periods of  part-time  work),  as  indeed  evidenced  by  her
    National Insurance contribution record,  she  was  a  qualified  person
    under the category of 'worker'.  When she was not working however,  the
    only basis upon which the claimant claims  that  she  was  a  qualified
    person is that she was a 'student'.  But there is no  evidential  basis
    upon which the judge  could  have  found  that  she  had  Comprehensive
    Sickness Insurance Cover during those periods.  It thus  appears  clear
    that, in the periods when the claimant's wife was not working, she  was
    not a qualified person, and it follows  from  that  that  during  those
    periods, the claimant's residence with her was not as the family member
    of a person who was residing "in accordance with these regulations".

 8. It thus appears that, so far as the decision under the regulations  was
    concerned, the Secretary of  State  was  correct,  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was wrong.  She erred in law by  failing  to  appreciate
    the full definition of 'student' in reg 4 and as a result  treated  the
    claimant's wife as a qualified person at times  when  she  clearly  was
    not.

 9. We had reached that view on the basis of  the  regulations  themselves:
    neither party referred us to any authority.  Following the  hearing  we
    became aware that the Court of Appeal was shortly to consider a similar
    issue.  The hearing of Ahmad v SSHD was on 2 April 2014.   The  leading
    judgement of the Court of Appeal [2014] EWCA Civ 988 is given by  Arden
    LJ, with whom Beatson LJ and Sharp LJ agreed.  Arden LJ sets out in her
    judgement not merely the provisions of the  law  but  the  reasons  for
    them, and makes copious reference to existing  authority  both  of  the
    United Kingdom courts and the Court of Justice of the  European  Union.
    Her conclusion endorses that which we had already reached.  In relation
    to the case before her, her conclusion was as follows:

          "[70] I would dismiss this appeal.  If an EEA national enters  the
              UK and is not involved in an  economically  active  activity,
              for example because she is a student, her residence and  that
              of her family members will not be lawful unless she has  CSIC
              [Comprehensive Sickness  Insurance  Cover]  while  she  is  a
              student in the five years following her arrival.  Accordingly
              her family members will not be able to qualify for  permanent
              residency in the UK.


          [71]  So Mrs Ahmad had to have CSIC while she was a student.  This
              condition must be strictly complied with.  The fact that  she
              would be entitled to treatment under the NHS, and was thus at
              all times in substantially the same  position  as  she  would
              have been had she had CSIC, is nothing  to  the  point.   Her
              failure to take out CSIC put the host state at risk of having
              to pay for healthcare at a time when the Ahmads had not  then
              achieved the status of permanent resident  and  she  was  not
              economically active."

10. Judge Quigley also allowed the appeal on  human  rights  grounds  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  Her reasons  for
    doing so are wholly obscure.  There was  and  is  no  question  of  the
    claimant being required to leave the United Kingdom, so long as  he  is
    the spouse of a qualified person, which at the date of the decision and
    at present, he is.  His wife is working full-time,  and  he  is  living
    with  her.   It  is  wholly  impossible  to   construct   an   argument
    demonstrating why it is disproportionate within the sense of Article  8
    for his residence here to be in the status of the spouse of a qualified
    person rather than that of a permanent resident; and the judge made  no
    reference to any such argument.  The Secretary of State's  decision  on
    the claimant's application makes no difference at all to  the  exercise
    of the rights of private or family life by either the claimant  or  his
    wife.

11. For the foregoing reasons we  consider  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in its conclusions both on the regulations and on Article 8.   We
    set aside Judge Quigley's  decision.   We  substitute  a  determination
    dismissing the claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 28 August 2014


