
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12057/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July 2019                       |On 15 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                         Mrs martha kammogne woguia
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimmons, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal from  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Parkes sitting at  Birmingham  on  23
    December 2015) dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse to issue her with a residence card as confirmation
    of her right to reside in the United Kingdom as the spouse  of  an  EEA
    national exercising Treaty rights here.   There  were  two  grounds  of
    refusal.  The first was that there was sufficient evidence  to  believe
    that her marriage to her EEA national sponsor was  one  of  convenience
    for the sole purpose of her remaining in the UK.  The second  was  that
    it was appropriate to refuse  her  application  on  grounds  of  public
    policy  and  public  security  pursuant  to  Regulation  20(1)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006.   I  was  not  asked  to  make  an
    anonymity direction, and I do not consider that  such  a  direction  is
    warranted on the facts of this case.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Cameroon,  who  is  recorded  as  having
    entered the UK in January 2012.  On  10  December  2013  the  appellant
    married her EEA national sponsor,  Mr  Alfred  Thiem  (aka  "Tiem"),  a
    French national.  She then applied for a residence card as his  spouse.
    She and the sponsor were requested to attend a marriage interview on  6
    June 2014.  It is admitted by the appellant that she had  attended  the
    interview with  Idriss  Nsangou,  not  Alfred  Thiem.   But,  with  her
    connivance, Mr Nsangou pretended  to  be  Mr  Thiem  by  presenting  an
    identity card belonging to Mr Thiem.

 3. In the course of his interview, it was put to Mr Nsangou  that  he  was
    not the person shown in the photograph of the identity  card  belonging
    to Mr Thiem, and he readily admitted that the card did  not  belong  to
    him.

 4. On 2 October 2014  the  appellant,  in  the  name  of  "Marthe  Woquia"
    (according to the transcript), was convicted at Liverpool  Crown  Court
    of  conspiring  with  Mr  Nsangou  to  commit  an  immigration  offence
    involving the circumvention of immigration controls by fraud.  She  was
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment of  18  months,  while  Mr  Nsangou
    received a term of imprisonment of 16 months.

 5. In his sentencing remarks, His Honour Judge Watson said:

         "It is the case that you and someone with an identity card  in  the
         name Alfred Tiem went  through  a  ceremony  of  marriage  on  10th
         December, but there is, it seems to me, scant evidence  to  suggest
         that this was anything other than an  arrangement  of  convenience.
         Certainly, when you were called for interview it was not  the  case
         that there has been any suggestion that you  told  the  Immigration
         authorities that your husband had departed to  France  suddenly  or
         unexpectedly or anything of that nature.  You  instead  went  about
         fielding a substitute husband and that is how Idriss  Nsangou  came
         to be with you travelling to Liverpool that  day,  he  having  been
         provided with the identity card of your purported husband, Mr Tiem,
         and also a bank card in his name which was evidence doubtless  that
         the two of you hoped to persuade someone, if  they  questioned  the
         identity card, to accept his, Mr Nsangou's identity as that  of  Mr
         Tiem, your purported husband ...

         It is the fact, however, that your [Mr  Nsangou's]  motivation  for
         involving yourself in  this  has  never  been  explained  fully  or
         properly and it  is,  it  seems  to  me,  in  the  absence  of  any
         suggestion of a close personal loyalty to Mr  Tiem  or  Ms  Woquia,
         inevitable that I would  have  to  conclude  that  there  was  some
         financial advantage of one sort or another that led you  into  this
         position.

         The simple fact is this:  that  there  is  a  real  and  legitimate
         concern by everybody resident in this country to know who  is  here
         and  whether  they  are  properly  here  in  this   country.    The
         restrictions on immigration, whether it be by visa or  anything  of
         that nature, the restrictions on residency are  properly  in  place
         because there is a huge public concern to know that people who  are
         resident here are here properly and have the authority to be  here.
         Arrangements such as this  strike  at  the  very  heart  of  public
         confidence in that very important issue.

         It is for that reason that a prison sentence for  both  of  you  is
         inevitable.

         ... In both your cases the starting  point  after  trial  for  this
         serious offence to circumvent the immigration controls is  a  trial
         sentence of two years."

 6. On 12 March  2015,  the  appellant  made  a  fresh  application  for  a
    residence card as confirmation of her right to reside in the UK as  the
    spouse of Alfred Thiem.

The Reasons for Refusal

 7.  On 26 March 2015 the Department gave their reasons  for  refusing  the
    application.  They noted that the Trial Judge  had  not  accepted  that
    Alfred Thiem had actually attended the wedding.  Based on the fact that
    she had a  history  of  deceiving  the  Home  Office  and  of  applying
    fraudulently for a residence card, there was  no  basis  for  the  Home
    Office to be satisfied that she had married her claimed sponsor and not
    another impostor.  Her deception cast doubt on the authenticity of  her
    whole application  (including  any  submitted  documentation)  and  the
    genuineness of any claim which she had made to  be  in  a  relationship
    with her claimed sponsor.  The Trial Judge was not satisfied  that  she
    had entered into a lawful marriage with Alfred Thiem.

 8. Alternatively, taking into account the Judge's sentencing remarks  that
    there was scant evidence to suggest that this was anything  other  than
    an arrangement of convenience, there was sufficient evidence to believe
    that the marriage undertaken  was  one  of  convenience  for  the  sole
    purpose of her remaining in the UK.

 9. In the further alternative, the refusal to issue the confirmation  that
    she sought was  justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy  and  public
    security.  The fact that she now claimed  that  her  real  husband  had
    returned to the UK and had  continued  to  sponsor  her  highlighted  a
    continued willingness to employ a similar deception on the Home Office.
     This showed the potential danger she posed to society as the Judge had
    already deemed her marriage to be one of convenience and did not accept
    their relationship.   Taking  her  personal  conduct  in  the  UK  into
    account, her continued presence in the UK  was  considered  to  pose  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  fundamental
    interests of society.

The Decision of Judge Birk

10. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Birk sitting at Birmingham  on
    28 May 2015.  Both parties were legally  represented,  and  Judge  Birk
    received oral evidence from the appellant and Mr Thiem.

11. Judge Burk found that there was an evidential burden on  the  appellant
    to address the evidence  justifying  reasons  for  suspicion  that  the
    marriage had been entered into for the predominant purpose of  securing
    residence rights.  She found that a reasonable suspicion  "very  easily
    arises in this case", and that the appellant had the  burden  to  prove
    that it was not a marriage of convenience.  Her reasoning at  [17]  was
    as follows:

         "This is because of the criminal conviction of the Appellant  which
         is directly relevant as she was prepared to attempt to deceive  the
         immigration authorities on the precise issue of her marriage to the
         sponsor. She did this knowingly and with preparation as she had  to
         engage the services of an impostor. I do not find it credible  that
         her friend who was not, on the evidence, a close friend was willing
         to do this for nothing bearing in mind that she  and  he  would  be
         aware of  the  seriousness  of  their  actions.  I  find  that  the
         Appellant in her oral evidence was unable to provide  any  credible
         reason as to why this person who was not a close  friend  would  be
         prepared to be an impostor if it was not for  financial  reward.  I
         find that this indicates the lengths to which she was  prepared  to
         go to deceive the Respondent. Further she has failed to provide any
         reason ... as to why she did not simply explain to  the  Respondent
         what she says happened which is that her husband had a row and left
         her to go to France. She did not seek to re-arrange the  interview.
         I find that this compounds her readiness to deceive the  Respondent
         rather than explaining the circumstances that  had  arisen  on  her
         account."

12. However, Judge Birk went to allow the  appeal  as  he  found  that  the
    weight of the evidence fell heavily on the side  of  establishing  that
    the marriage was genuine and subsisting.

The Decision and Directions of the Upper Tribunal

13. In a decision promulgated on 1 October 2015, UTJ Eshun gave her reasons
    for finding that Judge Birk had made an error  of  law  such  that  her
    decision could not stand. In short, she had not given adequate  reasons
    for her conclusion, given "the very strong findings the Judge  made  at
    paragraph 17". She remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    rehearing.  She directed that  the  findings  made  by  Judge  Birk  at
    paragraph [17] were to stand.

The Hearing  Before,  and  the  Decision  of,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
Remaking

14. The appeal came before Judge Parkes for remaking.   Both  parties  were
    legally represented, and Judge Parkes received oral evidence  from  the
    appellant and Mr Thiem.

15. In his subsequent decision promulgated on 8 January 2016, Judge  Parkes
    found in the appellant's favour on the first issue raised in the  RFRL.
    He accepted that the appellant had married Mr Thiem,  and  not  someone
    posing as Mr Thiem.

16.  In  relation  to  the  issue  of  whether  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience, the Judge found that the appellant had not  been  truthful
    about what had happened in the lead-up to the  marriage  interview  and
    how she came to have assistance from Mr Nsangou.  At the end  of  [17],
    Judge Parkes said: "The view of the Circuit Judge  who  sentenced  them
    seems to be the most likely explanation and the  appellant's  continued
    prevarication further undermines her position."

17. At paragraph [19], the  Judge  noted  that  there  was  a  conflict  of
    evidence between the appellant and her husband as to what had  happened
    after he had left and gone to France.  He said that  he  had  tried  to
    contact the appellant from France, but she did not  say  that  she  was
    aware of any efforts to contact her or that she had ignored them.   The
    Judge observed that, in any event, her husband remained in France until
    October 2014.  The husband said that he stayed with his father, but the
    appellant's evidence was that he stayed in France in different places.

18. At [20], the Judge drew  an  adverse  inference  from  the  fact  that,
    despite the husband saying he realised  quickly  that  he  had  made  a
    mistake, and that he had tried calling and had found out that his  wife
    had been remanded in custody, he had  nonetheless  remained  in  France
    until October 2014 and had only visited the appellant in custody  on  a
    limited number of occasions.

19. At paragraph [21], he accepted that the  appellant  was  now  pregnant,
    following her release from prison in August 2015.  But he held that the
    paternity of the child was presently unknown.   Given  her  history  of
    deception, he said that he had to consider whether she was using "this"
    as a means of remaining in the UK and that it might not be a reflection
    of a genuine relationship.  The Judge continued in [22]:

         "If the Appellant's marriage to Mr Thiem  is  genuine  there  is  a
         surprising lack of evidence from other people who know them and who
         can  provide  information  about  their  relationship.   Given  the
         history of the case and the observations above, I find the concerns
         raised by the Secretary of  State  about  the  genuineness  of  the
         marriage are entirely justified.  To the extent that  there  is  an
         evidential burden on the appellant to rebut  the  evidence  of  the
         Secretary of State, and that is only a  practical  matter,  I  find
         that she has not shown  that  the  marriage  is  genuine.   On  the
         evidence, and reminding myself that the  burden  of  proof  legally
         rests on the Secretary of State, I find that the  Appellant  cannot
         be said to be genuinely married to Mr Thiem."

 The Reasons for the Initial Refusal of Permission to Appeal

20. On 10 June 2016, a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  gave  his  reasons  for
    refusing to grant the appellant permission to appeal.  He held that the
    grounds were simply  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's  findings  and
    appeared to ignore the appellant's persistent dishonesty.

The Reasons  for  the  Eventual  Grant  of  Permission  to  Appeal  and  for
Extending Time

21. On 7 June 2019 UTJ Perkins decided to extend time  as  the  appellant's
    representatives had tried to serve an application for permission on  27
    June  2016  by  facsimile,  and  reasonably  believed  that  they  had.
    Further, they had made several attempts to  re-serve  the  grounds.  He
    continued: "The decision is more thoughtful than  the  grounds  suggest
    but each of the grounds is arguable.  That said, it might be helpful to
    begin by considering if the correct burden of proof is applied and,  in
    any event, if the decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  public  policy
    grounds should stand."



The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

22. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Whitwell produced documentary evidence of the appellant  having
    obtained a decree nisi in February 2018.  Ms  Fitzsimmons  agreed  that
    the appellant was probably divorced by now, but she submitted that this
    was a matter that needed to be checked.  In any  event,  she  submitted
    that the appeal was not academic as it was of value to the appellant to
    establish that the adverse findings made by  Judge  Parkes  should  not
    stand.

23. She developed the grounds of appeal in support of  the  case  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was vitiated by a material error of
    law.  Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  directed  himself
    appropriately, and that the findings which he made were sustainable  on
    the particular facts.

Discussion

24. Ground 1 relates to the issue of paternity.  It is pleaded that it  was
    materially unfair for the Judge to make a  finding  at  [21]  that  the
    paternity of the baby in utero was in question when this was not put to
    the appellant or her husband; and, in any event, the starting point  on
    the issue of paternity is that a child born  to  a  married  couple  is
    deemed to be the biological child of that couple.

25. The issue was whether the parties had entered into marriage in December
    2013 with the sole or dominant purpose of  facilitating  the  appellant
    remaining in the UK.  Judge Parkes recognised that the appellant  being
    pregnant at the date of the hearing two  years  later  was  capable  of
    supporting the appellant's case that the marriage was genuine from  the
    outset.  But it was open to him not to treat the fact of her  pregnancy
    as establishing this, in the light of the very strong findings of Judge
    Birk, that had been expressly preserved by Judge Eshun, and  which  had
    been reiterated by Judge Parkes earlier in  his  decision.  Given  this
    background, it was not incumbent  on  the  Judge  to  assume  that  the
    appellant had been impregnated by Mr Thiem. But even assuming that this
    was the case, it  did  not  change  the  fact  that  the  circumstances
    surrounding  the  marriage  interview  engendered  strong  grounds  for
    believing that the marriage was a sham at that time, and  that  it  had
    been a sham marriage at its inception.

26. Ground 2 is that the Judge failed to consider material evidence  which,
    it is said, tended to undermine the respondent's case that the marriage
    was entered into without the intention of matrimonial  cohabitation  or
    for the primary purpose of securing leave to remain  in  the  UK.   The
    evidence in  question  is  (a)  the  sponsor's  evidence  and  (b)  the
    documentary evidence of cohabitation and joint financial arrangements.

27. It was  never  in  dispute  that  there  was  documentary  evidence  of
    cohabitation and of joint financial arrangements.  The issue was always
    whether the outward manifestations of a  genuine  marital  relationship
    corresponded to the underlying reality.

28. The Judge did not ignore the sponsor's evidence on this issue.  On  the
    contrary, it was clear from the passages which I have cited earlier  in
    this decision that the Judge engaged with the  sponsor's  evidence  and
    drew attention to the respects in which it was  inconsistent  with  the
    evidence given by the appellant.  It was also  open  to  the  Judge  to
    attach considerable weight to the absence of evidence from other people
    who  knew  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor,  and  who  could  provide
    information about their relationship.

29. Ground 3 is that the Judge gave inadequate reasons for concluding  that
    the appellant had not shown that  her  marriage  was  genuine.   It  is
    pleaded that he reached this conclusion  solely  by  reference  to  the
    appellant's criminality surrounding events of 6 June 2014; and that her
    criminality at this time cannot be a complete answer to the question of
    whether the marriage on 10 December 2013 was one of convenience.

30. The appellant's criminality surrounding  the  events  of  6  June  2014
    provided a very strong evidential basis for inferring that her marriage
    to the sponsor six months earlier was one  of  convenience,  especially
    as, according to the preserved findings of Judge  Birk,  the  appellant
    had in effect increased suspicion (a) by not giving a credible  account
    of her arrangement with Mr Nsangou;  and  (b)  by  failing  to  give  a
    credible explanation as to why she did not simply seek to postpone  the
    interview and/or to explain at the time to the respondent that she  had
    had a row with her husband and he had left her to go to France.

31. It was open to the Judge to take as his  starting  point  the  criminal
    conviction and the sentencing remarks made by His Honour Judge  Wilson.
    It is not correct to characterise the Judge as looking no further,  and
    treating the above matters as his end point.  The Judge also took  into
    account the lack of supporting evidence from third parties as to  there
    being  a  genuine  and  subsisting  marital   relationship,   and   the
    inconsistencies in the oral evidence given by  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor to which I have referred earlier in this decision.

32. Ground 4 is that the Judge misdirected himself  as  to  the  burden  of
    proof in paragraph [22].  I accept that the  Judge  made  an  error  at
    paragraph [2], where he said that  the  burden  of  proof  lay  on  the
    appellant; and that the appellant had to show that the requirements  of
    HC395 were made out on the balance of probabilities.   But  this  error
    was not material. For the Judge correctly directed himself at paragraph
    [5] that the case was governed by the EEA Regulations (and not  by  the
    requirements of HC395).

33. When he revisited the issue  at  [22].  the  Judge  correctly  directed
    himself that the burden of proof legally rested  on  the  Secretary  of
    State.  He did not impermissibly reverse the burden of proof.

34. In Collins Agho -v- SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1198  at  paragraph  [13],
    Underhill LJ said:

         "What it comes down to  as  a  matter  of  principle  is  a  spouse
         establishes a prima face case that he or she is a family member  of
         an EEA national by providing a marriage certificate or the spouse's
         passport; for the legal burden is on the Secretary of State to show
         that any marriage thus proved is a  marriage  of  convenience;  and
         that that burden is not discharged merely by showing a  "reasonable
         suspicion". Of course in the usual way the  evidential  burden  may
         shift to  the  applicant  by  proof  of  facts  which  justify  the
         inference that the marriage is not genuine, and  the  facts  giving
         rise to the inference may include a failure to answer a request for
         documentary proof of the genuineness of the marriage where  grounds
         for suspicion have been raised."

35. This is a case where the respondent had proved  facts  which  justified
    the inference that the marriage was not genuine. Thus,  the  evidential
    burden had shifted to the  appellant,  albeit  that  the  legal  burden
    remained on the respondent throughout.  The Judge's  self-direction  in
    paragraph [22] is in line with the  guidance  given  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Agho, which the Judge cited earlier in his decision.

36. Ground 5 relates to the Judge's finding under Regulation 20(1)  of  the
    regulations 2006.  It is pleaded that the Judge  erred  in  failing  to
    consider whether the refusal of a residence card complied with all  the
    relevant requirements of Regulation 21(5), including the requirement at
    sub-paragraph (c) that the personal conduct  of  the  person  concerned
    must represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.

37. On a careful reading of the RFRL, the  ground  on  which  the  relevant
    decision was said to satisfy Regulation 21(5)(c) was that the appellant
    was fraudulently persisting in her claim that her marriage to  the  EEA
    national sponsor was genuine, when a Judge had already deemed that  the
    marriage was one of convenience.  In  short,  the  respondent  was  not
    contending that Regulation 20 should apply if in fact the marriage  was
    found not to be  one  of  convenience.   Accordingly,  I  find  in  the
    appellant's favour on Ground  5.   The  Judge  erred  in  finding  that
    Regulation 20 applied in the  alternative.   The  Judge  did  not  give
    adequate reasons for finding that the decision complied with Regulation
    21 if (contrary to his  primary  finding)  the  marriage  was  genuine.
    However, the Judge's error is not material as  he  made  a  sustainable
    finding that the marriage was one of convenience.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 4 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
