
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA123912015;
IA134812015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham   |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8th April 2016                        |On 14th June 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          1) mr Elino John Bernardo
                          2) MS ELINO JOHN BERNARDO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Reid (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Somal, promulgated on 24th August 2015, following  a  hearing  at
    Stoke-on-Trent on 11th August 2015.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The first Appellant, who is the  principal  Appellant,  is  a  male,  a
    citizen of the  Philippines,  who  applied  for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of his right to reside in the UK under European  Community
    Law.  The second Appellant, who is a female, is his wife,  and  she  is
    his dependent. By a decision dated 28th March 2015, the application  of
    the principal appellant (hereafter "the Appellant") was rejected.

 3. The Appellant's  claim  is  that  the  Sponsor,  Mrs  Erlinda  Bernardo
    Marcano, is a British citizen, and she is her aunt and he and  she  has
    exercised treaty rights, by working in Ireland, as a  British  citizen,
    and on that basis, he is entitled to join  her  as  a  extended  family
    member of hers.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge referred to the  applicable  European  Law  and  stated  that
    Regulation 7 makes it plain that a family member of an EEA national  is
    a spouse, or civil partner, and a direct descendant of his, his  spouse
    or civil partner, who is under 21.  It also includes a dependent direct
    relative in the ascending line or an extended  family  member  who  has
    been issued with an  EEA  family  permit  registration  certificate  or
    business card.  In this case, the  sponsoring  relative  had  not  been
    issued with a residence card.

 5. The judge went on to hold that, "I find the  Appellant  does  not  have
    rights through the aunt and could never have met the definition  of  an
    extended family member, as his aunt is a British citizen and not an EEA
    national" (see paragraph 9).

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge erred  in  law  because
    the application was under the "Surinder  Singh  youth  route"  and  the
    British citizen should have been treated as an EEA national.

 7. On 5th January 2016, permission to appeal was granted.

 8. On 7th January 2016, a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect  that
    the Appellants are  at  most  extended  family  members  of  a  British
    national who had purportedly been  exercising  treaty  rights  and  the
    Grounds of  Appeal  do  not  annunciate  how  the  requirement  of  the
    Regulations had been met.

Submissions

 9. At the  hearing  before  me,  Ms  Reid,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, submitted that she had had the opportunity of speaking  with
    Mr  Diwnycz and the two of them were agreed  that  there  should  be  a
    finding of an error of law and then a remaking of the decision by  this
    Tribunal for the following reasons.  First, the judge  at  paragraph  9
    stated that, "I find the Appellant does not  have  rights  through  the
    aunt ...", but this is plainly wrong.  Rights did exist under the aunt.
     Under Regulation 9 allowances specifically made for British  citizens,
    working abroad to be treated as EEA nationals.  Therefore, the  judge's
    conclusion was the error of law.   Second,  however,  in  remaking  the
    decision, it must be the case that the Appellant cannot succeed because
    the Appellant is not a directed descending  family  member  but  is  an
    extended family member.  Mr  Diwnycz agreed.

Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are  quite
    simply that the judge was wrong to have concluded  that,  "I  find  the
    Appellant does not  have  rights  through  the  aunt  .....".   British
    citizens working abroad  are  to  be  given  the  same  status  as  EEA
    nationals because they are availing themselves of EEA rights.

Re-Making the Decision

11. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before her, and the submission that I have
    heard today.  I am dismissing this appeal because the Appellant  cannot
    succeed as he is an extended family member of an EEA national  who  did
    not hold a residence card.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I re-made the decision as follows.  The appeal  of
    both Appellants is dismissed.

13. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                           13th June 2016
