
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12780/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th December 2013                            |On 20th December 2013      |
|Extempore Judgment                              |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                                Morshed Alam
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hasan ( Universal Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Ong (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  the  Appellant  Mr  Morshed
    Alam who is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  27th  November  1991.   He
    came to the UK initially in June 2012 with  a  visa  valid  until  29th
    September 2013 with the aim of studying.  He was to study at level 5 at
    Bedford College.  However, there were difficulties with that college in
    that the teaching was inadequate, although there is  evidence  that  he
    attended. Therefore he ceased studying at Bedford  College  and  sought
    leave to remain in the same category as a student on 10th  April  2013,
    this time wishing to study at Waltham  Forest  College.   He  made  the
    application therefore as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  and  with  it  he
    submitted a CAS issued by Waltham Forest College.

 2. The Secretary of State refused the  application  on  10th  April  2013,
    citing as a reason for doing  so  that  the  30  points  claimed  under
    Appendix  A  for  the  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies   was
    unacceptable, it indicated that the previous visa had  been  issued  to
    study at level 5 and the current application related to study at  level
    4, and the Secretary of State in the refusal specifically says this:

         "You have claimed 30 points under Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration
         Rules for a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies  (CAS)  assigned
         by Waltham Forest College.  Your CAS  states  that  you  intend  to
         study a BTEC Higher National Certificate in business course at  NQF
         level 4, but you were previously issued leave to study on a diploma
         in business and administrative management course at  NQF/QCF  level
         5.  As you are intending to study a course at a lower level to  the
         course you were previously issued leave to study, your course  does
         not represent academic progression from your previous studies.   It
         has therefore been decided that you have not met  the  requirements
         and no points have been awarded for your CAS."

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross heard the case at Hatton Cross  on  25th
    September 2013.  On behalf of the Appellant, the judge was referred  to
    the Secretary of State's guidance in relation to progression in studies
    and was specifically referred to paragraph 436 of that  guidance  which
    states:

         "Sometimes the further study may be at a lower level, but we expect
         these cases to be rare.  Again, you must justify this on  the  CAS.
         We will closely monitor the situation."

 4. It can be seen from that policy that the Secretary of  State  does  not
    rule out the possibility of someone studying at a lower level  than  he
    has previously.  In deciding that matter the Judge has simply said that
    this is not the kind of case that he  thinks  is  rare  and  the  judge
    indicates that he would expect that to be somebody studying  a  further
    degree which leads to a more prestigious qualification such as medicine
    or a professional qualification which is not the case  here.   That  it
    seems to me is speculation on the part of the judge  and  also  ignores
    what it seems to me is an error on the part of the Secretary  of  State
    in considering the application.

 5. The Secretary of State has failed to  take  into  account  at  all  the
    policy that on occasions study can be at a lower level.  She  also  has
    failed to take into account the explanation contained in the CAS as  to
    why this study is at a lower level.  The  CAS  specifically  states  as
    explanation:

         "Student came to the UK to study at IIM Bedford  College  where  he
         was offered to study the IAM diploma in business and administrative
         management QCF level 5.  The student was not happy with the quality
         of teaching provided by this college and therefore applied  to  us.
         Based on his academic qualifications we were only able to offer him
         a place on the HNC business level 4.  We have  a  letter  from  the
         previous college confirming the student studied there and had above
         satisfactory attendance."

 6. It may be, of course I do not know, that this is exactly  the  sort  of
    situation where the Secretary of State would allow someone to  continue
    studies at a lower level.  It is not the case  of  a  student  who  has
    completed one course at one level  and  wants  to  study  a  completely
    different course at the same or a lower level.   The  student  in  this
    case was partway through a course which was highly  unsatisfactory  and
    which clearly he was struggling with, and so is now seeking to study at
    an appropriate level for him.  Whether or not that is acceptable is not
    a matter for me, it is a matter for the Secretary of State  because  it
    is her discretion contained in her guidance.  However, it is  incumbent
    on the Secretary of State to follow her own guidance  and  to  consider
    that explanation.

 7. The other difficulty in the refusal is in relation to the refusal under
    Appendix C which relates  to  funds  and  maintenance.   The  Appellant
    relies upon funds provided by his father.  In that part of the  refusal
    the Secretary of State says:

         "You have  provided  evidence  of  financial  sponsorship  from  Md
         Mofizur Rahman who is stated to be your father.  However, you  have
         provided no evidence  of  relationship  to  this  person.   It  has
         therefore been decided that you have not met  the  requirements  as
         specified within the Immigration Rules  and  no  points  have  been
         awarded for maintenance (funds)."

 8. There is evidence with the application that the Appellant's  father  is
    the person named because he  is  named  on  the  Appellant's  passport.
    There was also a  sworn  affidavit  or  notarised  declaration  by  the
    father.  So there was evidence of who the Appellant's father  was,  but
    unfortunately for him that does not comply with Appendix C in the Rules
    as to the documentation which has to  be  provided.   What  has  to  be
    provided is contained in paragraph 13B of Appendix C, which states that
    an applicant has to provide either his birth  certificate  showing  the
    names of his parents or a certificate of adoption or a  court  document
    naming his legal guardian.  He did not provide any of those  documents.



 9. However, that then brings us onto the evidential flexibility policy and
    Rodriguez (Flexibility Policy) [2013] UKUT 00042 (IAC) and  whether  or
    not the Secretary of State under those circumstances should have  asked
    the Appellant to produce the required documentation.  It is clear  that
    she is only required to do so if there is a reasonable expectation that
    the document exists, and in this case clearly there was  because  there
    were two separate documents indicating the name  of  his  father.   The
    Secretary of State did not make that enquiry and Ms Ong  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State before me candidly accepted that the case worker
    dealing with it would not make that enquiry because  they  had  already
    decided to refuse it because of the CAS.

10. On that basis the First-tier Tribunal Judge in failing to  take  either
    of those matters into account has made an error of law.  It seems to me
    that the original Decision by the Secretary of State  was  unlawful  by
    reason of her failing to take into account her own policy made worse by
    also failing to apply the evidential flexibility policy.

11. For those reasons I set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I remake the decision and allow the appeal to the  limited
    extent that it is remitted to the Secretary of State to make  a  lawful
    Decision.






Signed                              Date 6th December 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
