

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)   Appeal Number: IA/12720/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Magistrates Court |                   Decision and Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                                 |
|On 25 January 2016                    |                   On 4 February 2016       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                              MRS OLHA STOLBOVA
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Barret of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine born on 19  December  1958  appeals
   against the decision of the respondent dated 24  February  2014  refusing
   his application for indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
   pursuant to Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  in
   respect of her family and private life.


2. At the hearing it was accepted by  both  parties  that  four  years  have
   passed since the  appeal  was  heard  and  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
   Tribunal on the bases that the appellant's  relationship  with  Mr  Brian
   Christopher Ford was not genuine and subsisting. The only  issue  in  the
   appeal before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and upon which the success of
   this appeal rested was whether the relationship between the appellant and
   Mr Ford is a genuine and subsisting relationship. It was  submitted  that
   given the passage of time, there is updated evidence available which  can
   shed light on the appellant's and Mr Ford's  current  circumstances.  The
   appellant should be given an opportunity to provide this evidence  as  to
   her current relationship with Mr Ford.


3. The First-tier Tribunal found that Mr Ford had genuine  feelings  towards
   the appellant but did not find  that  the  appellant  reciprocated  these
   feelings. Therefore, it is important, given the passage of time, that the
   updated evidence be considered by the First-tier  and  findings  of  fact
   made.



4. I therefore under Practice Direction 17 remit the appeal  to  the  First-
   tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo on the first available date.



DECISION



   The appeal is remitted to first-tier Tribunal.


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                          Dated the 30th day of January 2016
Mrs S Chana









