
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12660/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 October 2016                            |On 26 January 2017            |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                          MONISOLA OLUTOYIN OKULAJA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance and not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal ("FtT")

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 19 October  1979.  On  1
    April 2014 she made an application for a residence card as confirmation
    of a right of residence  as  the  family  member  (spouse)  of  an  EEA
    national, a Portuguese citizen.  That  application  was  refused  in  a
    decision dated 12 March 2015.

 3. The appellant's appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wyman
    ("the FtJ") on 11  April  2016.   She  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the   EEA
    Regulations") on the basis that she was satisfied that the appellant is
    in a durable relationship with her partner and  thus  qualified  as  an
    extended family member under reg 8 of the EEA Regulations.  The  reason
    that she allowed  the  appeal  on  that  basis  only  was  because  she
    concluded that the appellant's proxy marriage was not a valid marriage.

 4. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  upon  which  permission  to
    appeal was granted were that the  FtJ  had  erred  in  not  making  any
    findings in terms of whether the sponsor was a 'qualified  person'  and
    therefore exercising Treaty rights, and secondly in terms  of  the  FtJ
    having apparently allowed the appeal outright,  when  it  was  for  the
    respondent to consider the  exercise  of  her  discretion  to  grant  a
    residence card (see  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -  meaning)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT
    00340(IAC)).

 5. The appeal came before me on the above date but by letters dated 15 and
    17 October 2016 the appellant's solicitors requested that the appeal to
    be dealt with 'on  the  papers'.  However,  whilst  I  noted  the  very
    regrettable circumstances in which the appellant did not feel  able  to
    attend the hearing, I nevertheless considered that I should proceed  in
    the appellant's absence pursuant to rule 38 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. I took into account  that  the  respondent
    was represented and ready to proceed, as well  as  the  fact  that  the
    request for the matter to be dealt with on the papers was only received
    by the Tribunal on the day of the hearing. Furthermore, even though the
    appellant was unable to attend, no explanation was offered  as  to  why
    the appellant's representatives did not attend. It may  be  that  there
    was an explanation, but none was offered.

 6. At the hearing Ms Isherwood relied on the grounds and made some limited
    submissions as to the evidence of employment.  However,  there  was  no
    appellant's bundle on the Tribunal's file. Furthermore,  I  raised  the
    question of the effect of the decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of  Appeal)
    [2016]  UKUT  00411  (IAC).  In  the  circumstances,  I  considered  it
    appropriate to issue directions to  the  parties  before  deciding  the
    appeal. Those directions, in summary, required written submissions from
    the parties in relation to the Sala point, in relation to the sponsor's
    employment, and for service of an appellant's bundle.

 7. In due course submissions were received from both parties, as  well  as
    an appellant's bundle which had been before the FtJ.

 8. In Sala it was decided that there  is  no  statutory  right  of  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State not to grant a residence
    card to a person claiming to be an extended family member. The parallel
    with the appeal before me is immediately obvious. The FtJ  allowed  the
    appeal on a basis which, according to Sala, there would otherwise  have
    been no right of appeal.

 9. In the written submissions sent  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  it  is
    contended, in summary, that Sala is not binding on me, and that it  was
    in any event wrongly decided. With reference to the EEA Regulations, in
    particular regs 2 and 26, and Article 31 of Directive 2004/38/EC  ("the
    Citizens Directive") as well as domestic and European  authorities,  it
    is submitted that the appellant did/would have had, a right  of  appeal
    against a refusal to issue her with a residence card as a person  in  a
    durable  relationship.  Reference  is  also  made  to  the  documentary
    evidence  in  support  of  the  contention  that  there  was   evidence
    establishing the exercise by the sponsor of Treaty rights.

10.  Ms  Isherwood's  submissions  contend  to   the   contrary,   although
    recognising that Sala was a case in which the application  and  refusal
    had been in relation to a person claiming  'only'  to  be  an  extended
    family member as a person in a durable relationship, and not  a  family
    member as a spouse.

11. However, the Tribunal in Sala considered both  the  Citizens  Directive
    and all relevant aspects of the EEA Regulations, including reg  26.  It
    considered various authorities. I cannot see that the cases  relied  on
    in support of the appellant's submissions in this  appeal  support  the
    contention that Sala was wrongly decided.

12. The decision in Sala seems to me to be clear. It was a  decision  taken
    by a senior panel of the Upper Tribunal, including the  Vice-President.
    I adopt and apply the reasoning  in  Sala  to  the  appeal  before  me.
    Although this appellant applied for a residence card as a family member
    and the FtJ therefore had jurisdiction to hear the appeal, she  had  no
    jurisdiction to allow the appeal on a basis in  respect  of  which  the
    appellant had no right of appeal to the Tribunal. It is not  argued  on
    behalf of the appellant, nor could it be, that because she had a  right
    of appeal on the basis upon which she advanced it, she could succeed on
    a basis upon which she would not have had a right of appeal initially.

13. I am satisfied that the FtJ lacked jurisdiction  to  hear  the  appeal.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that the FtJ erred in law  in  hearing  the
    appeal at all, and her decision is set aside. Of course, the FtJ  could
    not have been expected to have considered the jurisdiction point, since
    the guidance in Sala was not available to her at the time she heard the
    appeal.

14. In the circumstances, it is not necessary to resolve  the  respondent's
    grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal in terms of the  employment  of
    the appellant's partner, or  in  terms  of  the  decision  of  the  FtJ
    seemingly to have allowed the appeal 'outright'.

    Decision

    The First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal  and  it
    erred in law in doing so.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowing the appeal is set aside and a decision substituted that  there
    was no valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 25/01/17
