
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/12598/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                           |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12 April 2016                         |  On 29 April 2016                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              HELEN SOLA SMITH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. B. Adewusi, Crown and Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fowell, promulgated on 11 June 2015, in which
    he allowed Miss.  Smith's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to grant leave to remain on the basis of private and
    family life.




 2. For the purposes of this appeal I will refer to the Secretary of  State
    as the Respondent, and to Miss.  Smith  as  the  Appellant,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "In my assessment at least the following  strands  of  the  grounds  on
    which the respondent seeks permission to appeal are arguable:


     - it is arguable that the judge had no proper basis for  finding  that
       the  appellant  would  face   very   significant   difficulties   in
       integrating on her return to her country  of  nationality  (Nigeria)
       (as per the respondent's paragraphs 3 to 6); and


     - it is arguable that the judge's article 8 reasoning  is  flawed  due
       to, amongst other things, a lack of attention to the factors set out
       in Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (as
       per the respondent's paragraphs 7 to 9)."


 4. The Appellant did not attend the hearing.   I  heard  oral  submissions
    from both representatives, following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


 5. Mr. McVeety submitted that when the judge had dealt  with  the  appeal,
    the test under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) was  whether  there  were  "very
    significant obstacles" to the  Appellant's  integration  on  return  to
    Nigeria.  However this wording only appeared once in  the  decision  at
    paragraph [33].  I was referred to paragraphs [30] and [31]  where  the
    judge referred to whether or not the Appellant had any ties in Nigeria.
     He submitted that there was no reference to the Appellant's ability to
    reintegrate into society in Nigeria.


 6. I was referred to paragraph [30] where the judge had raised doubts over
    the Appellant's credibility and  had  referred  to  the  issue  of  her
    mother's death in this regard.  If the Appellant's mother had not died,
    she had ties to Nigeria.  The case had  been  decided  on  the  papers.
    While the case was unsuited to a decision on the papers, given that  it
    was a paper case, it was also unsuited to a  credibility  finding.   He
    submitted that there were major discrepancies  in  the  evidence.   The
    judge had not accepted that the Appellant's mother was dead, and if the
    Appellant had family in Nigeria, they would be able to  assist  her  on
    her return.


 7. I was referred to paragraph [32].  Mr. McVeety submitted that it was an
    error to find that the "picture of a resourceful  and  skilled  mother"
    was at odds with the social services report due to the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had no access to public funds.  This was due to the fact that
    the Appellant was here illegally and  therefore  could  not  work.   He
    asked whether the judge was  in  fact  suggesting  that  the  Appellant
    should have worked illegally.


 8. I was referred to paragraph [44] where the judge stated that  too  much
    had been made of the Appellant's status as an overstayer.  Mr.  McVeety
    submitted that this should be a starting point  as  the  Appellant  had
    illegal use of UK resources.  The fact that she was an  overstayer  had
    to weigh heavily in the balance.


 9. He submitted that there was no lower standard of proof in relation to a
    finding of trafficking.  Given that the discrepancies  referred  to  in
    paragraphs [27] and [30] had not been addressed, it was an error of law
    to accept that the Appellant had been  trafficked.   There  were  major
    credibility issues.

10. I was referred to paragraph [47] where the judge  found  that,  in  the
    event that he needed to consider Article 8  outside  the  rules,  there
    would not be any compelling circumstances in the  Appellant's  case  to
    allow him to go outside the provisions of the immigration rules.  Given
    that the judge had found that there would be very significant obstacles
    to the Appellant's  integration  into  Nigeria,  it  was  difficult  to
    understand why he found that there were  no  compelling  circumstances.
    The judge had not allowed  the  appeal  under  Article  8  outside  the
    immigration rules, but  the  finding  that  there  were  no  compelling
    circumstances to go outside the rules undermined the finding that there
    were very significant obstacles to the Appellant's  reintegration  into
    Nigeria.  The decision was not clear.


11. Mr. Adewusi submitted that in paragraph [45] there was a  reference  to
    the Appellant's child who was over eight years old.  That was  why  the
    appeal had been allowed.  He submitted that paragraph [45] covered  the
    consideration under section 55 which had been addressed in the skeleton
    argument before the First-tier Tribunal.


12. He submitted that the wrong test had not been applied  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  The case had been argued before the First-tier Tribunal
    on the basis that the Appellant's daughter met "the seven  year  rule".
    The caselaw pointed in the direction of allowing  the  appeal.   I  was
    referred to the case of PD and others (Article  8  -  conjoined  family
    life claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC).   He submitted that the
    decision had been allowed by reference to the Appellant's child.


13. Mr. McVeety pointed out that paragraph [45]  started  with  the  phrase
    "This may be to enter into speculation..." indicating that  the  appeal
    had not been allowed under paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.  The decision
    did not reflect the fact that the Appellant had a child who  was  seven
    years old, and it had not been allowed on this basis.  There  had  been
    no consideration of the Appellant's child's  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   In  paragraph  [45]  it  was  clear  that  the   judge   was
    speculating.   There  had  been  no  discussion  of   the   Appellant's
    daughter's circumstances under paragraph EX.1,  and  no  discussion  of
    whether it was reasonable to expect her to leave  the  United  Kingdom.
    The Appellant's appeal had been allowed under paragraph 276ADE.


Error of law


14. The decision is somewhat unclear, but I find that the judge allowed the
    appeal under paragraph  276ADE  of  the  immigration  rules.   This  is
    apparent from paragraph [33], which states:


    "In  all  the  circumstances  therefore  I  find  on  the  balance   of
    probabilities that there will be  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    return and so the refusal of  her  application  under  the  Immigration
    Rules was not in accordance with the law."


15. It is also clear from the fee award where the judge states:


    "The application ought to have been granted under paragraph  276ADE  on
    the information available to the decision maker".


16. I find that the judge did not allow the appeal under paragraph EX.1  of
    Appendix FM of the immigration rules with reference to the  Appellant's
    daughter.  In paragraph [34] the judge states:


    "As noted above, P meets the requirements of the immigration  rules  in
    her own right, subject to the question of whether it is unreasonable to
    expect her to go to Nigeria."


    However, there is no discussion of whether or not it is  reasonable  to
    expect the Appellant's daughter to return to  Nigeria.   There  are  no
    reasons given for why it would not be reasonable for her to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  There is no full consideration of  her  position  and,
    while the judge refers to the factors identified in paragraph  [35]  of
    EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874,  there  is  no  consideration  of
    these factors.


17. Mr. Adewusi relied on the case of PD and others (Article 8 -  conjoined
    family life claims).  This case states in the headnote:


    "In considering the conjoined Article 8 ECHR claims of multiple  family
    members decision-makers should first apply  the  Immigration  Rules  to
    each individual applicant and, if appropriate, then consider Article  8
    outside  the  Rules.  This   exercise   will   typically   entail   the
    consideration and determination of all claims jointly, so as to  ensure
    that all material facts and considerations are taken  into  account  in
    each case."


    However, paragraph [45],  to  which  Mr.  Adewusi  referred,  does  not
    contain such an assessment of "all material facts and  considerations",
    and it is by no means clear that they have been taken into account.


18. The judge does not allow the appeal under paragraph EX.1  in  paragraph
    [45].  This states:


    "Accordingly, if it was necessary to decide the point,  I  should  find
    that it was not it was not (sic) reasonable for Precious to  leave  the
    UK, and hence for that reason also, Mrs  Smith  would  be  entitled  to
    remain, on the basis that she  satisfies  the  requirements  under  the
    Immigration Rules (section EX.1) for leave to remain  as  a  parent  of
    Precious."


19. The judge states that he is  not  deciding  the  point  as  it  is  not
    necessary given that he has already allowed the appeal under  paragraph
    276ADE.  Contrary  to  the  Respondent's  grounds  of  appeal,  and  as
    accepted by Mr. McVeety, neither did the judge allow the  appeal  under
    Article 8 outside the immigration rules.  This is clear from  paragraph
    [46], and from the notice of decision.


20. Having allowed the appeal under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi),  I  find  that
    the judge made no clear  findings  as  to  why  there  would  be  "very
    significant obstacles" to the  Appellant's  return  as  required  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).   The  only  reference  to  "very  significant
    obstacles" is found in paragraph [33], which is the final paragraph  of
    the findings relating to paragraph 276ADE.  In paragraphs [30] and [31]
    the judge refers to the fact that the Appellant has no ties,  but  this
    is not the test.  I find that there is no proper consideration  of  why
    there  would  be  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the   Appellant's
    integration, and no clear reasons given for why the Appellant meets the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  I find that this  amounts  to
    an error of law.


21. Further, in relation to the finding that the Appellant has no ties, the
    judge finds in  paragraph  [30]  that  there  are  questions  over  the
    Appellant's credibility.  He states:


    "It may well be that certain aspects of  her  account  has  (sic)  been
    exaggerated in support of her claim, such as her  mother's  death  (and
    hence  her  son's  placement  in  an  orphanage)  and  the  period   of
    homelessness before she left Nigeria - downplaying what  may  otherwise
    have been a more calculated attempt to enter the  UK  illegally  -  but
    even on the basis of the details given to social  services  it  appears
    likely that there would be no real ties or support available to her  in
    Nigeria."


22. This is further to  his  finding  in  paragraph  [27]  that  there  are
    discrepancies by reference to the  report  of  the  assessment  of  the
    children carried out by social services.  "It also notes that  she  has
    another child who lives in Nigeria with his maternal grandmother,  i.e.
    the appellant's mother."


23. Given that it appears that the judge has not accepted  the  Appellant's
    account of her mother's death,  and  given  that  the  social  services
    assessment report notes that the Appellant has a  child  who  lives  in
    Nigeria with the Appellant's mother, it is difficult  to  see  how  the
    judge has come to the finding that the Appellant has no  real  ties  in
    Nigeria.  I find that this failure to give clear and  adequate  reasons
    is an error of law.


24. While it may be  that  the  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal submitted that the appeal should be allowed on  the  basis  of
    the Appellant's daughter's residence in the United Kingdom,  the  judge
    does not allow the appeal on the basis of the Appellant's position as a
    parent of a qualifying child.  As I have  stated  above,  there  is  no
    assessment of the Appellant's daughter's circumstances, and there is no
    consideration of whether or not it  is  reasonable  to  expect  her  to
    return to Nigeria.  This would be necessary in order for the appeal  to
    be allowed under paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix  FM.   There  is  no  such
    consideration.  It is by no means clear  from  this  decision  that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect the Appellant's daughter to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.


25. It is unfortunate that the Appellant elected for the appeal to be heard
    on the papers, as it is not a case suited to paper consideration.   The
    judge found that there were inconsistencies in the evidence before him.
     Having found that these inconsistencies related to issues such as  the
    Appellant's family in Nigeria, I find  that  the  judge  did  not  give
    adequate reasons for why he found that the Appellant  had  no  ties  in
    Nigeria.


26. It was accepted by Mr. McVeety that the appeal  had  not  been  allowed
    under Article 8 outside the immigration rules.  The judge has  referred
    to section 117B of the 2002 Act, factors to be considered when carrying
    out an assessment of Article 8 outside the immigration rules,  but  the
    consideration of these factors takes place after the  judge  has  found
    that the Appellant's appeal should be allowed  under  paragraph  276ADE
    [33].   When considering Article 8 in paragraph [47], the  judge  finds
    that there were no compelling circumstances to allow him to go  outside
    of the immigration rules, which puts into  question  his  finding  that
    there  would  be  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the   Appellant's
    integration into Nigeria.


27. I find that the decision involves the making of a material error of law
    in the judge's failure to give clear and adequate reasons as to why the
    Appellant would face very significant obstacles to her reintegration on
    return to Nigeria, as required by paragraph 276ADE(1)(a).




28. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I have already noted above, as was  submitted  by
    Mr. McVeety, that this case was unsuited to a paper hearing  given  the
    issues that it involves.  Given the nature  and  extent  of  the  fact-
    finding necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard
    to the overriding objective, I find that it  is  appropriate  to  remit
    this case to the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The decision involves the making of a material error of law  and  I  set  it
aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


Signed                                  Date 27 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

