

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/12371/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 7 July 2017                          |On: 17 July 2017                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                              MR AKHTAR HUSSAIN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Rehman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of India born  on  12  May  1983.  He  appeals
   against the decision of the respondent dated 16 April 2015  refusing  his
   application for leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1
   (entrepreneur) Migrant under paragraph 245 DD (b) of Appendix  A  of  the
   Immigration Rules.


2. This is the second time that the appellant has  complained  that  he  did
   not get an oral hearing. The first time  this  happened,  Upper  Tribunal
   Judge Pinkerton set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  dated  6
   December 2016 because there had been a procedural irregularity and stated
   that it was in the interests of justice to set it aside and he  explained
   the appellant's request for an oral hearing was sent on 15 December  2015
   although subsequently the  appellant  solicitors  requested  by  a  faxed
   letter of 10 December 2015 that the appeal be decided on the  papers  and
   at the same time sought further time to provide evidence  in  support  of
   the appeal.


3. Judge Pinkerton, stated that the Judge evidently was  not  aware  of  the
   dual request made by the appellant solicitors, for a paper hearing and at
   the same time to file evidence. Indeed, it  appeared  from  the  decision
   that the Judge considered the  appellant's  absence  prejudicial  to  his
   appeal. A notice of  the  upper  Tribunal's  decision  was  sent  to  the
   appellant's home address that the Upper Tribunal informing him that there
   was an error of law and his appeal had been remitted  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal for a fresh paper determination. He was also  informed  that  he
   must send in any written evidence and submissions to the Tribunal and the
   respondent by 11 October 2016. No further evidence was received  and  the
   First-tier Tribunal proceeded with the  appeal  and  made  his  decision,
   against which he appealed.


4. Permission to appeal against the decision of  first-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Coll was granted by first-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  on  23  May  2017
   stating that the appellant did not attend the hearing having requested  a
   paper hearing of the  appeal.  The  grounds  of  appeal  state  that  the
   appellant did not request a paper hearing and had not received  a  letter
   dated 3 August 2016 giving him the hearing date  or  directions  for  the
   service of evidence. This case has  previously  been  considered  on  the
   papers but was set aside on the appellant's own  application.  He  stated
   that his previous solicitors had not  sought  a  paper  hearing  but  has
   sought time for the service of evidence. However, the fact that  he  sent
   with that application clearly indicated an application for the case to be
   considered on the papers. The decision setting aside the  first  disposal
   of this appeal was dated 3 June 2016 and clearly referred  to  the  paper
   hearing request. This was sent to the  appellant  on  12  July  2016  and
   clearly indicated that the original decision had been set aside and would
   be remade and a further notice followed on 31 August 2016.


5. The Judge continued  that  the  fact  that  the  appellant  sought  paper
   disposal is clearly indicated by the representatives fax of  10  December
   2015. The appellant does not complain that he did not get the  set  aside
   notice and therefore would have known from that what  the  position  was.
   That said he had paid for a paper hearing and was entitled to one without
   an extra fee although he would clearly have been aware that  there  would
   be further  hearing  and  he  had  the  opportunity  to  present  further
   evidence. It is far from clear that the appellant will succeed but  there
   are a number of issues that arise and on that basis permission to  appeal
   was granted.


6. At the hearing, the appellant said that he had paid for an  oral  hearing
   and he was entitled to one. At the hearing, the appellant  said  that  he
   has changed his home address which is why he did not receive the  notice.
   However, the appellant did not notify the Home Office of  his  change  of
   address. He blames the change of address for not receiving the notice  of
   hearing of his appeal. While there have been administrative  errors,  the
   appellant has contributed to the confusion  by  not  notifying  the  Home
   Office of his change of address.


7. Be that as it may, out of an abundance of caution and fairness,  I  remit
   the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  considered  de  novo.  I
   therefore under Practice Direction 17 remit the appeal to the  First-tier
   Tribunal for a hearing on the first available date.





8. I further direct that the appellant file his evidence  within  two  weeks
   of the hearing date. The respondent has a week to file any  response.  It
   is imperative that the hearing notice is sent to the appellant at his new
   address, which is indicated on the file. I have also asked the  appellant
   to remain in contact with the Home Office in respect of his appeal.   The
   appellant requires an oral hearing and will appear before the  First-tier
   Tribunal on the next hearing date.





      DECISION



   The appeal is remitted to First-tier Tribunal.


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                             Dated the 12th day of July 2017
Mrs S Chana











