
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12954/2012
     IA/12957/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On the papers                                 |On 2 August 2013             |
|On 30 July 2013                               |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          FATIMO OLUWAKUKOLA AYOOLA
                            GANIYU OLUMIDE AYOOLA

                                                                 Respondents



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Adio.   For  ease  of  reference,  throughout  this
    determination I shall refer to Mr and Mrs Ayoola, who were the original
    appellants, as "the claimants" and to the Secretary of State,  who  was
    the original respondent, as "the Secretary of State".

 2.  Judge  Adio  had  allowed  the  appeals  of  the   claimants   against
    simultaneous decisions refusing to vary their leave to  remain  and  to
    remove them by way of directions under Section 47 of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 to the extent that he found that  these
    decisions were not in accordance  with  the  law.  The  appeal  of  the
    claimants' daughter, which was also before him, was  dismissed  on  the
    basis that she did not have a valid right of appeal. Her appeal is  not
    now before this Tribunal.

 3. The Secretary of State  submits  in  the  grounds  in  support  of  the
    application for permission to appeal that in  accordance  with  current
    jurisprudence, even though the Section 47 removal decision was  not  in
    accordance with the law, the judge ought to have considered the  appeal
    against the substantive decision on the merits.

 4. In my "Directions  and  Memorandum  to  Parties",  which  is  dated  15
    November 2012, relying on the decisions of this Tribunal in Ahmadi  and
    the Court of Appeal in Patel, I set out my preliminary view that  Judge
    Adio's decision ought to be set aside, and that the appeal  ought  then
    to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.

 5. While I accepted that the decision to remove the claimant under Section
    47 was made other than in accordance  with  the  law,  I  expressed  my
    preliminary view that the First-tier Tribunal had made an  error  on  a
    point of law when finding that the Secretary of State's entire decision
    (including the substantive decision) was made other than in  accordance
    with the law.

 6. I invited the parties to make further submissions, in relation  to  the
    approach  I intended out take, that is that the  appeals  ought  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  determined  afresh,  by  no
    later than 14 days after the directions were sent out. I also indicated
    that any party failing to provide such a response would be  treated  as
    having given consent to the Tribunal taking this approach.

 7. Regrettably, the files were then mislaid, but they are now  before  me.
    It appears that there has been no further response by or on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State, and although substantial submissions have  been
    received on behalf of the claimants with regard to the merits of  their
    substantive appeal, it is not suggested within  these submissions  that
    these appeals should not now be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    rehearing.

 8. Accordingly, having regard to paragraph 7 of  the  Practice  Statements
    for the Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  I
    consider that the effect  of  Judge  Adio's  failure  to  consider  the
    substantive appeal on the merits, which I find was a material error  of
    law, was such that the claimants have been deprived of a fair  hearing,
    in that the merits of their appeal have not been considered at all.   I
    consider further, especially in light of the  submissions  subsequently
    received on behalf of the claimants, that the nature and extent of  the
    judicial fact finding which will now be necessary in  order  for  their
    appeals to be properly determined are such that, having regard  to  the
    overriding objective, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
    tier Tribunal, which I shall order.

Decision

I  set  aside  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Adio  as
containing a material error of law.

I direct that this appeal now be remitted for rehearing  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, sitting at Hatton Cross, to be put before  any  judge  other  than
First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio.

I direct further that Judge Adio's finding that  the  Secretary  of  State's
decision to remove the claimants by way of directions  pursuant  to  Section
47  fo  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006  was  not  in
accordance with the law, shall stand.




Signed                                  Date: 30 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
