

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12189/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 5 November 2014                   |On 24 November 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                 Manirambona
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Salmon, Bradford Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs R. Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant who was born on 22 May 1977 is a citizen of  Burundi.
         She appeals against the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Turnock following a hearing at Bradford on 19 June 2014 in which he
         dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
         respondent refusing  to  grant  her  a  Derivative  Residence  Card
         pursuant to the provisions of Reg. 15A of the Immigration (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (2006 No  1003),  as  amended.  Her
         application was refused by the respondent in a decision made on  25
         February 2014.


      2.  The  making  of  the  application   arose   from   the   following
         circumstances, described as 'complex' by the Judge.  The  appellant
         was married to her husband, also a national of Burundi who had been
         recognised in the United Kingdom as a refugee on 7  November  2003.
         The couple lost, and then resumed, contact with each other and  the
         appellant applied for, and was granted, entry clearance  under  the
         family reunion policy. The visa was issued to  her  on  12  October
         2006 on the strength of which she  entered  United  Kingdom  on  23
         November 2006. The couple returned to Burundi in November 2008  and
         her husband, using the  appellant's  passport,  attempted  to  seek
         entry clearance on behalf of another woman. This  ruse  failed  and
         the husband was prosecuted. The appellant herself then applied  for
         settlement making various false statements one of which was to  the
         effect that she had been living in the United Kingdom for a  number
         of  years.  Although  she   was   issued   with   entry   clearance
         acknowledging her as a returning resident,  this  was  subsequently
         cancelled as a result of the fraud and her  appeal  dismissed,  the
         Judge   finding   the    appellant    was    complicit    in    the
         misrepresentations. Her credibility was grievously damaged.


      3. That said, the appellant's  poor  immigration  history  is  largely
         irrelevant to the consideration before me.  The couple underwent an
         Islamic ceremony of marriage on 22 July 2011 but  are  not  legally
         married in accordance with  British  law  and,  inexplicably,  have
         failed to have their union regularised by a  civil  ceremony  which
         would  be  recognised   by   United   Kingdom   authorities.    The
         relationship with Mr Utamuliza is not in dispute; nor that  he  was
         subsequently granted indefinite leave to remain. Judge Turnock  was
         satisfied the appellant lives with her 'husband' and their son  who
         was born on 19 June 2012.   He is now 2 years  and  5  months  old.
         Having been born in the United Kingdom of a person settled  in  the
         United Kingdom, he was entitled to British nationality. As such, he
         is both a British citizen and a citizen of the European Union.


      4. The couple are not able to regularise the wife's  position  as  the
         unmarried partner of a person present and  settled  in  the  United
         Kingdom because they did not seek  to  establish  the  requirements
         for entry clearance or leave to remain in that  capacity  when  the
         application was made on 16 April 2013.  They had  not  been  living
         together in a relationship akin to marriage which had subsisted for
         two years or more prior to the application and no attempt was  made
         to comply with the other requirements  for  settlement  under  this
         category. The application for a derivative residence  card  appears
         to be taken in an effort to avoid meeting the requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules for leave to  remain  in  a  capacity  recognised
         within them.  Instead, the appellant or her advisers have sought  a
         right to remain pursuant to the rights commonly identified  as  the
         Zambrano principle.


      5. In Ruiz Zambrano (European citizenship) [2011]  EUECJ  C-34/09  (08
         March 2011), the Court of Justice of  the  European  Union  made  a
         decision on citizenship which went beyond a consideration  of  free
         movement rights and resulted in a novel  principle  affording  non-
         Union citizens rights of residence.  The case concerned a Colombian
         couple, Mr Zambrano and his wife, in  April  1999  were  living  in
         Belgium and who applied for refugee status in  Belgium.   This  was
         refused but the order included  a  non-refoulement  clause  stating
         that they should not be sent back to Colombia in view of the  civil
         war in that country.  In October  2000,  he  applied  to  have  his
         situation regularised but that application was also rejected. On  1
         September 2003, Mrs Zambrano gave  birth  to  a  second  child  who
         acquired Belgian nationality pursuant  to  what  was  then  Belgian
         Nationality law.  This was  the  child's  sole  nationality,  since
         Columbian law did not recognise him as one of its nationals because
         the parents did not take specific steps to have it conferred on the
         child.  A third child,  born  on  26  August  2005,  also  acquired
         Belgian nationality.


      6. Mr Zambrano became  unemployed  and  sought  unemployment  benefit,
         which was refused.  Neither he nor his wife was permitted to  work,
         notwithstanding the fact no expulsion measure could then  be  taken
         against them.  There were,  in  effect,  rendered  destitute  which
         could only be remedied by their leaving the country in  what  would
         have amounted to the de facto removal of  their  2  Belgian-citizen
         children.


      7. The Court of Justice decided Article  20  TFEU  precludes  national
         measures which have the effect of depriving citizens of the Union -
         the Zambrano children - of the genuine enjoyment of  the  substance
         of the rights conferred by virtue of their status  as  citizens  of
         the Union.  This was the effect of the refusal to grant a right  of
         residence to their non-Union  citizen  parents  where  their  minor
         children reside as nationals of the country.  The Court of  Justice
         said that it must be assumed that such a refusal would  lead  to  a
         situation where those children, citizens of the Union,  would  have
         to leave the territory of the Union in  order  to  accompany  their
         parents. The children as citizens of the Union would, as a  result,
         be unable to exercise the substance of the rights conferred on them
         by virtue of their status as citizens of the Union.


      8. The Court concluded by declaring that Article 20 TFEU:


    'precludes a Member State from refusing a third country  national  upon
         whom his minor children,  who  are  European  Union  citizens,  are
         dependent, a right of residence in the Member  State  of  residence
         and nationality of those children, and from  refusing  to  grant  a
         work permit to that third country  national,  in  so  far  as  such
         decisions deprive those children of the genuine  enjoyment  of  the
         substance of the rights attaching to the status of  European  Union
         citizen.'


      9. The obvious limitation on the principle  is  that  minor  children,
         albeit Union citizens, are not at risk of being removed when  there
         is one parent or carer who remains in the United Kingdom or  indeed
         the European Union.   Zambrano  operated  in  the  context  of  the
         removal of both parents.  This is  reflected  in  the  introduction
         into the 2006 Regulations, a new  Reg.  15A  which  replicates  the
         Zambrano principle and incorporates it into United Kingdom domestic
         law:


             15A.     (1) A person ("P") who is not an  exempt  person  and
             who satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or
             (5) of this regulation is entitled to a  derivative  right  to
             reside in the United Kingdom for as long as  P  satisfies  the
             relevant criteria.


             (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-
                  (a) P is the primary carer of  a  British  citizen  ("the
                  relevant British citizen");
                  (b) the relevant  British  citizen  is  residing  in  the
                  United Kingdom; and
                  (c) the relevant  British  citizen  would  be  unable  to
                  reside in the UK  or  in  another  EEA  State  if  P  were
                  required to leave.


             (7) P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person
                  if
                  (a) P is a direct relative or a legal  guardian  of  that
                  person; and
                  (b) P-
                      (i)  is the person who has primary responsibility for
                           that person's care; or
                      (ii)     shares equally the responsibility  for  that
                           person's care with one other person who is not an
                           exempt person.


             15A (6)(c) "an exempt person" is a person-


                  (i) who has a right to reside in the United Kingdom  as  a
                  result of any other provision of these Regulations;


                  (iv) who has indefinite leave to enter or  remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom.

     10. Mr Salmon, on behalf of the  appellant,  relies  upon  the  recital
         provided by the Judge of Mr Utamuliza's evidence which is  set  out
         in paragraph 17 of the determination:


             "Ibrahim is of an age at which he clearly needs  a  parent  to
             look after him on a full-time basis. He continues to be breast
             fed.  Obviously I cannot do that.  I  have  tried  to  changes
             nappies on a few occasions but am not at all good  at  it  and
             his work is normally done by [the appellant].  [The appellant]
             and Ibrahim are extremely close. It is not possible for her to
             leave him with somebody else. When she tries  he  cries.  This
             applies even to me. If [the appellant] was required  to  leave
             the UK Ibrahim would, in practice have to go with her. I could
             not manage with him on my own."


     11. The Judge considered, notwithstanding  the  care  provided  by  the
         mother, the Zambrano principle was not engaged because  the  mother
         was not, and is not, the primary carer as defined in Reg. 15A,  see
         paragraph 9 above. The Judge properly took into  account  the  fact
         that both shared equally the responsibility of looking after  their
         child although, necessarily, some aspects were the preserve of  the
         appellant. The Judge recorded that Mr Utamuliza  had  been  granted
         indefinite leave to remain in June 2010. Mr Utamuliza is  therefore
         an exempt person in accordance with Reg. 15A (6)(c)(iv).  This  was
         accepted by Mr Salmon before the Judge, as it was  accepted  before
         me. The appellant is not, therefore, the child's primary carer  and
         does not, therefore, benefit from the Zambrano  principle  pursuant
         to Reg. 15A just as she would not have benefited from the  Zambrano
         principle as set out in the case of Zambrano itself and  the  cases
         that followed it.


     12. Mr Salmon sought to persuade me that the description provided by Mr
         Utamuliza of the respective roles of the appellant and himself  set
         out in paragraph 10 above overrides anything that is  said  in  the
         Rules and that the appellant  is  the  primary  carer  and  cannot,
         therefore, be lawfully separated from her two children who  cannot,
         themselves, be required to leave the  United  Kingdom.  He  submits
         that other decisions involving the Zambrano principle have involved
         fathers but never mothers and, in the case of a mother, in all  but
         a tiny number of cases where the mother has given up responsibility
         for looking after a child, the mother will always  be  the  primary
         carer and this fact trumps the immigration controls set out in  the
         Rules by preventing her removal.


     13. I reject that submission. The Rules  are  clear.  They  acknowledge
         that in a family where both mother and father are  living  together
         in a unit, responsibility for  the  care  of  their  children  will
         almost inevitably be a shared responsibility. In this  context  the
         discharge of shared responsibility does not mean that  each  parent
         has to share in the performance of  every  task  as  if  they  were
         Siamese twins.  Nor  does  the  concept  of  shared  responsibility
         require the impossible task  of  calculating  whether  each  parent
         discharges their respective responsibility  in  equal  measure.  It
         will often be the mother who  provides  the  majority  of  care  in
         relation to a baby. Some tasks  are  hers  alone.  That  does  not,
         however, violate the Zambrano principle when there is  evidence  of
         shared responsibility involving both parents when one parent is not
         under threat of removal to a place outside Europe.


     14.  Although the couple underwent an Islamic ceremony of  marriage  on
         22 July 2011, the couple are not legally married in accordance with
         British law and  their  union  recognised  by  the  United  Kingdom
         authorities. In Dereci & Ors (European citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-
         256/11 (15 November 2011), the  Court  of  Justice  considered  the
         cases of a number of applicants who were  all  third-country  (non-
         Union) nationals wishing to live with  their  family  members,  who
         were Austrian  nationals,  resident  in  Austria.   Although  their
         Austrian relatives were Union citizens, none had exercised a  right
         to free movement.  The Austrian court  sought  a  reference  asking
         whether the refusal to grant the applicants a  right  of  residence
         amounted to a denial of the genuine enjoyment of the  substance  of
         the rights conferred on their relatives who  were  Union  citizens.
         The Court of Justice of the European Union decided it did not  but,
         in doing so, considered the ramifications of Article 8 of the ECHR.
          It was on this passage that Mr Salmon sought to rely:
             72.      Thus, in the present case, if  the  referring  court
             considers, in the light of the circumstances of  the  disputes
             in the main proceedings, that the situation of the  applicants
             in the main proceedings is covered by European Union  law,  it
             must examine whether the refusal of their right  of  residence
             undermines the right to respect for private  and  family  life
             provided for in Article 7 of the Charter. On the  other  hand,
             if it takes the view that that situation  is  not  covered  by
             European Union law, it must undertake that examination in  the
             light of Article 8(1) of the ECHR.
     15. The reasons for refusal  letter  of  25  February  2014  gave  some
         limited consideration to the Article 8 claim of the  appellant  and
         her family members in the context of the changes introduced to  the
         Immigration Rules in 2012 designed  to  reflect  the  Secretary  of
         State's thinking of her obligations under Article 8  of  the  ECHR.
         The refusal letter referred  to  the  fact  that  Appendix  FM  and
         paragraph 276ADE would have to be met.  The  respondent's  position
         as stated in the refusal letter was that if the applicant wished to
         remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  family  or  private
         life, it was necessary for them to make separate  application  (for
         which they would be charged  a  fee)  by  completing  the  relevant
         forms, either the FLR(M) or the FLR(O).


     16. The letter went on to say that as the applicant had no  alternative
         basis  for  her  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom,  she  should  make
         arrangements to leave and that, should  she  fail  to  do  so,  her
         departure might  be  subject  to  enforcement  action.  The  letter
         continued:


             "If you fail to  do  so  voluntarily  your  departure  may  be
             enforced. In that event we would first contact you  again  and
             you would have a separate opportunity to make  representations
             against the proposed removal."

     17. This was repeated in the formal  notice  of  "Refusal  to  issue  a
         Derivative Residence Card (No Further Basis of Stay in the UK)":


             "If you fail to make a voluntary departure a separate decision
             may be made at a later date to enforce your removal  from  the
             United Kingdom. Any such decision and associated appeal rights
             would be notified separately."

         Furthermore, in informing the appellant of her  rights  of  appeal,
         the decision maker set out in the grounds of  appeal  that  it  was
         open to the appellant to argue. The potential grounds included that
         the decision was not in accordance with immigration rules, breached
         the applicant's community rights under the  European  treaties  but
         omitted any reference to the  decision  violating  the  appellant's
         human rights.

     18. As the refusal letter states, there was to be no immediate  removal
         for the appellant. Removal would be made the subject of a  separate
         decision  and  associated   appeal   rights   would   be   notified
         accordingly. However, the extent of those  appeal  rights  was  not
         identified; nor whether the respondent might exercise her power  to
         fetter the appellant's rights by certification or by  granting  the
         appellant an out-of-country right of appeal. This was not simply  a
         decision refusing to issue a derivative residence card  (a  refusal
         which did not, in itself, contemplate removal capable of  violating
         an applicant's human rights) but expressly threatened removal which
         was capable of doing so, albeit at a later stage.


     19. The grounds of appeal to the Tribunal require a Delphic approach to
         their meaning:


             "a. It is suggested that [the appellant] should  have  applied
             using forms FLR(M) or FLR(O). However, the  claim  is  on  the
             basis of EEA Law. If the Home Office were of the view that the
             form filled-in was not the  appropriate  one  it  should  have
             rejected the application as invalid at the time  when  it  was
             made not far short of a year ago.

     20. On any view, this was a rejection of  the  stance  adopted  by  the
         respondent in the refusal letter that a separate application had to
         be made in order for the appellant's human rights to be considered.
         By implication, the draftsman must have meant that  the  respondent
         was wrong in imposing that as a precondition for any  consideration
         of the appellant's Article 8 rights. In other words, the grounds of
         appeal must, at least impliedly, rely upon a duty on  the  part  of
         the respondent to make a decision in  relation  to  the  effect  of
         removal upon the appellant's human rights.


     21. For these reasons, I construe the grounds of appeal to the Tribunal
         as raising the point that the  Secretary  of  State  was  wrong  in
         failing to deal with the implications of the decision which engaged
         human rights.  The Judge refused to  consider  Article  8  because,
         according to him, it was not in issue  as 'There are no  directions
         for removal' merely repeating the point made by the  respondent  in
         the decision letter but failing to determine the  issue  raised  by
         the appellant's claim that Article 8 issues had to  be  determined.
         The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  repeat  the  assertion
         that the Judge was required to consider all the grounds,  including
         Article 8.


     22. In JM (Liberia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA  Civ  1402,  Laws  LJ  gave  the
         decision of the Court in a case that concerned a  refusal  to  vary
         leave but in which no removal directions had been set.   The  Court
         of Appeal said at [22] that there was,


             'plainly force in  this  submission  that,  depending  on  the
             particular facts, human rights issues are indeed likely to  be
             integral to the process of  deciding  whether  an  immigrant's
             leave should or should not be varied.'

         The IAT had found [28] that removal was not imminent and there  was
         therefore no human rights claim before the Tribunal:

             "We are aware that it has sometimes been said that, in dealing
             with a refusal to vary leave to enter or remain, the appellant
             authorities should deal also with human rights on  removal  on
             the basis that removal is imminent: but it is not imminent  in
             any legal sense because of the need for a further decision."

         That point was rejected by the Court of Appeal as  erroneous  [33].
         The Court of Appeal, stated that, once  a  human  rights  point  is
         properly before the AIT, they are obliged to deal  with  it,  [28].
         That was consonant with the general jurisprudence relating  to  the
         obligations of public bodies under the Human Rights Act.

     23. By parity  of  reasoning,  the  refusal  of  a  residence  card  in
         circumstances where the letter stated the appellant  had  no  basis
         for  remaining  and  was,  therefore,  liable  to  be  removed  and
         enforcement was likely to occur, albeit at a  later  date,  engages
         the  same  principles  identified  by  Laws  LJ  in  JM  (Liberia).
         Applying those principles I am satisfied that there was an issue as
         to a potential violation of the appellant's human rights which  the
         respondent was required to consider.


     24. If, in the course  of  an  appeal,  the  Tribunal  is  required  to
         consider whether the respondent's decision is  in  accordance  with
         the law, that assessment may involve consideration of  whether  the
         effect of the decision (as  described  by  the  respondent  in  the
         decision letter) is capable  of  violating  the  appellant's  human
         rights.  That consideration arises by operation of law  and  arises
         independently of an application made for leave to remain  on  human
         rights grounds.  Whether such an issue is raised will  depend  upon
         the factual matrix of the claim.  In a case, such as is found here,
         where the claim to  be  entitled  to  the  issue  of  a  derivative
         residence card necessarily involves consideration  of  the  nuclear
         family, including a child, the respective contributions each  makes
         to the welfare of the  child,  the  nature  and  extent  of  shared
         responsibility, the status of the parent who remains in the  United
         Kingdom, it is highly  artificial  to  give  consideration  to  the
         material only insofar as it relates to the application of Reg.  15A
         without also considering  whether  the  decision  would  involve  a
         violation of the human rights of relevant family members such  that
         the decision is rendered unlawful.   In effect,  the  ramifications
         of the proposed decision  cannot  properly  be  considered  without
         adopting  an  approach  that  considers  both  elements.   Where  a
         decision necessarily requires consideration of  Article  8  private
         and family life principles, it is impermissible for  the  Secretary
         of State to avoid consideration of this  element  by  imposing  the
         requirement of a separate application and the  payment  of  a  fee.
         There will be cases  where  the  nexus  between  an  assessment  of
         whether the requirements of the claim are met and an assessment  of
         the appellant's human rights claim will be tenuous or non-existent.
          In such a case, there is no reason why the respondent may properly
         decide that the assessment of the Article 8  claim  is  a  separate
         exercise which should be made the subject of a separate application
         and a separate fee.


     25. Whether there is a sufficient nexus between  the  two  elements  is
         fact sensitive but in this case, the two elements are  inextricably
         entwined. Where this happens, a decision made by the  Secretary  of
         State in the form adopted here requiring a separate application and
         a separate fee will amount to an unlawful refusal  to  consider  an
         applicant's human rights claim.


     26. What then is the Tribunal required to  do?   In  the  recent  past,
         where the proportionality exercise was conducted by reference to an
         amorphous public  interest  which  was  left  to  the  Tribunal  to
         determine and to which the Tribunal  attached  such  weight  as  it
         deemed was merited, the Tribunal reached its own  decision  on  the
         proportionality exercise when the Secretary of  State's  assessment
         had to be re-visited on appeal, even in cases where there had  been
         no prior consideration of the appellant's Article 8 claim.  It  was
         as easy for  the  Tribunal  to  decide  where  the  proportionality
         balance lay as it was for the respondent; proportionality, although
         perhaps appearing so, was not an  exercise  of  discretion  but  an
         exercise of judgment taking into account the competing interests of
         State and individual.  It did not, therefore, require the  exercise
         of a  discretion  which  was  primarily  vested  in  the  executive
         requiring the  Tribunal  to  limit  its  appellate  function  to  a
         declaration that the Secretary of  State  had  failed  properly  to
         exercise her discretion such that a fresh and lawful  decision  was
         awaited in accordance with the principles identified in Abdi v SSHD
         [1996] Imm AR 148 (CA).


     27. The legal landscape has now changed.  The Tribunal is not permitted
         to construct  its  own  version  of  the  public  interest  without
         reference to the Secretary of State's  views  as  set  out  in  the
         Rules.  Given the nature of the consideration  now  required,  this
         presents both practical and legal  difficulties  when,  as  in  the
         present case, the Secretary of State has made no decision  at  all.
         The first practical difficulty in a case such as the present is for
         the Tribunal judge to know what are the Rules that he  is  required
         to apply.  The decision letter itself  suggests  something  of  the
         complexity:

             If you wish the Home Office to consider an application on [the
             basis of family or private life]  you  must  make  a  separate
             charged   application   using   the   appropriate    specified
             application form (FLR (M) for the 5-year partner route, or FLR
             (O) for the 5-year parent or 10-year partner or parent  route,
             or FLR(O) for the 10-year private life route).

     28. A Judge, however, is required to apply the law and cannot  normally
         divest himself of the obligation by not researching  it.   However,
         unless the  Judge  is  adequately  assisted  by  the  parties,  and
         particularly  the  respondent  in  a  matter   which   concerns   a
         contribution from her  as  to  the  public  interest,  there  is  a
         significant risk of factors being overlooked or misconceived.


     29. In the context of this case there are also potential issues  raised
         about eligibility. Thus, for example, a  part  of  the  Immigration
         Rules provides:


             S-EC.2.1. The applicant will normally be refused on grounds of
             suitability if any of paragraphs S-EC.2.2. to 2.5. apply.
             S-EC.2.2. Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge-
             (a) false information, representations or documents have  been
             submitted in relation  to  the  application  (including  false
             information submitted to any person to obtain a document  used
             in support of the application); or
             (b) there has been a failure to  disclose  material  facts  in
             relation to the application.


     30. In paragraph 14.4  of  the  determination,  with  reference  to  an
         earlier immigration appeal, the Judge recorded that  the  appellant
         was  issued  with  a  visa  as  a  returning  resident  which   was
         subsequently cancelled under the provisions of paragraph  320  (7A)
         as a false representation had been made to obtain entry  clearance.
         As the provision makes  clear,  S-EC.2.1  to  S-EC.2.5  contains  a
         discretion ('will normally be refused') but the falsity is strictly
         limited to the application  under  consideration,  not  an  earlier
         application.  There may, however, be other provisions that a  Judge
         may be required to consider dealing  with  past  misrepresentations
         which, were he to fail  to  consider,  would  render  the  decision
         unlawful.  It is arguable that the Tribunal is not the  appropriate
         forum to make, for the first time, a decision on such discretionary
         matters.  (It would be particularly unfortunate, were the  Tribunal
         to reject an appeal on the basis of a discretionary element, if  it
         transpires that the Secretary of State would not  herself  have  so
         exercised her discretion.)


     31. The respondent's letter continues that, if the  applicant  were  to
         make an application, consideration should then be given to s. 55 of
         the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in  which  it  is
         said that the Home Office discharges its duty of care by acting  on
         any concerns it identifies regarding the welfare of  children  with
         whom they come into contact  and  by  conducting  checks  that  are
         consistent with the impact of its decision-making.


     32. Inevitably such a decision  would  also  require  the  Tribunal  to
         consider whether there are exceptional circumstances in  accordance
         with the well-established procedure first set out in MF (Nigeria) v
         SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.


     33. All this inevitably leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Tribunal
         cannot properly re-make the Article 8 decision in the absence of  a
         clearly reasoned submission  from  the  respondent  addressing  the
         Article 8 issues.  In effect, this  will  become  the  reasons  for
         refusal letter on Article 8 issues that this  case  has  lacked  so
         far.  This can only be achieved by an  adjournment  permitting  the
         appellant an opportunity to respond.  I would  regard  this  as  an
         unsatisfactory process,  all  the  more  so  since  the  respondent
         acknowledges in her letter that, if the appellant  fails  to  leave
         voluntarily, she will be provided with 'a separate  opportunity  to
         make representations against the proposed removal', see page  4  of
         the respondent's decision.  The process may or may not  carry  with
         it a separate right of appeal.  This  is  a  highly  unsatisfactory
         process and is far removed from the ethos of a  one-stop  appellate
         process.


     34. The alternative solution is to find that, in the context of the new
         Immigration Rules on Article 8,  a  failure  on  the  part  of  the
         Secretary of State  to  consider  Article  8  at  all  renders  the
         decision not in accordance with the law and the Secretary of  State
         ought to be required to complete the task by making a  decision  on
         Article 8 in what might be a somewhat expanded application of  Abdi
         principles.   This  will  provide  the  respondent  with  both   an
         opportunity to express her views on Article 8 in a  refusal  letter
         in a form which is now familiar to appellants and  Tribunal  alike.
         It might also afford the  respondent  an  opportunity  to  consider
         whether it is an appropriate case to take the further steps already
         outlined in the refusal decision to offer the appellant a  separate
         opportunity to make representations against the  proposed  removal,
         thereby rolling up the two separate stages of the process.


     35. This is the course I propose to adopt.


     36. I find that the failure  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a
         decision on the claim which properly  addressed  Article  8  was  a
         decision that was not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  she  is
         required to make a fresh  and  lawful  decision.   The  appellant's
         application has not so far been  fully  decided  and  it  awaits  a
         lawful  decision  on  the  appellant's  private  and  family   life
         concerns.


DECISION

         The appeal is allowed to the limited extent of requiring the
         respondent to make a fresh and lawful decision.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                            20 November 2014
