
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12237/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd December 2014                         |On 17th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                         MS RACHEL KADIJATU ADEBIYI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  her  from  the
    United Kingdom as an overstayer was dismissed by Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Manuell ("the judge") in a decision promulgated on  30th
    September 2014.

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in  January  2008,  with  a
    visit visa valid until 20th June that year.  She applied for  leave  to
    remain in April 2013, unsuccessfully and a decision to remove  her  was
    made on 19th February 2014.  In her grounds  of  appeal  she  contended
    that her removal to the country  of  her  nationality,  Nigeria,  would
    breach her human rights.  The judge heard evidence from the  appellant,
    through an  interpreter  and  from  the  appellant's  daughter,  Mrs  B
    Folashade.

3.    The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  was  an  overstayer  who  had
    benefitted from improper access to the NHS.  She  could  not  meet  the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration   Rules   ("the   rules")   and   no
    representations had been received suggesting that she was  entitled  to
    the grant of any leave.  So far as the appellant's  family  life  claim
    was concerned, the  judge  concluded  that  her  removal  would  be  in
    accordance with the law and proportionate.  The appellant came  to  the
    United Kingdom for  a  temporary  purpose,  to  the  knowledge  of  her
    daughter and herself.  She had a son in Nigeria (who travelled to  this
    country with his mother for a visit at  the  time  of  the  appellant's
    entry) and her relationship with her daughter here, now naturalised  as
    a British citizen, could be maintained from  abroad.   The  appellant's
    daughter could continue to support her mother in Nigeria.

4.   The appellant applied for permission to appeal.  It was contended  that
    the judge erred in paragraph 17 of the decision.  He found  there  that
    there was no evidence that the relationship between the  appellant  and
    her  daughter  had  any  unusual  characteristics  such  as   emotional
    dependency.  The judge failed to "consider the full facts"  as  it  was
    clear that there was emotional dependency and that the appellant relied
    upon her daughter emotionally, physically and  mentally.   The  witness
    statements and supporting documents  showed  that  the  appellant  felt
    comfortable with her daughter and relied upon her for care.  She had no
    such connection with her son in Nigeria.  The appellant  had  a  strong
    attachment to her daughter and grandchildren and her  strong  Christian
    values compelled her to  appreciate  the  value  of  "extensive  family
    concept".

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on 14th November  2014  on  the  basis
    that the judge may not have taken proper account  of  the  evidence  of
    physical dependency, in terms of health and personal care and  may  not
    have given adequate reasons for rejecting the submission  made  on  the
    appellant's behalf in this regard.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   The appellant said that she was happy for her daughter, Mrs  Folashade,
    to speak on her behalf.  Mr Avery had no objection.  The appellant said
    that she had no solicitors at present acting for her.

7.   Mrs Folashade said that the judge was  wrong  to  dismiss  the  appeal.
    The appellant had  several  children,  including  Mrs  Folashade.   Mrs
    Folashade did everything for her mother "medication wise" and  was  the
    only daughter.  The judge erred in saying that  there  were  no  strong
    bonds between the appellant and Mrs Folashade  and  her  children,  the
    appellant's grandchildren.

8.   Mrs Folashade said that the appellant had received NHS treatment.   She
    had registered her mother and was aware that she was  not  entitled  to
    NHS services.  Her mother was over 60 years of age  and  treatment  was
    free.

9.   Mr Avery said that the basis of  the  case  was  properly  set  out  in
    paragraph 11 of the decision.   Counsel  appearing  for  the  appellant
    accepted that she was unable to meet the requirements of the rules  and
    that she had not established any relevant private life ties.  The  case
    turned on her family life with her daughter and grandchildren.  It  was
    not a  question  of  emotional  ties  but,  rather,  dependency.   That
    explained why the judge did not feel obliged  to  say  much  about  the
    relationship between the appellant and, for example, the grandchildren.
     He did, however, take into account the medical circumstances  and  the
    evidence in that context.  He felt that  the  relationships  themselves
    did not amount to more than the usual emotional ties.  In any event, he
    carried out a proper proportionality assessment.  At paragraph  20,  he
    made  sustainable  findings.   Some  of  these  were  adverse  to   the
    appellant.  Having regard to Section 117 of the 2002 Act, the appellant
    did not speak English well and had been a  burden  on  the  state,  not
    least in terms  of  the  services  she  received  from  the  NHS.   The
    appellant could not succeed.

10.  In a brief reply, Mrs Folashade said that she was able to pay  for  her
    mother's medicines.  She was the only person able to  help  her  mother
    and this would be so even if she returned to  Nigeria.   Mrs  Folashade
    wanted to look after her mother because she had suffered.   She  wanted
    to keep the appellant with her. In Nigeria they might not discover that
    her mother has diabetes.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11.  The decision has been carefully prepared and it is  apparent,  I  find,
    that the judge had all the salient features of the case  in  mind.   He
    heard oral evidence and took into account witness  statements  made  by
    the appellant and by Mrs Folashade.  The summary of that  evidence,  at
    paragraphs 7 to 9, shows that the judge was fully aware of and did  not
    overlook the extent of the support  provided  by  Mrs  Folashade.   The
    claim that the appellant  relied  on  her  daughter  for  transport  to
    hospital appointments, meals and washing, was taken into account.

12.  The judge's findings on the extent of the appellant's  ill-health  were
    open to him on the evidence.  He took into account the medical  records
    showing that she has relied on the NHS, notwithstanding her  status  as
    an overstayer, and that she nonetheless does not suffer from  any  life
    threatening condition.  There was nothing to show  that  she  would  be
    unable to gain access to essential medical services  in  Nigeria.   Mrs
    Folashade said that she feared that  her  mother's  diabetes  might  be
    missed on return but the evidence does not support that claim.

13.  The judge made a full assessment of the appellant's family life in  the
    United Kingdom and was entitled to conclude that the relationship  with
    Mrs Folashade could be maintained following the appellant's removal  to
    Nigeria.   He did not overlook the claim regarding emotional and  other
    dependency.  As noted above, he had the appellant's evidence  in  mind,
    including her witness statement.  This recorded her wish to  spend  the
    rest of her life with her daughter and her claim that there was no  one
    else to support  her.   Mrs  Folashade's  witness  statement  was  also
    clearly taken into account by the judge.   That  statement  included  a
    claim that there were no family members or relatives in Nigeria able to
    take care of the appellant.  The judge found,  however,  that  her  son
    travelled with her to the United Kingdom for the purposes of  a  visit,
    before returning to Nigeria.  He was entitled to find that her son  was
    a potential source of support.

14.  The judge was also entitled to make the adverse  findings  he  did,  in
    relation to the appellant's immigration history and to observe that  it
    was a poor reflection on Mrs Folashade that  she  applied  for  British
    citizenship and took the citizenship oath in 2010 in the full knowledge
    that her mother  was  present  here  with  her  as  an  overstayer  and
    benefitting from access to the NHS.

15.  It was conceded on the appellant's behalf that the requirements of  the
    rules were not met.  The judge went on to make an Article 8 assessment,
    taking into account  guidance  given  in  recent  cases,  including  MM
    (Lebanon) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985.   The  appellant's  poor  immigration
    history told against her,  as  did  her  apparent  inability  to  speak
    English.  In weighing the competing interests, the judge  had  in  mind
    the extent of the family life ties (there being no claim in relation to
    private life) and he gave due weight to the public interest in removal.
     He was entitled to conclude that the balance fell to be struck in  the
    Secretary of State's favour and no error of law has been shown  in  his
    approach or in his conclusion.

16.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing no  error  of  law,
    shall stand.

DECISION

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Signed        Date 23rd December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


ANONYMITY

There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
    occasion.



Signed        Date 23rd December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
