
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12307/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 17 March 2015                              |On 20 April 2015              |
|Delivered orally                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                         Mr Olalekan Oladimeji Idowu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, Counsel instructed by ICS LEGAL
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  19
    June 1978, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal who  sitting
    at Richmond on 7 October  2014  and  in  a  determination  subsequently
    promulgated on  17  October  2014  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent dated 3 March 2014 to refuse his application
    to vary his leave to remain and to remove him from the  United  Kingdom
    by way of directions under the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act
    2006 (as amended).

2.   The brief immigration history of the Appellant is that he  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 26 January 2010 as a student and after  a  succession
    of failed Tier 4 Student applications on 8 October and 16 December 2010
    he was finally granted leave  in  that  capacity  until  31  May  2012.
    Subsequently the Appellant successfully made a Tier 1  Post-Study  visa
    application granted on 30 December 2011 until 30 December 2013.  On  24
    December 2013 the Appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis of
    his relationship with Nadam Adjook Adam.  In that regard the Respondent
    noted that the Appellant was not married and that his partner  had  not
    yet legally divorced her spouse.

3.   Further there was no evidence  before  the  Respondent  to  demonstrate
    that the Appellant and his partner had met and that they were currently
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship together.  Thus,  because  the
    Appellant had  not  demonstrated  that  he  and  his  partner  had  any
    intention to live together  and  that  her  previous  relationship  had
    broken down it was concluded that the  Appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of the relevant Immigration Rules.

4.   The application was also refused under the Rules because the  Appellant
    did not meet the income threshold requirements.   In  that  regard  the
    wage slips provided to demonstrate the Appellant's  partner's  earnings
    could not be accepted as  they  did  not  fully  corroborate  the  bank
    statements submitted with the Appellant's application.  The application
    was also refused under the five year or ten year route  under  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules.

5.   In his determination the First-tier Judge heard oral evidence from  the
    Appellant  that  he  clearly  considered  in   conjunction   with   the
    Appellant's witness statement and the  bundle  of  documents  that  the
    Appellant had provided in support of his appeal.   In  that  regard  he
    noted the Appellant's explanation  that  his  partner's  delay  in  her
    divorce proceedings was partly due to  the  fact  that  she  could  not
    obtain the original marriage certificate.  She was a practising  Muslim
    and for that reason they were unable to live together but would  do  so
    when they married.  It was  recorded  that  the  Appellant  stated  the
    couple were unable to live together in Nigeria.  The Appellant had been
    away from Nigeria for nearly  five  years  and  claimed  there  was  no
    accommodation for them in Nigeria.  Further his partner was  a  British
    citizen and it would be unfair on her and her children to make them all
    live in Nigeria.

6.   The Judge concluded  that  as  set  out  in  the  refusal  letter,  the
    Appellant could not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    either under the five year or ten year route  nor  could  he  meet  the
    requirement as a partner because the couple were required to be  living
    together for two years under GEN.1.2. of Appendix FM.  It was  accepted
    that the couple could not live together for religious reasons  and  the
    Judge observed that they had only been in a relationship for six months
    prior to the Appellant's application.  The Judge further recorded  that
    the Appellant in evidence before him, had conceded that  he  could  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules  in  respect  of
    private life.  The Judge thus continued that:

         "The only issue therefore is whether this matter can be  considered
         outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8 ECHR."

    With that issue in mind, the Judge continued that he could not see  any
    factors pursuant to the guidance in Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  Rules  -
    correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) on the facts  as  found  that
    "would justify this matter being  considered  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules as there are no  exceptional  circumstances  to  justify  such  a
    step."

7.    The  Judge  continued  that  he  had  taken  into  account  that   the
    applicant's partner did not attend the hearing.   He  noted  there  had
    been a previous application for an adjournment made on 1 October  2014,
    a few days before the hearing, and that application  was  based  on  Ms
    Adam's sickness certificate that prevented her  from  working  for  one
    month from 28 August 2014 but, said the Judge,

         "No updated certificate was provided (and  therefore)  it  was  not
         possible for her evidence to the challenged under cross-examination
         and for the relationship to  be  tested.   I  therefore  have  some
         concerns about the genuineness of the relationship in any event."

8.   The Judge was clear when reaching his decision, that account  had  been
    taken of Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 and the public interest
    considerations therein  that  included  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control and the necessity for financial  independence.   He
    concluded:

         "For all these reasons I do not consider that because the Appellant
         cannot meet the Immigration Rules the matter  should  therefore  be
         considered outside of the Immigration Rules."

9.   First-tier Tribunal Judge  Saffer  in  granting  permission  to  appeal
    stated that he was satisfied that it was arguable that the Judge

         "erred in not conducting an  Article  8  assessment  given  e.g.  R
         (Ganesabalan) [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin) as Appendix FM and paragraph
         276ADE were not a complete code as far as Article  8  compatibility
         was concerned."

10.  The Respondent in her Rule 24 response dated 22 January 2015  submitted
    that the Judge directed himself appropriately and that it was  entirely
    open to the Judge following  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  to
    conclude  that  there  were  no  exceptional  factors  to   support   a
    consideration outside the Rules.  Therefore there was no material error
    of law demonstrated within the determination of the First-tier Judge.

11.  Thus the appeal came before me on 17 March 2015 when my first task  was
    to decide whether or not the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    disclosed an error or errors on  a  point  of  law  such  as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

12.  The question for me is therefore not whether  the  appeal  against  the
    immigration decision under challenge by the Appellant should be allowed
    or dismissed.  The appeal before me is concerned only with the question
    of whether the Judge made an error of  law  of  a  nature  such  as  to
    require his decision to be set aside.  It  is  only  if  that  question
    returns a positive answer that it is open  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    disturb the decision of the First-tier Judge.

13.  Mr Iqbal provided to me at the outset of the hearing the decisions in:

    R (on the application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi  &  Ors)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (Article 8  -  MM  (Lebanon)  and  Nagre)
    (IJR) [2014] UKUT 539 (IAC);


    Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).


14.  The latter-mentioned case related to the question of "fairness" and  it
    would be as well to set out the head  note  of  that  decision  of  the
    President of this Tribunal which reads as follows:

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness: was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
         to a fair hearing?  See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

15.  In that regard Mr Iqbal acknowledged that  a  few  days  prior  to  the
    hearing of the appeal before the First-tier Judge,  there  had  been  a
    written application for an adjournment request that had  been  refused.
    His point, however, was that in all the circumstances it  was  open  to
    the  First-tier  Judge  on  his  own  motion  to   adjourn   the   case
    notwithstanding that, as Mr Iqbal accepted, there was  nothing  in  the
    determination of  the  Judge  which  suggested  that  that  adjournment
    application had been renewed before him.  Mr Iqbal maintained  that  it
    was arguably a "Robinson obvious" point.

16.  With reference to the Judge's findings of fact as set out in  what  was
    a  somewhat  lengthy  paragraph  15  of  the  determination,  Mr  Iqbal
    maintained that given that the Judge had stated that in consequence  of
    Ms Adam's absence he had some concerns about  the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship in any event, that this could be interpreted as the  Judge
    having moved  from  the  position  of  the  Immigration  Rules  into  a
    consideration of Article 8 outside of them in that such an  observation
    arguably met the first question of the Razgar test.  Mr Iqbal concluded
    his submissions by stating that in all the circumstances and mindful of
    the guidance in Nwaigwe, the Judge should have exercised  fairness  and
    on his own motion adjourned the hearing of the case.  In that there had
    been, in his submission, such procedural unfairness  it  followed  that
    this would amount to an error of law material to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

17.  Mr Avery in response maintained that the Judge  considered  if  it  was
    appropriate to deal with this matter further outside of the Immigration
    Rules but gave clear reasons as to why he saw no reason to do that  and
    that in any event it was apparent on a reading of the determination  as
    a whole, that the  nature  of  the  relationship  was  not  necessarily
    determinative of the appeal and, again with reference  to  the  Judge's
    findings at paragraph 15, he exemplified the point  that  he  had  just
    made by pointing out that the Judge had said  "I  therefore  have  some
    concerns about the genuineness of the relationship in  any  event"  (my
    emphasis).

18.  Mr Iqbal in response persisted in the argument that fairness  warranted
    an adjournment of this case, given the particular circumstances and the
    need, in his submission, not least that the Appellant's claimed partner
    was a British citizen with two British citizen children aged 7  and  5,
    that it was a case where the circumstances warranted a consideration of
    the Appellant's circumstances outside the Immigration  Rules  and  that
    could have been properly  investigated  had  the  Judge,  as  Mr  Iqbal
    submitted, exercised such fairness and adjourned  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal to enable Ms Adam to attend any resumed hearing.

Assessment

19.  Despite  the  eloquence  of  Mr  Iqbal's  submissions  I  have  had  no
    difficulty in concluding  that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge does not disclose an error of law that was  material  to
    the outcome of the appeal.  As I have earlier mentioned at  the  outset
    of the hearing Mr Iqbal had helpfully presented me with a transcript of
    the decision in Oludoyi (above).  The head note of that decision states
    as follows:

         "There is nothing in R (Nagre) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin),
         Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) Pakistan  [2013]
         UKUT 640 (IAC) or Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim)  [2014]  UKUT  85
         (IAC) that suggests that a threshold test was  being  suggested  as
         opposed to making it clear that there was a need  to  look  at  the
         evidence to see if there was anything which has  not  already  been
         adequately considered in the context of the Immigration  Rules  and
         which  could  lead  to  a  successful  Article  8   claim.    These
         authorities must not be read as seeking to qualify  or  fetter  the
         assessment of Article 8.  This is consistent with para 128 of R (MM
         & Others) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985, that there is no  utility  in
         imposing  a  further  intermediate  test  as  a  preliminary  to  a
         consideration of an Article 8 claim beyond the relevant  criterion-
         based Rule.  As is held in R (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014] EWHC  2712
         (Admin), there is no prior threshold  which  dictates  whether  the
         exercise of discretion should be considered; rather the  nature  of
         the assessment and the reasoning which are called for are  informed
         by threshold considerations."

20.  Much of that head note was set out within paragraph 20 of  the  Judge's
    substantive decision in which she gave examples in explaining:

         "If, for  example,  there  is  some  feature  which  has  not  been
         adequately considered under the Immigration Rules but which  cannot
         on any view lead to  the  Article  8  claim  succeeding  (when  the
         individual's circumstances are considered cumulatively),  there  is
         no need to go any further."

21.  I am satisfied upon a reading of the determination as a whole that  the
    First-tier Judge provided sustainable reasons that  were  supported  by
    and open to him on the evidence that led him to conclude that there was
    "nothing which had  not  already  been  adequately  considered  in  the
    context of the Immigration Rules  which  could  lead  to  a  successful
    Article 8 claim".  He therefore clearly had the  guidance  to  which  I
    have above referred in  mind  in,  following  a  consideration  of  the
    evidence, reaching that conclusion.   I  am  also  satisfied  that  the
    decision in MF (above) demonstrated that it could not be  an  error  of
    law for a Judge upon a careful consideration of  the  evidence  in  its
    totality to conclude that it was open to the Respondent after  applying
    the requirements of the Rules to find there  to  be  no  arguably  good
    grounds for granting leave to remain outside of them and no  particular
    features as to the applicant's  circumstances  demonstrating  that  his
    removal would be unjustifiably harsh, see indeed also Nagre (above) and
    Gulshan (above).

22.  As the First-tier Judge found, it was open to  the  Respondent  on  the
    evidence before  her  to  conclude  that  the  applicant's  immigration
    history demonstrated that there was no basis for a grant  of  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom either under the family and  private  life
    provisions of the Immigration Rules or by virtue of the  assistance  of
    any exceptional circumstances and that the applicant thus no longer had
    any known basis for remaining in the United Kingdom.  At  the  time  of
    the Appellant's application he was aged 35, having spent  31  years  in
    his home country before coming to the United Kingdom, and as the  Judge
    noted, it was not  accepted  that  in  the  period  of  time  that  the
    applicant had been in this country and in the absence  of  evidence  to
    the contrary, he had lost ties to  Nigeria  and  although  his  claimed
    partner had two British children, the Appellant did not live with  them
    or share any parental responsibility for them.

23.  I find that it is not correct as submitted  in  the  grounds,  that  at
    paragraph 15 of the determination (and I appreciate that Mr  Iqbal  did
    not settle those grounds) that "the Judge accepted that the Appellant's
    partner could not attend because of her depression  and  illness".   On
    the contrary, in circumstances where no adjournment  request  had  been
    made before him the Judge took into account that she did not attend the
    hearing, thus preventing the Respondent from challenging  the  veracity
    of  her  written  evidence  under  cross-examination   "and   for   the
    relationship to be tested".  It was thus properly open to the Judge  to
    draw an adverse  conclusion  from  her  non-attendance  and  indeed  no
    evidence-based justification as to the reason for her  absence  at  the
    hearing had been provided.  It follows that the concerns of  the  Judge
    were reasonably open to him.

24.  In the light of his treatment of the authorities I do not think it  can
    reasonably said that the Judge did  not had the correct  principles  in
    mind nor do I think there is any basis for saying that  he  misdirected
    himself by applying the wrong legal test.  Mindful of the  guidance  of
    the Court of Appeal in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982,  I  find  that  it
    cannot be  said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  finding  was
    irrational  and/or  Wednesbury  unreasonable  such  as  to  amount   to
    perversity.  It cannot be said that they were inadequate.  This is  not
    a case where  the  First-tier  Judge's  reasoning  was  such  that  the
    Tribunal was  unable  to  understand  the  thought  processes  that  he
    employed in reaching his decision.

25.   As  Mr  Iqbal  most  fairly  accepted  there  was   nothing   in   the
    determination of the Judge to suggest that the  Appellant  renewed  his
    adjournment request before him and the Judge had in mind not  only  the
    fact that such a request had already been refused a few days before the
    hearing but for the reasons he gave within  his  determination,  it  is
    apparent that the question of a further adjournment did not arise.   It
    was not, contrary to Mr Iqbal's submission, a Robinson  obvious  point,
    and again, and typical of him, he most fairly accepted that  in  making
    that submission he might arguably be stretching the point.

26.  I find that the Judge properly  identified  and  recorded  the  matters
    that he considered to be critical  to  the  decision  on  the  material
    issues raised before him in this appeal.  The  findings  that  he  made
    were clearly open to him on the evidence and are  thus  sustainable  in
    law.

Decision

27.  The making of the previous decision involves the making of no error  on
    a point of law and I order that it shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 9 April 2015



Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein



