
IAC-TH-LW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12316/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 April 2015                               |On 17 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

                            Rasidat Bolanle Lawal
                          (no ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Akohene, Solicitor, instructed by Charles Hill
                    & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a Nigerian citizen, applied for a  derivative  residence
    card on the basis that she was the primary carer of her British citizen
    child.  This was refused, on 25  February  2014,  and  her  appeal  was
    dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Archer,   in   a   decision
    promulgated on 1 December 2014.

2.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Frankish, on 20 January 2015.  The three grounds seeking permission  to
    appeal had been concerned with the judge's  finding  that  the  child's
    father could take responsibility for her if the appellant were required
    to leave the UK (the first ground); that paragraph 29 of  the  decision
    included a  statement  that  the  decision  under  appeal  was  not  in
    accordance with the law in the Regulations, which was inconsistent with
    the outcome (the second ground); and in not giving  full  consideration
    to Article 8 (the third ground).

3.   At the hearing before me attention was focused  on  the  first  ground.
    An issue emerged, in the course of submissions and discussion, that was
    hinted at but not  properly  identified  in  the  first  ground.   This
    related to paragraph 27 of the decision.  The second sentence  of  that
    paragraph was as follows.

         "There is no evidence before me that the father would  be  prepared
         to add Sameerah to his household if the appellant  is  required  to
         leave the UK."

4.   The penultimate sentence of paragraph 27 was as follows.

         "I find on balance of probabilities  that  the  father  could  take
         responsibility for Sameerah if the appellant were required to leave
         the UK and there is no evidence that he is not willing to do so."

5.   As was agreed between the parties at the hearing before  me  these  two
    sentences disclosed an error  of  law.   It  is  well-established  that
    findings, to be lawfully made, must be based on evidence.   Within  the
    judge's decision itself the two sentences, on their face, make the case
    that the finding about the father taking responsibility for  the  child
    was not evidence-based.

6.   There followed some discussion as to whether the agreed  error  of  law
    was material to the outcome.  This led to a consideration of  the  last
    sentence of paragraph 26 of the decision, which was a finding that  the
    appellant had not shown that her British child  was  a  self-sufficient
    person.  It was agreed between the parties that  the  case  had  always
    been concerned with the Zambrano ruling, and not with  the  Chen  case.
    Mr Walker confirmed that self-sufficiency had not  been  raised  as  an
    issue in the refusal.  The application had been made and considered  on
    the  basis  of  Regulation  15A(4A).   Mr  Walker  submitted  that  the
    financial evidence had only  been  considered  as  a  means  to  assess
    whether the appellant was the primary  carer.   It  was  accepted  that
    there were no  self-sufficiency  or  other  financial  requirements  in
    Zambrano type cases.

7.   Having listened to submissions from both sides as  to  the  consequence
    of the agreement that there was a legal  error  in  paragraph  27,  and
    whether it was material, I decided that the finding in the  penultimate
    sentence of paragraph 27 did rest on a material error of law, and  that
    it needed to be set aside.  There did not appear to be any other  basis
    on which the appeal would have fallen to  be  dismissed,  once  it  was
    accepted that self-sufficiency would not have been such a basis, as  it
    was not a requirement in this type of case.



Remaking of the Decision

8.   Having listened to both  representatives  on  the  subject  of  whether
    there was any need for further evidence I indicated that I  would  hear
    submissions and proceed to an immediate remaking.

9.   Mr Walker submitted that there was no specific  finding  or  conclusion
    within paragraph 24 of the decision as to the primary carer issue,  and
    it would be preferable for the matter to be adjourned, and for there to
    be an opportunity for further evidence.  The further evidence  required
    was the financial evidence, the  limitations  of  which  was  noted  at
    paragraph 26 of the decision.

10.  Mr Akohene submitted that the primary carer point was  clear  from  the
    decision.  At paragraph 25 there was a clear finding that the appellant
    was the primary carer for her child.  It was important not  to  confuse
    the test of primary carer with  that  of  sole  responsibility  in  the
    Immigration Rules.  The appellant was clearly the primary  carer  based
    on the evidence, and the judge's findings.  The father  had  almost  no
    involvement.  At the time of the hearing there had been no  contact  at
    all between the father and the child for twelve months,  and  the  last
    telephone conversation had been six months before the hearing.

11.   Following  consideration  of  the  submissions  by  both  sides  I  am
    satisfied that the decision can be remade without the need for  further
    evidence.  There are clear findings by the judge in paragraph 25, which
    are as follows.

         "I find that the appellant  is  the  primary  carer  for  Sameerah.
         There is no reason to doubt her  account  of  working  and  looking
         after Sameerah.  ... I find that Sameerah and  the  appellant  live
         alone together.  On the evidence available to me, I find  that  the
         father has very limited contact with Sameerah and  currently  plays
         no part in her upbringing."

12.  Nothing in the submissions, or in  the  grounds,  sought  to  challenge
    these findings, and I can see no argument that they were not evidenced-
    based and properly reached.  The judge did note, at paragraph 26,  that
    the financial evidence was limited, but at the same time it  was  noted
    that the appellant had provided evidence to show  her  annual  earnings
    from a nursing agency for the  tax  year  2013/2014.   The  key  point,
    however, is that it was not necessary for the  appellant  to  establish
    that either she or her child were self-sufficient.  The  only  argument
    was whether the primary carer findings in paragraph 25 were sustainable
    in view of the limitations in the financial evidence.  In my view those
    findings are sustainable, based  as  they  were  on  the  evidence  and
    findings set out from paragraph 20 onwards in the decision.

13.  No further submissions were made, as to the remaking of  the  decision,
    with reference to the issue of whether the appellant's  daughter  would
    be unable to reside in the UK if the appellant were required to  leave.
    It was not suggested, in particular, that this  conclusion  should  not
    follow in the appellant's favour, based on the observation  that  there
    was no evidence that her father would be willing or  able  to  take  on
    responsibility for her.

14.  Mr Akohene, for the appellant, accepted that there  would  be  no  need
    for a consideration of the second and third grounds,  in  view  of  the
    outcome arising from the first ground, and  the  agreed  position  that
    there was an error of law in  the  negative  determinative  finding  at
    paragraph 27 of the decision.

15.  For these reasons the judge's finding at the end  of  paragraph  27  is
    set aside, as resting on a material error  of  law.   The  decision  is
    remade on the basis that the appellant has established, on balance, the
    three requirements set out in Regulation 15A(4A).

16.  It was not suggested that there was any  need  for  anonymity  in  this
    appeal, and I make no such order.  No application was made  for  a  fee
    award.  Despite the outcome of the appeal I have decided  not  to  make
    such an award, on the basis that the outcome depended on  evidence  not
    submitted with the application.

Notice of Decision

17.  There was a material error of law in  the  judge's  decision,  and  the
    decision dismissing the appeal is set aside.

18.  The following decision is substituted.

19.  The appeal is allowed under the 2006 Regulations.



Signed        Date 14 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

