

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                      Appeal Number:
IA/12034/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Birmingham                               Decision Promulgated:
On: 18 September 2014                        On: 24 September 2014


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                                Anton Apianai


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Peterson, instructed by CK Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms Peterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


This is an appeal against the determination promulgated on 9 August 2012  of
First-tier  Tribunal  Graham  which   refused   the   appeal   against   the
respondent's decision of 1 May 2012  to  refuse  leave  to  remain  on  long
residence grounds under paragraph 276B of HC 395 (the Immigration Rules).

The appellant is a citizen of Surinam and was born on 17 February 1965.

The initial decision  I  have  to  make  is  to  assess  whether  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Graham  erred  in  law  in  his  determination  refusing  the
appeal.

That decision falls to be made for a second time as in  an  order  dated  16
May 2014  the Court of Appeal  remitted  the  case  having  found  that  the
decision promulgated on 13 September 2013 of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Sommerville disclosed an error on a point of law in failing  to  consider  a
Rule 15(2A) application to adduce evidence not  before  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Graham.

It was my view that the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Graham
disclosed a material error on a point of law  even  without  my  needing  to
decide whether the material that  formed  part  of  the  15(2A)  application
should be admitted.

The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  appellant  had  not  shown  long
residence as there was a gap in his work records from 2004 to  2008,  albeit
the appellant provided invoices and other documents for the  other  material
periods.

One of the alternative pieces of evidence that  the  appellant  provided  to
show that he was living in the UK from 2004 to 2008 was a  letter  dated  11
May 2012 at G1 of his bundle. It was from a firm for whom the appellant  had
done contract work. It stated:
      "I confirm that Mr Anton Apianai was contracted  by  KBA  on  a  self-
      employed basis from November 1996 to April 2008."

The First-tier Tribunal considered  this  letter  (and  another  written  in
similar terms) at [12]. Judge Graham found that the letter did not  "confirm
that the Appellant has not been outside the UK for 6 months or  more."  That
was the only reason given for placing no weight on this letter.

In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal  applied  too  high  a  standard  of
proof to this letter. On its face the letter  confirms  work  and  therefore
residence in the UK between  specified  months.  Where  the  writer  of  the
letter takes months, not merely years, to be the appropriate measurement  or
reference point, if there had been an absence of more  than  6  months,  the
letter could be expected to have said so. The contents of  the  letter  were
consistent with the appellant's account. It did not appear to  me  to  be  a
sustainable approach to find that  the  letter  was  without  any  probative
value merely for failing to overtly specify that the appellant had not  been
abroad for more than 6 months.

That error then leads to another at [13]. The  appellant's  account  of  was
also supported by a witness, Mr Kelleher, who attended  the  hearing  before
the  First-tier  Tribunal.  His  evidence  was  that  it  was  his  personal
knowledge that the appellant had been in the UK continuously since 1998.  He
was the appellant's landlord. The appellant had been living in his  property
with him as his tenant continuously since 1998.

The only reason given for Mr Kelleher's evidence failing to  attract  weight
was at [12] and is stated to be that there was "an absence of any  documents
between 2004-2008".

I have found  above  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not  entitled  to
discount the  employment letter at G1. It follows that the  judge  erred  in
rejecting  the  evidence  of  Mr  Kelleher  merely  because  there  was   no
documentary evidence to support his account. The letter at  G1  was  capable
of amounting to that evidence. The materiality  of  Mr  Kelleher's  evidence
and its capacity to alter the outcome of the appeal,  was  conceded  by  the
judge at [13], where he states that it "appears to support  the  Appellant's
claim that he has been in the United Kingdom continuously since 1998".

I did not find the other grounds of appeal had  any  merit.  The  First-tier
Tribunal was entitled to place little weight on the evidence of Mr Slack  at
[14] where his account of when the appellant  worked  in  Wolverhampton  was
not consistent with the dates given by the appellant for  living  in  London
with his wife.

I found, however, that the matters set out above concerning  the  employment
letter and the evidence of Mr Kelleher amounted to errors on a point of  law
and were material to the outcome of the appeal. I therefore  set  aside  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal and proceeded to remake the appeal.

It was my view that the evidence before me showed  that  the  appellant  met
the requirements of paragraph 276B. The transactional documents showing  his
work record is complete other than for the  period  2004  to  2008.  Nothing
before me indicated that the evidence of Mr Kelleher  as  to  the  appellant
living as his tenant from 1998 onwards was not reliable. It  was  consistent
with the evidence of the appellant. It was supported by  the  letter  at  G1
confirming employment during this period. I found that letter  to  be  clear
and probative. I was satisfied that the appellant  had  shown  that  he  had
been continuously residence in the UK for a  14  year  period.  I  therefore
allowed the appeal.

I should also point out for completeness  sake  that  the  appellant  had  7
witnesses present at the  hearing  before  me  ready  to  give  evidence  in
support of his appeal  and be cross-examined, all of  them  having  provided
statements or letters that were provided in support  of  the  appeal  before
the First-tier Tribunal  and contained  in  the  appellant's  bundle.  Those
witnesses included Mr Kelleher. In the event it was not  necessary  for  the
witness to give oral evidence but their attendance was a further  indication
of the strength of the evidence in support of the appellant's case.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside.

I remake the appeal, allowing it under the Immigration Rules.


Signed:     [pic]                            Date: 23 September 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

Fee Award

I make a full fee award where the appellant has won  his  appeal  under  the
Immigration Rules.

Signed: [pic]                                Date: 23 September 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt






