
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/12806/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                    |                                    |
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated On |
|On 30 March 2015                    |14 April 2015                       |
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                              SIHAM EL KORICHI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Khan from Whitestone Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley  promulgated  on  4  July
   2014 which dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  but  allowed
   the  Appellant's  appeal  under   Article   8   finding   that   it   was
   disproportionate to remove her to Morocco.
Background
3. The Appellant was born on 5 September 1990 and is a national of Morocco.
4. On 12 December 2011 the Appellant submitted  further  representations  in
   support of her application for leave to remain on the basis of her family
   and private life with her mother and brother under Article 8 ECHR.
5. On 26 February 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
   a) The Appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and
      paragraph 276ADE.
   b) The Respondent took into account the best  interests  younger  brother
      but did not have an impact assessment from Manchester Social  Services
      as such an assessment would  only  be  made  when  the  Appellant  was
      removed.
   c) Many young people are the carers for their parents and therefore there
      is nothing unusual or exceptional about the circumstances of this case
      warranting a grant of leave outside the Rules.


The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Ransley ("the Judge") allowed the appeal under Article 8.
7. The Judge found :
   a) The Appellant has established a  private  life  with  her  mother  and
      brother since her entry into the UK in 2005.
   b)  The Appellant has  taken  parental  responsibility  for  her  younger
      brother because of her mother's disability.
   c) The Judge carried out an assessment  by  reference  to  the  questions
      posed in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  with  the  best  interests  of  the
      Appellant's bother 12 year old Adam as a primary consideration.
   d) At paragraphs 27-40 the Judge considered all  of  the  evidence  which
      included that of an independent social worker and concluded  that  the
      decision to remove was disproportionate.
8. Grounds of appeal were lodged on the basis that the Judge  had  erred  in
   falling to have sufficient regard to the Respondent's  position  and  the
   public interest. Permission was initially refused by First -tier Tribunal
   Judge Osbourne on 5 September 2014. The application was renewed and Upper
   Tribunal  Judge Kekic gave permission to appeal stating that both sets of
   grounds relied on showed arguable errors of law.

9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Mc  Vitie  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :

   a) He relied on the grounds of appeal.

   b) In essence two issues were raised.

   c) The first was that the Judge had failed to give sufficient  weight  to
      the previous adverse immigration history of the Appellant and the cost
      to the public purse of her being  educated  in  the  UK  in  assessing
      proportionality.

   d)  The  previous  unappealed  decision  of  2007  suggested   that   the
      Appellant's relationship was not as close with her mother as  was  now
      claimed; there was  no  mention  in  the  2007  determination  of  the
      Appellant's mother's health problems.

   e) This was not a challenge to the weight the Judge afforded  to  certain
      considerations but that it was not considered at all.

   f) The Judge should have taken into account that the  Appellant  did  not
      meet the requirements of  the  Rules  in  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
      276ADE.



10. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Khan submitted that :

   a) This was a clear and detailed decision.

   b) The judge properly determined that given the application was prior  to
      the introduction of the new Rules in  July  2012  in  accordance  with
      Edgehill the application  was  assessed  by  reference  to  Article  8
      outside the Rules. Even had the Judge expressly acknowledged that  the
      Appellant did not meet the requirements of the  Rules  it  would  have
      made no material outcome to the decision.

   c) The decision recognised that the factual situation in  2007  was  very
      different from that today: the Appellant's mother's condition worsened
      after 2009 and it was her deterioration that led to their relationship
      becoming closer. The Judge heard oral evidence and medical evidence to
      this effect.

   d) All of the relevant factors were taken into account

11. In reply Mr Mc Vitie on behalf of the Appellant submitted that;

   a) There was  no  reference  in  the  decision  to  those  factors  which
      mitigated against the Sponsor's entitlement to care  from  the  State.
      The Appellant would be unable to work and would be reliant  on  public
      funds
Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. The Appellant in this case came to the  United  Kingdom  in  2005  as  a
   visitor to see her mother who was a United Kingdom citizen. In  September
   2005 she made an application for leave  to  remain  as  the  child  of  a
   settled parent which was refused and  another  application  was  made  in
   October 2005 and refused in June 2006. An appeal  against  that  decision
   was heard and dismissed on 16 March 2007 and  the  Appellant  was  appeal
   rights exhausted on 13 August 2007  and  was  served  with  a  notice  of
   liability for removal as an overstayer. Fresh representations  were  made
   on 12 December 2011 and 22 January 2014 on the basis that  removal  would
   engage Article 8 given the Appellant's relationship with her  mother  and
   brother arising out of her mother's ill health. This was  the  background
   set out detail at paragraphs 10-13 of the Judge's findings and  therefore
   I am satisfied that it cannot be argued that  she  failed  to  take  that
   negative history into account when she specifically acknowledges in  this
   chronology that the Appellant had no right to be in the  UK  and  was  an
   overstayer. The weight she accorded the  background  to  the  case  is  a
   matter for her  and  no  error  of  law  is  revealed  in  relation  this
   challenge.

14. The  grounds  challenge  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the  decision  in
   Edgehill v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] CIV 402  and
   suggest that the Judge therefore failed to acknowledge that the Appellant
   did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE.  The
   Judge set out at set  out  at  paragraph  14-17  why  she  preferred  the
   guidance in Edgehill and I am satisfied that she  gave  adequate  reasons
   for concluding that the Appellant's application was made prior to 9  July
   2012 and  was  outstanding  and  therefore  the  transitional  provisions
   applied.

15. Even if she were wrong in that I accept that if an  applicant  does  not
   meet the criteria set out in  the  Rules  then  guidance  issued  by  the
   Secretary of State in the form of instructions provides in  effect,  that
   leave to remain outside the rules could be granted  in  the  exercise  of
   residual discretion in 'exceptional circumstances' which are  defined  in
   the  guidance  and  must  be  exercised  on  the  basis  of   Article   8
   considerations,  in  particular  assessing  all   relevant   factors   in
   determining  whether  a   decision   is   proportionate   under   Article
   8.2.Although case law continues to develop in relation to Article  8  and
   the Rules the current position is set out  in   R(MM  (Lebanon))  v  SSHD
   [2014] EWCA Civ 985 where the Court of Appeal rejected  the  analysis  of
   Sales J in R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin)  that  it  was  only
   necessary to undertake a consideration of a claim outside  the  Rules  if
   there was an "arguable" case of good grounds for granting  leave  outside
   the Rules.

16. The Judge was therefore entitled to assess  the  case  by  reference  to
   Article 8 outside the Rules guided by Razgar  principles.  The  Appellant
   always accepted that she did not meet any  of  the  requirements  of  the
   Rules pre July 2012 and this was specifically acknowledged by  the  Judge
   in paragraph 24 of the decision. It could never have been argued that she
   met any of the provisions of  the  Rules  post  9  July  2012  but  I  am
   satisfied that in the light of her overall assessment  of  the  facts  of
   this case specifically acknowledging this  would  have  had  no  material
   outcome given the nature of the case.

17. The Judge at paragraphs 25- 41 carried out  a  meticulous  and  detailed
   analysis of the Appellant's relationship with her mother and brother  and
   the facts that she found established that the factual matrix underpinning
   the claim were significantly different to those which prevailed  in  2007
   as her mother's health  had  declined  since  2009.  The  conclusion  she
   reached, that in the circumstances of this case taking into account as  a
   primary consideration the best interests of the child  involved,  removal
   was disproportionate was a  conclusion  that  was  open  to  her  on  the
   evidence before her.

18.  The grounds also challenge the Judge's approach to the  involvement  of
   social services although it is not entirely clear  what  error  is  being
   alleged. Throughout the decision the Judge acknowledges  the  involvement
   of social services in the life of the mother and brother of the Appellant
   and the fact that Manchester social services had, in effect,  refused  to
   assist by providing an impact assessment regarding the need for care. The
   Judge was therefore obliged to proceed  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
   before her and it was open to her to  conclude  that  given  that  social
   services had visited the family in 2012 and 2013  to  assess  the  family
   circumstances they had no concerns about the Appellant's role as carer.

19. I remind myself of what was said in   Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
   set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

20. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.



CONCLUSION

21. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

22. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date
8.4.2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
