
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12018/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th February 2015                            |On 10th March 2015         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                          MR Muhammad Mozafar KHAN
                          (anonymity not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ficklin of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 15th March 1981 is a citizen  of  Pakistan.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by  Mr  Ficklin  of  Counsel.
    The Respondent was Represented by Miss Johnstone, a Presenting Officer.





Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had originally entered the United Kingdom as a student in
    2003 and on 15th October 2008 was granted leave to remain as a  Tier  1
    (Post Study) Worker valid until 15th  October  2010.   That  leave  was
    curtailed on 2nd June 2009  as  he  had  submitted  a  false  education
    certificate.  However on 25th January 2011 he was granted  a  residence
    card under the EEA Regulations 2006  as  a  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national namely a Portuguese citizen exercising treaty  rights  in  the
    UK.  The Appellant and his spouse Miss  Arruda  married  on  18th  July
    2010.

 3. On 25th February 2014 the Appellant was refused leave to  re-enter  the
    United Kingdom as the  Respondent  took  the  view  that  the  marriage
    between the Appellant and Miss Arruda was a  marriage  of  convenience.
    The Appellant's residence card was therefore  revoked.   The  Appellant
    lodged an appeal against that decision  on  12th March  2014  and  his
    appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Edwards  sitting  at
    Manchester on 30th June 2014.  He dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  on
    all matters.  Application for permission to appeal was made and granted
    on 5th September 2014 and matter came before me sitting at  Manchester
    on 24th November 2014 firstly to decide whether or not an error of law
    had been made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Following the  hearing
    I found a material error of law had been made for the reasons  provided
    in the decision contained within the papers.   Directions  were  issued
    for the decision to be made afresh  by  myself  sitting  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the matter therefore came back  before  me  in  accordance
    with those directions.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 4. Mr Ficklin made preliminary submissions which I deal within the body of
    the decision below.

 5. I next identified the documents available to me in this case.

 6. The Respondent's documents consists of:

      i) Immigration history.

     ii) Those documents listed within the bundle of documentation.

    iii) Previous determination and appeal related documents.

 7. The Appellant's documents consists of:

     iv) Skeleton argument.

      v) Those documents listed at pages 1 to 285 on the index sheet to  the
         bundle.

     vi) Chapter 8 IDIs.

    vii) Miah [2014] UKUT 00515.

Evidence

 8. The Appellant was called to give evidence.  He identified his full name
    and address.  He further identified his written  witness  statement  at
    pages 3 to 9 of the Appellant's bundle as being true and correct.

 9. In cross-examination he confirmed  that  he  had  submitted  his  first
    wife's death certificate her date of death being 16th October 2009.  He
    was referred to page 74 of the Appellant's bundle when he said his wife
    had died in August or September 2009.  He  was  also  referred  to  two
    letters within the Respondent's bundle from Pakistan which referred  to
    his wife having died some three years back.   The  Appellant  confirmed
    there was no death certificate rather a  death  summary  which  he  had
    obtained from his family after her death.  He said  his  children  were
    living in Pakistan.  He was referred to  page  45  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle his statement in reference to a certificate of approval where he
    said that he had met his current wife in  July  2009  although  in  his
    interview record he had said it was September 2009.  His wife  did  not
    know when he met her about his first wife and  children  and  the  fact
    they were still living with him when she came to  his  house.   He  was
    then referred to various extracts of the witness statements of himself,
    his wife and  witness  concerning  the  circumstances  surrounding  the
    marriage on 17th July 2010.  It was also pointed out to  the  Appellant
    that his wife had only flown into London on 17th July 2010.

10. He was referred to his wife's interview where she  said  that  she  had
    returned to Portugal for one year although he claimed that she had only
    returned for a three to four week period.  There  were  questions  with
    reference to his wife's employment and bank accounts and the payment of
    rent to the landlord who was also the employer of  both  the  Appellant
    and his current wife.

11. In answer to questions I raised for clarification he confirmed that  he
    had six children with his first wife and that he had come to the UK  in
    2003 as a student and his then wife had come to the UK  in  2005  as  a
    dependent bringing their three youngest children  with  her.   He  said
    that he had been granted leave as a Tier 1 worker in October  2008  and
    was working in a cash and carry outlet and  living  in  Liverpool.   He
    confirmed that his leave was curtailed in June 2009 and that  his  wife
    had left the UK with the three dependent  children  on  18th  September
    2009.  He had not returned with her.

12. I next heard from Miss Arruda  who  also  confirmed  that  her  witness
    statement at pages 10 to 18 of the  Appellant's  bundle  was  true  and
    correct.

13. In cross-examination she said that when she had met the  Appellant  she
    had been in the UK for a few weeks since June 2009 and after  they  met
    he had told her that his immigration status had ended.  She  had  never
    met the Appellant's first wife or spoken to her.  She had gone  to  the
    Appellant's house after meeting him believing  that  his  wife  was  in
    Pakistan and that she was not aware that the wife and children were  in
    fact still living in the home when she went there.  Initially she  said
    she was not even aware that he was married.  When she had come  to  the
    UK it was her intention to visit Liverpool because of The  Beatles  and
    then things happened by chance in terms of  their  meeting.   She  said
    that the Appellant had told her that he had children at the point where
    his wife had died.  She did not know why the Appellant had  never  gone
    to Pakistan after the death of his first wife.  She said that  she  had
    travelled to London on 17th July 2010 with the Appellant  and  Mr  Jaji
    and was referred to that  fact  within  paragraph  12  of  her  witness
    statement.  She had then returned to  Portugal  after  marriage  having
    travelled to Portugal in December 2010 and said that she had gone  back
    for a few weeks and had not returned to Portugal since.  She said  that
    she had worked in the UK for three years receiving wages  in  the  shop
    and had deposited money in her bank account.  She said she  was  unable
    to go away for a long period of time as she was needed to work  in  the
    shop.

14. I finally heard from Mr Jaji who confirmed his full name and identified
    his witness statement at pages 19 to 24 of the  Appellant's  bundle  as
    being true and correct.  He said that he had employed the Appellant  Mr
    Khan from about February or March 2011 on a full-time basis and he  had
    not worked for anyone else.  He had worked  for  him  at  the  Best-one
    Express shop and was referred to P60s for the years 2013 and 2014.   He
    said that he employed the wife full-time.  He said that he  leased  the
    flat above the shop where they lived.

15. In answer to matters that I raised by way of clarification he confirmed
    that he had known the Appellant since 2006 when he was a student living
    in Liverpool and had met the Appellant's first wife  and  children  and
    confirmed the Appellant and his wife got on well together.  He did  not
    recall the Appellant's leave being curtailed  nor  did  he  recall  the
    Appellant's first wife leaving the UK nor did he know why she went back
    to Pakistan.  He said he was still in contact with  the  Appellant  and
    had started work with him in about 2011.

16. He said that Miss Arruda had started work for him in  August  2010  and
    was referred to page 230 of the Appellant's bundle in terms of a letter
    written saying that she worked full-time some 35 hours.  He  could  not
    recall if she had gone away for any lengthy period  of  time.   He  was
    also referred to page 242 of the Appellant's bundle.

17. Finally I heard submissions on behalf of the Respondent who referred me
    to the various matters of credibility in respect of the totality of the
    account put forward by the Appellant and his witnesses.

18. I finally heard submissions on behalf of the Appellant who responded to
    the issues of credibility raised by  Miss  Johnstone  and  referred  to
    weaknesses and difficulties in respect of reliance upon the  interviews
    conducted with the Appellant and Miss Arruda.

19. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    documents and evidence submitted.  I now provide that decision with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

20. Mr Ficklin made preliminary submissions  concerning  the  admissibility
    and reliability of the interview records  of  the  Appellant  and  Miss
    Arruda contained at pages 69 to 130 of the Appellant's bundle.

21. It was submitted that the case of Miah indicated at headnote (iv)  that
    the interviewer's summary or commentary to the decision maker must as a
    matter of fairness be disclosed.  It was noted in this  case  that  had
    not  occurred  and  accordingly   the   interview   should   be   ruled
    inadmissible.

22. I found against that submission.  The principle  referred  to  in  Miah
    seems clear and is the promotion of fairness by proper disclosure.   If
    the interviewing officer at the conclusion of the  interview  forms  an
    opinion upon the genuineness  or  otherwise  of  the  marriage  he  may
    enshrine those views in a summary or document which is  passed  to  the
    decision maker.  Clearly the views  of  the  interviewing  officer  may
    affect  the  judgment  and  outcome  of  the  decision  maker  and  the
    disclosure of the summary  is  therefore  important  in  terms  of  the
    fairness of proceedings.  However in this case the interviewing officer
    and the decision maker (see refusal letter) was  the  same  person  and
    accordingly, nor surprisingly, no summary was ever made and even if one
    had been made it would have been no  more  than  an  aide-m�moire.   In
    those circumstances the non-disclosure of a document never  made  where
    both the interviewer and decision maker were one and  the  same  person
    does not breach the principles set out in Miah.

23. Secondly it was said that the interviews were  not  administered  under
    caution, and that was against Chapter 8 IDI.  Chapter 8  (3.5)  of  the
    IDIs does refer to interviews being normally  conducted  under  caution
    where a person is arrested  on  suspicion  of  an  immigration  related
    offence.  Presumably that is because such an offence may be a  criminal
    offence and any prosecution that followed could  not  rely  upon  a  an
    interview not under caution and not in accordance with the  Police  and
    Criminal Evidence Act 1984.  However non-caution  interviews  can  take
    place (3.7).  Where there is evidence of a relationship (in  this  case
    the  marriage  certificate  and  previous  granting  of  leave).    The
    Appellant was not arrested.  The fact that the interview was not  under
    caution does not mean the evidence cannot be used for the  purposes  of
    the EEA Regulations 2006.  It does mean that interview is  unlikely  to
    have evidential weight if theoretically any criminal  proceedings  were
    contemplated.

24. In respect of both submissions therefore I found no basis for exclusion
    of the interviews.  Indeed the  interviews  formed  the  best  evidence
    available of the parties' relationship and in circumstances  where  the
    Respondent conceded they had answered many questions  consistently  and
    accordingly exclusion  could  be  construed  as  being  unfair  to  the
    Appellant.

25. This is not an easy case and has required a careful examination of  all
    the documentary evidence together with the oral evidence  provided  and
    the helpful submissions from both representatives.  It is a case  where
    the initial burden of proof at the proposition that this  is  a  "sham"
    marriage is upon the Respondent to  produce  reasons  and  evidence  in
    support of such proposition and if met, the burden then passes  to  the
    Appellant to prove such genuineness on the balance of probabilities.

26. The starting point is an examination of the  fate  of  the  Appellant's
    first wife.  That is significant firstly in terms of  the  validity  of
    the marriage  under  examination,  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant
    generally and potentially some importance on the issue  of  genuineness
    of this marriage.  The Respondent questioned the alleged death  of  the
    first wife and in the refusal letter of 14th June 2014 provided  proper
    and adequate reasons why that  aspect  of  the  case  was  called  into
    question.  The documentary evidence available discloses a proper  basis
    for the Respondent's concern such that  any  initial  burden  upon  the
    Respondent has been discharged.  I have now examined  the  totality  of
    the evidence on this  aspect  of  the  case.   Equally  the  Respondent
    discharged the burden of proof in that there were in respect  of  other
    aspects of the case reasonable suspicions that were referred to by  the
    Respondent.

27. The Appellant and his first wife had been married for some time.   They
    had six children.  The Appellant had come  to  the  UK  in  2003  as  a
    student.  The Appellant's wife and three of their children  had  joined
    them in 2005.  Accordingly that two year period of separation  had  not
    precipitated an end to the marriage.  They had lived together in the UK
    since 2005 without any obvious marital problems.  Mr Jaji who knew them
    very well accepted in oral evidence that they  got  on  well  together.
    The Appellant's last application to remain in the UK as a Tier 1 (Post-
    Study Work) resident (October 2008) included his wife as  a  dependent.
    When his leave was curtailed she and the children eventually  left  the
    UK in September 2009.  In summary there is no evidence to suggest  this
    marriage had any difficulties or they intended to  live  apart  at  any
    stage.

28. The Appellant's first wife was allegedly killed in a bomb blast in Sade
    on 15th October 2009.  That is a matter of less than one  month  after
    she arrived back in Pakistan.  The Appellant has never produced a death
    certificate.  He has produced a death summary document.  He  has  never
    produced or provided evidence concerning the circumstances  surrounding
    the alleged death of his wife.  He did not attend her funeral.  He  did
    not make or produce any evidence to show he made  enquiries  concerning
    the welfare of his children and in particular whether any of  them  had
    been injured as a result of such incident.  He  had  not  travelled  to
    Pakistan to see his family, make enquiries and pay respects to his wife
    despite what on the face of it was a sudden and unexpected death of  an
    individual to whom he was  happily  married  for  many  years.   Whilst
    individual attitudes may vary I do not find that to be a  probable  set
    of circumstances or behaviour.

29. Additional to those factors when interviewed the Appellant at questions
    52 and 53 had been a little uncertain of the date of his  wife's  death
    stating it was either August or September; both wrong months and months
    when she still resided with him in the UK.  Further  he  described  her
    death as being caused by a stray bullet.  He also opined at question 55
    that he may have a death certificate at his house but he was unsure.  I
    find the vagueness of his knowledge of when his  wife  was  killed  and
    whether or not he had a death certificate to be improbable.  Equally  I
    find it entirely improbable that he would provide  clearly  conflicting
    accounts of how she died.

30. Further there are two letters dated 20th March 2014 and 2nd April  2014
    from the Office of the Political Agent in Qurran  following  a  request
    concerning the alleged death of the Appellant's wife.  It is  not  easy
    to know how reliable those letters are.   However  both  letters  state
    that the Appellant's wife died three years back from the  date  of  the
    letter i.e. in about 2011.  That is a not  insignificant  period  later
    than the Appellant's claim.  It is certainly not  consistent  with  her
    death in October 2009 nor  her  being  deceased  at  the  date  of  his
    marriage to Miss Arruda.  There is further the  total  absence  of  any
    death certificate.  Given  the  Appellant  has  substantial  family  in
    Pakistan and given the presence of an alleged death summary it  may  be
    expected that a death certificate could be produced with relative ease.



31. All of the above factors point to the conclusion that  on  balance  the
    account given by the Appellant of his wife being killed in October 2009
    is not true.

32. The consequence of that finding is that I conclude  the  Appellant  has
    not been credible upon this aspect of his case.  I also  conclude  that
    his marriage to Miss Arruda was in all likelihood an  invalid  marriage
    under both English and Portuguese law as he was already married at  the
    time and had not been divorced.

33. The circumstances of the meeting of the Appellant and Miss  Arruda  are
    also highly questionable.  The Appellant in oral  evidence  claimed  to
    have met Miss Arruda in July 2009.  In interview at question 27 he  had
    said September 2009.  In his witness statement  in  June  2014  he  had
    stated he had met her in mid-2009.   Given  the  passage  of  time,  in
    ordinary circumstances, a difference of a  few  months  may  amount  to
    little, but it  was  significant  in  this  case.   In  July  2009  the
    Appellant's first wife and three children were living with him in  what
    was described by Mr Jaji as  a  happy  marriage.   It  is  questionable
    therefore why the Appellant  was  embarking  on  an  affair  with  Miss
    Arruda.  Even September/October 2009  would  place  the  matter  either
    whilst his wife was still with him in  the  UK  or  shortly  after  her
    return to Pakistan.

34. Even  more  strangely,  according  to  the  Appellant  in  his  witness
    statement (and Miss Arruda in hers) they instantly clicked, and started
    a conversation leading to an  exchange  of  telephone  numbers  and  an
    agreement to contact each other.  Such instant chemistry does of course
    occur.  However I note from the refusal letter that a Section 24 report
    was produced by the registrar at the date of  their  marriage  in  July
    2010 that stated:

         "Parties are unable to converse in the same language.  Bride needed
         several  attempts  to  correctly  state  groom's  full  name.   The
         interpreter went out of the room twice to liaise with the groom."

    Given the marriage was a year after this  alleged  meeting  I  find  it
    entirely lacking  in  credibility  that  July  or  September  2009  the
    Appellant and Miss Arruda were able to hold any form of conversation or
    had any common language, culture or background such that it is easy  to
    say what chemistry might have flowed between them in the  circumstances
    described.

35. It is further claimed by the Appellant that very  shortly  after  their
    meeting in July 2009 she came to his  home.   That  is  echoed  in  his
    witness statement.  I find that most unlikely  given  that  until  18th
    September 2009 the Appellant's first wife and three children were still
    living with him.  Equally I find it not credible that she  was  unaware
    that he was married if she had visited his home.

36. I have also noted the letter dated 25th November 2009 from Ali Sinclair
    Solicitors (page 31 Appellant's bundle).  This is the  covering  letter
    written on behalf of the Appellant for approval of marriage.  It refers
    to the parties as being engaged and the Appellant and Miss Arruda  also
    refer  to  themselves  as  cohabiting.   Indeed  at  page  152  of  the
    Appellant's bundle is a joint  tenancy  agreement  of  [  -  ]  Street,
    Liverpool and dated 1st November 2009.   I  find  this  aspect  of  the
    evidence of real concern.  Firstly, even if  the  parties  had  met  as
    early as July 2009, it is still a rapid movement to be signing a  joint
    tenancy agreement and living together on 1st  November  2009.   If  the
    first meeting was as late as September 2009 as suggested by Miss Arruda
    then it is even swifter.  Further, if the Appellant was  still  happily
    married to his first wife  until  her  alleged  sudden  death  on  18th
    October 2009 it is not in my view credible  that  two  weeks  later  he
    would be signing a tenancy agreement to live with another woman from an
    entirely different culture and background with  whom  he  could  barely
    converse due to a lack of a common language.

37. I have next looked at the circumstances  surrounding  the  marriage  in
    July 2010 and have carefully  considered  the  evidence  of  all  three
    witnesses.  The witnesses deal with this aspect of the case as  follows
    (Appellant  paragraphs  14  to  16  witness  statement,   Miss   Arruda
    paragraphs 12 to 13 witness statement,  Mr  Jaji  paragraph  5  witness
    statement).  Their separate evidence is entirely clear and  consistent.
    They claim that all three travelled from Liverpool to  London  on  17th
    July 2010 and stayed overnight in a Travel Inn Hotel  in  Newham  which
    had been previously booked prior to the wedding taking  place  on  18th
    July 2010 in London.  Unknown and unavailable at  the  date  of  making
    their witness statements (and the earlier interviews of  the  Appellant
    and Miss Arruda), was information now available concerning the  flights
    relating to Miss Arruda.  Passenger search results have  been  provided
    by the Respondent concerning her flights.   I  acknowledge  that  there
    appears a typographical error relating to the year of her birth on  one
    such flight but I  am  satisfied  that  these  results  relate  to  her
    providing as they do her full and correct name,  passport  or  identity
    document number as verified in independent documents within the bundle.



38. One of those documents shows that she flew from Lisbon to  Heathrow  on
    17th July 2010 only arriving at Heathrow  at  19:55.   It  is  unlikely
    therefore she would  have  cleared  the  airport  before  20:30.   That
    document  therefore  demonstrates  the  evidence   presented   by   the
    Appellant, Miss Arruda and  Mr  Jaji  that  all  three  travelled  from
    Liverpool where they had been living to London on  17th  July  2010  is
    simply not true.  It demonstrates a lack of credibility in the  account
    and also demonstrates a collaboration to tell a lie between all  three.
    Finally  it  demonstrates  that  Miss  Arruda  was  not  in   Liverpool
    immediately prior  to  the  wedding  and  living  with  the  Appellant.
    Further flight information shows that she must have left the UK shortly
    after the wedding as she was flying back to the UK from Lisbon  on  3rd
    August 2010.  She then stayed in the  UK  for  only  four  days  before
    leaving for Lisbon on 6th August  2010.   There  is  further  a  flight
    record showing her leaving Liverpool on 8th November  for  the  Algarve
    Airport of Faro.

39. In summary I  find  the  evidence  presented  by  all  three  witnesses
    concerning the circumstances leading up to the wedding to be false  and
    that there has been collusion between these three  witnesses  prior  to
    the production  of  their  witness  statements.   I  do  not  find  the
    inferential or clear evidence they sought to portray of  the  Appellant
    and Miss Arruda cohabiting  in  Liverpool  prior  to  the  wedding  and
    travelling together down to London on the eve of  that  wedding  to  be
    true.  Further the flight records disclose that not only did she fly in
    the evening before the wedding but very shortly after the  wedding  she
    was flying back and forth on her own to Portugal.

40. A further significant area I have examined in this  case  is  the  very
    clear inconsistency in a period away from the UK spent by Miss  Arruda.
    She  in  interview  had  said  she  started  work  for   Mr   Jaji   in
    October/November 2010, worked for three months  and  then  returned  to
    Portugal for one year (questions 54 to 60).  She confirmed she referred
    to a year's absence at question 65 when she stated that  she  had  only
    returned to the UK in November 2011 and had gone to  Portugal  to  look
    after her elderly mother.  In contrast the Appellant said  Miss  Arruda
    since marriage had only been to Portugal once for a three to four  week
    period (question 164).  In oral evidence Miss Arruda  claimed  she  had
    gone to Portugal in December 2010 but only for a few weeks.   Curiously
    in her witness statement made in June 2014 she could not recollect  how
    long  she  had  spent  in  Portugal.   Mr  Jaji  has  provided  letters
    concerning her employment.  At page 233 he states that she started work
    for him on 9th August 2010 the letter being dated 9th  September  2010.
    A second letter dated 13th September 2010 was  issued  (page  234).   A
    number of P60s for her have been supplied (pages 239 to 241).  They  do
    not include P60s for the tax years April  2011  to  April  2012.   That
    substantially covers the period Miss Arruda  claims  to  have  been  in
    Portugal for twelve months in her interview.  Finally Mr Jaji  wrote  a
    letter in his capacity as her employer at W & Z UK Limited  (page  242)
    confirming that she began work with him on 6th April 2012.

41. I am satisfied therefore that Miss Arruda left the UK in about November
    2010 and was absent from the UK for at least twelve months and did  not
    work in the UK until April 2012 on her return.  Again therefore I  find
    the evidence of the Appellant that his wife only stayed in Portugal for
    three to four weeks on one occasion to be entirely false.  I also  find
    that Miss Arruda's oral evidence inconsistent with her interview record
    is a dishonest attempt to now provide consistency with  the  Appellant.
    The best that can  be  said  for  Mr  Jaji's  evidence  on  the  matter
    (paragraphs 8 to 9 witness statement) is  that  at  best  he  has  been
    disingenuous.

42. There are other aspects of this  case  when  examined  in  detail  that
    disclose inconsistencies and flaws in the account  provided.   For  the
    sake of time I do not propose to deal with each and every single  point
    but have dealt above with the major factors.

43. This is not necessarily a classic case of a "sham" marriage or at least
    not at the point when the Home Office very belatedly  became  involved.
    As I noted at the error of law hearing, it is clear that the  Appellant
    and Miss Arruda certainly by 2014 had knowledge of each other and could
    consistently answer questions.  In one sense that is hardly  surprising
    given that they had four years to consider the matter  and  also  I  am
    satisfied that they do reside at least some of the time within the same
    flat above the shop owned by Mr Jaji who is  their  employer.   I  have
    also carefully considered his evidence because he  plays  a  reasonably
    prominent role in this case, again as I anticipated at the error of law
    hearing.  I have concluded as follows.  The  Appellant  when  he  first
    came to the UK in 2003 had no intention of returning  to  Pakistan  and
    was determined by  any  means  to  remain  in  the  UK,  including  the
    production of a  bogus  education  certificate  at  one  stage.   I  am
    satisfied that when his leave was curtailed in July 2009 his  wife  and
    children returned to Pakistan in September 2009.  He decided to remain,
    placing his selfish interests above that of being  with  his  wife  and
    family.  I do not accept that his wife was killed in  October  2009  as
    claimed.  Whether she died in about 2011 or is still alive is not known
    and perhaps  not  now  relevant  for  these  purposes.   I  am  however
    satisfied that in July 2010 when the Appellant married Miss  Arruda  he
    was still married to his first wife and she was still alive.   There  I
    find his marriage to a Portuguese national void under both English  and
    Portuguese law.  Further I am entirely satisfied that the marriage  was
    a sham brought about simply  to  ensure  the  Appellant  found  another
    mechanism for remaining in the UK.   For  her  part  Miss  Arruda,  was
    single with adult children and little or no obvious dependency or  ties
    in Portugal.  Her prospects and finances there, are not  known,  but  I
    suspect were not particularly good.  She I find  has  had  a  financial
    benefit in this sham marriage in that at the very least  she  has  been
    able to work in the UK at Mr Jaji's shop and been accommodated  by  him
    above that shop.  She may also therefore have availed herself of UK tax
    credits and other such benefits.  Mr Jaji for his part is  a  long-time
    friend of the Appellant and I find that he has been  a  facilitator  in
    that which has occurred.

44. In short this has been a sham marriage from inception that has involved
    a not insignificant degree of deceit and deception on the part  of  the
    Appellant but also Miss Arruda and to some extent Mr Jaji.  This is not
    a  genuine  marriage  nor  is  this  in  the  alternative   a   durable
    relationship.  There is no basis for the Appellant remaining in the  UK
    under the 2006 EEA Regulations.  I find  no  basis  for  him  remaining
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.  He has no family life in  the  UK  but  a
    substantial family life in Pakistan.  His private life has  been  built
    from start to finish on deception and the most favourable outcome  from
    his point of view is leaving the UK without  prosecution.



Notice of Decision

I dismiss this appeal under the EEA Regulations and under Article 8  of  the
ECHR.

Anonymity not retained.



Signed   Date 10th March 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

