
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/12917/2014
                                                               IA/12931/2014
                                                               IA/13122/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House               |                Decisions and Reasons   |
|                                    |Promulgated                             |
|On: 22 June 2015                    |                 On: 1 July 2015        |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                        MISS VIDA OBEIDA DAWUDU GYAWU
                     MASTER McKenzie KOFI DAWUD TWUMASI
                        MASTER ZAIN OSEI KOJO TWUMASI
                        (No anonymity directionS made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:          Mr Waithe of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.      The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the  Secretary  of  State
   for the Home Department and the respondents are citizens of Ghana born on
   15 April 1975, 27 May 2005 and 6 October 2008 respectively.  They  are  a
   mother and her two sons. However for the sake  of  convenience,  I  shall
   refer to the latter as the "appellants" and to the Secretary of the State
   as  the  "respondent",  which  are  the  designations  they  had  in  the
   proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.




2.      I shall consider the first appellant's appeal and for  the  sake  of
   convenience refer to her as "the  appellant"  and  I  shall  specifically
   refer to the second and third appellant where necessary.



3.    The appellant's appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  the
   decision of the respondent dated 26 February 2014 to refuse the appellant
   further leave to remain in the United Kingdom pursuant to  Article  8  of
   the European Convention on Human Rights.



    4.      A Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  DA  Pears  allowed  the
       appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the European  Convention
       on Human Rights.  First-tier Tribunal Judge JM Holmes in a  decision
       dated 2 April 2015 granted the respondent permission  to  appeal  to
       the Upper Tribunal, it being found to be arguable  that  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge arguably erred in his approach to the Article  8
       appeals and to properly apply either ss117 A-D of the guidance to be
       found in EV Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ 874.



5.      Thus the appeal came before me.

   First-tier Tribunal's Findings.


6.       The respondent refused the appellant's  application  to  remain  in
   the United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules on the bases of her  and
   her two sons's private life.



7.       The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal,  concluding
   that :



          "[57]." "Before the start of submissions I indicated that I  found
          the first appellant an unreliable witness.  Her  counsel  on  that
          point did not seek to persuade me otherwise. She could not  answer
          simple questions in a straightforward manner. Her explanation  for
          why her mother was not present was unconvincing. Her statement was
          contrived at one part, not be as frank as it should have been.....
          Further there were issue where I conclude  on  the  basis  of  the
          evidence as a whole that she was lying and I refer to the  matters
          set out in paragraph 50. Mr Twumasi's was a much  more  convincing
          witness; he answered questions in a clear manner  even  when  they
          might have been said to be against the children's interest such as
          indicating that he taught them something  about  Ghanaian  culture
          and the fact that he had family back in Ghana. His history of  the
          decline in his relationship, the reasons for it and the effect  on
          the children all hung together and were credible."


          [58] "I find that Mr Twumasi is telling the truth and he  and  the
          first appellant are no longer in a relationship although currently
          sharing accommodation.  I  accept  that  the  first  appellant  is
          however their primary carer  and  his  role  as  secondary  though
          important."


          [59] "I accept that in the light  of  his  limited  leave  in  his
          answers set out in paragraph 56 that he  will  remain  in  the  UK
          until March 2017 and that the second and third appellant will lose
          extensive face-to-face contact with him."


          [60] "if the case turned on the first appellant's Article 8 rights
          I would have no hesitation in rejecting her claim  since  she  has
          been in the UK unlawfully for years and a private  life  has  been
          built up whilst her immigration status was precarious. As  section
          117B above says her private life should be afforded little  weight
          and that the maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in
          the public interest."


          [62] "That however is not the case as far as the second and  third
          appellant are concerned. They are minors, their best interests are
          a primary consideration, I have more evidence then the  respondent
          had about those best interests and that  since  the  decision  was
          made their father has been granted limited  leave  to  remain.  It
          therefore seems that the second and third  appellant's  have  been
          put forward an arguable basis for the exercise of discretion,  the
          respondent has not assessed the relevant factors  because  of  the
          leave being granted to their father and  a  repeat  evaluation  is
          necessary"


          [63] "As  I  indicated  in  submissions  however  undeserving  and
          untruthful the first appellant might be that was no fault  of  the
          second and third appellant's".


          [64] "I find on the basis of what is set  out  above  that  second
          appellant has been in the UK for more than  seven  years  and  has
          been in the UK education system since 2009. His ability to speak a
          language other than English is limited and  his  understanding  of
          Ghana and its culture is restricted."


          [65] "I find on the basis of what is set out  in  paragraph  39-42
          and 64 above  that  the  second  appellant  has  developed  social
          cultural and educational ties that it would  be  inappropriate  to
          disrupt.  [56]  "I  find  that  there  has  not  been   identified
          compelling reasons why the second appellant  should  be  removed".
          [67] "As a separate reason the second and third  appellant's  both
          have extensive face-to-face contact with their father  which  they
          would lose if they had to go to Ghana."

          [72] I conclude that if the second appellant can remain, it  would
          not be proportionate to remove  the  third  appellant  whose  best
          interest to remain are not as great as the second  appellant  only
          because he is younger and has been in the UK for less  than  seven
          years but he should not be split from his brother".

          [73] "it was not argued before me that the second and  appellant's
          father could take over the care  of  the  children,  become  their
          primary carer and the  first  appellant  could  return  to  Ghana,
          however it is only because of my conclusion  in  relation  to  the
          second and third appellant's and because the alternative  was  not
          ventilated that the first appellant's  appeal  should  be  allowed
          since if the second and third appellant's remain it would  not  be
          proportionate to remove the first appellant as  their  mother  and
          primary carer".


       The grounds of appeal.




8.       The grounds of appeal state the following  which  I  summarise.  At
   paragraph 57 the Tribunal found that the  first  appellant,  who  is  the
   mother of the other two appellants,  is  an  unreliable  witness  and  at
   paragraph 60, stated that if the  case  just  turned  on  her  article  8
   rights, it would be rejected. In making this  finding  the  Tribunal  has
   failed to provide adequate reasons for finding that the best interests of
   the second two appellants are to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
   basis of their educational needs, despite stating at paragraph  62  their
   interests are a primary consideration,  merely  because  they  have  been
   educated in the UK.



9.      The Tribunal has  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  going
   against some of the established principles  of  case  law.  None  of  the
   appellants are British citizens and these cases confirm there is no right
   to an education in the United Kingdom and  that  the  best  interests  of
   children are to remain with their parents even if those parents  have  no
   right to remain in the UK, as is the case of  the  first  appellant.  The
   Tribunal has failed to provide adequate reasons for finding that it would
   be inappropriate to disrupt the educational ties  the  second  and  third
   appellant has, as there was no  credible  evidence  before  it  that  the
   children's education could not be continued in Ghana.



       Error of law Decision




10. Therefore the appeal involves two steps, the first  being  to  determine
   whether there is an error of law in the determination of  the  first-tier
   Tribunal Judge and the second, if I find there  was  an  error,  to  hear
   evidence or submissions to enable me to remake the decision  or  send  it
   back to the First-tier Tribunal for redetermination.



11.  Having  considered  the  determination  as  a  whole,  I  find  Judge's
   consideration of the appellant's appeal in respect of Article  8  of  the
   European Convention on Human Rights is materially flawed.  The  Judge  by
   allowing has not given adequate reasons for  why  the  appellants  should
   succeed given that they have been in this country unlawfully for  a  very
   long time.



12. The appellant's application was  made  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the
   European convention on Human Rights in respect of her and her  two  son's
   private life and there was no dispute that the appellant  does  not  meet
   the requirements of the Immigration Rules.




13. Although the Judge referred to an abundance amount of case  law  in  his
   determination, made material errors of law in his application of the case
   law. The Judge failed to consider that the appellant and her sons are not
   British citizens and do not have a right to be  educated  in  the  United
   Kingdom.



14. The Judge failed to provide proper and cogent reasons for  finding  that
   the second appellant has lived  in  this  country  for  seven  years  and
   therefore that somehow entitles him to continued  British  education  for
   the rest of his life. The Judge failed to consider that  the  appellant's
   two son's education could be continued in Ghana.



15. The case of EV Philippines  which  was  referred  to  by  the  Judge  at
   paragraph 28 of his determination stated that  none  of  the  appellant's
   family were British citizens. It is clearly stated in EV Philippines that
   if the parents are removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect  the
   children to go with them. Because the best interests of children  are  to
   remain with their parents. In EV Philippines states "although  it  is  of
   course a question of fact for the Tribunal, I cannot see the desirability
   of being educated at the public  expense  in  the  UK  can  outweigh  the
   benefits to the children of remaining with  their  parents.  Just  as  we
   cannot provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot educate  the
   world".




16. The Judge having referred to paragraph 60 of EV Philippines came to  the
   opposite conclusion  that  the  appellant's  two  sons  have  established
   educational  ties  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  this  trumps  the
   respondent's interest in the fair and orderly immigration control.




  17. For the reasons given  above,  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal is set aside as it is infected by material error.



   Remaking the Decision




18. In Human Rights claims, it is for the appellant to show that there  has
    been, or there will be, if the respondent acts as  he  intends  to,  an
    interference with his human rights.  The  standard  of  proof  is  that
    there must be a real risk that such interference will be suffered.   If
    that is established, and the relevant article permits, it is  then  for
    the respondent to establish that the interference was justified.  Where
    the respondent has to establish anything, the normal civil standard  of
    a balance of probabilities applies.

19. I have considered all the evidence in the appeal including evidence  to
    which I have not specifically referred. I have taken into  account  the
    submissions at the hearing and I will re-make the decision taking  into
    account the  appellant's  circumstances  and  to  the  public  interest
    question as it applies to the facts of this case.


20. In looking at Article 8 I have considered the decision of the House  of
    Lords in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11.  The House of Lords gave guidance
    that in assessing proportionality there was  no  legal  test  of  truly
    exceptional circumstances, reaffirmed the analysis they  had  given  in
    Razgar, R (on the Application of)  v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27  and  also
    reaffirmed  the  importance  of  continuing  reliance  on   established
    Strasbourg jurisprudence relating to Article 8.  Lord Bingham's step by
    step approach in Razgar continues to  apply  in  all  expulsion  cases.
    Firstly, it is necessary to establish whether there  is  a  private  or
    family life with which removal would interfere and then Lord  Bingham's
    five questions, the step by step approach, should thereafter serve as a
    framework for deciding such cases.




21. I remind myself that the mere existence of a family relationship  or  a
    private life is not sufficient for the applicability of  Article  8(2).
    Much more is needed.  At paragraph 20 of Lord Bingham's judgment in the
    case of Huang he said this:

        "In an Article 8 case where this question is reached,  the  ultimate
         question for the appellate immigration  authority  is  whether  the
         refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances  where  the
         life of the family cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
         elsewhere, taking full account of all  considerations  weighing  in
         favour of the refusal, prejudices the family life of the  applicant
         in a manner sufficiently serious to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
         fundamental right protected by Article 8.  If the  answer  to  this
         question is affirmative, the refusal is unlawful and the  authority
         must so decide.  It is not necessary that the appellate immigration
         authority, directing itself  along  the  lines  indicated  in  this
         opinion, need ask in addition whether the  case  meets  a  test  of
         exceptionality."

22. I must consider Lord Bingham's step by step approach and in so doing  I
    recognise that at all stages of the Article 8 assessment when  deciding
    whether there is a family or private life, when  deciding  whether  any
    existing family or private life  is  the  subject  of  an  interference
    having  grave  consequences  and  when  deciding   whether   any   such
    interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be
    achieved, the approach  is  to  take  into  account  a  wide  range  of
    circumstances including the appellants  previous  family  and  personal
    circumstances and the likely developments in the future.


23. I have further considered the decision of the House of Lords in  Beoku-
    Betts v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]  UKHL  39  in
    which Baroness Hale observed that 'the right to respect for the  family
    life of one necessarily encompasses the right to respect for the family
    life of others, normally a spouse or minor  children,  with  whom  that
    family life is enjoyed'.  It was further  said  that:  'Together  these
    members enjoy a single family life and whether or not the removal would
    interfere disproportionately with it has to be looked at  by  reference
    to the family unit as a whole and  the  impact  of  removal  upon  each
    member.  If overall the removal would be disproportionate, all affected
    family members are to be  regarded  as  victims'.   In  light  of  this
    decision, I have to consider the family life of  all  those  who  share
    their family life  with  the  appellants.  In  particular,  I  have  to
    consider the Article 8 rights of the appellant's and her two sons.


24. Mr Waithe submitted that the second appellant has made  an  application
    for British citizenship on the basis that he has been in  this  country
    for more than seven years. In fact the second  appellant  has  been  in
    this country for nine years. He  argues  that  the  second  appellant's
    mother and siblings should be  both  given  leave  to  remain  in  this
    country on the basis that his mother is his primary carer and based  on
    his family life with his brother.




25. In MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC) the Upper
    Tribunal gave guidance  on  dealing  with  cases  covered  by  the  new
    Immigration Rules introduced by HC 194 on 9 July 2012.  The panel noted
    that the new Rules set out a number of mandatory requirements  relating
    to Article 8 cases which make clear that if these requirements are  not
    met, the Article 8 claim under the Rules must be refused.  However, the
    new Rules only covered Article 8 claims brought under  some,  not  all,
    parts of the Rules.  Even if a decision to refuse an  Article  8  claim
    under the new Rules is found to be correct, Judges must still  consider
    whether the decision complies with Section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998 and, in automatic deportation cases, whether removal would  breach
    a person's rights under the ECHR (Section 33(2) UK Borders Act).




26. Thus, the two stage approach to  assessing  Article  8  claims  in  the
    context of deportation and removal remains imperative as the new  Rules
    do not encapsulate the guidance in Maslov v Austria  -  1683/03  [2008]
    ECHR 546, endorsed by the higher courts in the UK.




27. In the case of Iftikhar  Ahmed  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014]  EWHC  300  (Admin)  held  it  is  settled  law  that
    considerations under Article 8 are imbedded in  the  Immigration  Rules
    such  that  if  the  Secretary  of  State  applied  those  Rules  then,
    ordinarily, Article 8 considerations would have been fully catered for.




28. It has been essentially argued by the three appellants  that  they  are
    entrenched in the  British  way  of  life  and  the  second  and  third
    appellant's are going to school and that should not be interfered with.




29. In the case of ZH Tanzania it was stated that it is not  reasonable  to
    expect the children to follow  their  mother  to  Tanzania,  not  least
    because the family  would  be  separated  and  the  children  would  be
    deprived of the rights to grow up in the  country  of  which  they  are
    citizens. The appellants are all nationals of Ghana and  therefore  the
    facts in ZH Tanzania are different than the facts  in  this  case.  The
    appellants have lived in this country illegally  from  the  outset  and
    have never had leave to live here.




30. Even if the second appellant is able to procure British citizenship  my
    decision remains the same. I have  considered  the  second  appellant's
    interests as my primary consideration which is not to say that it is my
    only consideration. I also consider the third appellant's interests  as
    my primary consideration even though he has not lived in  this  country
    for seven years.



31. I find that the starting point is that it is in the second  appellant's
    sons best interests is to remain with  his  mother  who  has  been  his
    primary carer. The appellant's  father  who  is  separated  from  their
    mother is a secondary carer. He only has limited  leave  to  remain  in
    this country on the bases of his two sons who live here  and  therefore
    it will be his choice whether he wants to return to Ghana  to  be  with
    them.



32. Ms Isherwood was unable to explain why the appellant's father was given
    leave to remain in this  country  until  2017.  The  second  and  third
    appellants' father was granted discretionary leave on the basis that he
    has two children in this  country.  His  application  however  did  not
    include the second and third appellants as his dependents.  The  second
    and  third  appellant's  father  was  at  the  time  of  the   previous
    determination not working in this country but  was  nevertheless  given
    limited leave to remain on those bases.




33. The appellant's father therefore can return to Ghana with his family as
    his leave expires in 2017. He therefore would have to apply for further
    leave to remain and to that extent the appellant's father's immigration
    status is precarious  in  this  country.  Given  that  the  appellant's
    father's leave to remain in this country is  based  on  his  two  son's
    presence here, if they are to return to Ghana  therefore  there  father
    can return with them, if that is his wish.




34. I also take into account  that  the  relationship  of  the  appellant's
    mother and father has broken down but nevertheless live together in the
    same accommodation. While there would be some interruption  with  their
    family life with their father, how long the separation will be a matter
    entirely for the appellant's father. I therefore do not find there  are
    any significant obstacles to the second appellant  returning  to  Ghana
    with his mother and sibling to enjoy family and private  life  in  that
    country.



35. In AE Algeriav Secretary of State for the home Department  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 653 it was held that in conducting the  exercise  as  to  the  best
    interests of the children as a primary  consideration,  it  would  have
    been appropriate to consider the cost of the public purse in  providing
    education to these children. In the case of Zoumbas [2013] UK SE 74  it
    was stated by the Supreme Court that children  whose  parents  had  "an
    unedifying immigration history" and had spent longer than  seven  years
    in the United Kingdom it was proportionate that they are all removed as
    a family. The best interests of the child will always  start  from  the
    premise that the child should remain with his primary carer  or  parent
    and if that parent is required to leave the  United  Kingdom  then  the
    child should accompany them.




36. In the case of Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions  affecting  children;
    onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC) it was held that  the  starting
    point it is the best interests  of  children  to  be  with  both  their
    parents and if both parents are being removed from the  United  Kingdom
    than the starting point suggests that so should dependent children will
    form part of their household unless there are reasons to the  contrary.
    It further states that it is generally in the interests of the children
    to have  both  stability  and  continuity  of  social  and  educational
    provision in the benefits of growing up in the cultural  norms  of  the
    society to which they belong. It states that lengthy residence  in  the
    country other than the State of  origin  can  lead  to  development  of
    social cultural and educational ties that it would be inappropriate  to
    disrupt, in the absence of compelling reasons  to  the  contrary.  What
    amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear-cut  but  past  and  present
    policies have identified seven years as the relevant period. Apart from
    the terms of published policies and  rules,  the  Tribunal  notes  that
    seven years from age 4 is likely to be more significant to a child than
    the first seven years of life. Very young children are focused on their
    parents rather than their peers and are  adaptable.  Short  periods  of
    residence,  particularly  once  without   leave   of   the   reasonable
    expectation of leave to enter or  remain,  while  claims  are  properly
    considered, are unlikely to give rise  to  private  life  deserving  of
    respect and the absence of exceptional factors. In any event protection
    of the economic well-being of the society amply  justifies  removal  in
    such cases.



37. The third appellant has been living in this country for less than  five
    years and therefore can adjust to life in Ghana with his mother.  There
    is no evidence that Ghana does not have  schools  to  which  the  third
    appellant can attend and continue with his education.




38. There is no reason why the appellant cannot look after her two sons  in
    Ghana. There is also no reason to believe that she cannot rely  on  her
    husband's extended family in Ghana to assist her settle  down  in  that
    country. The  appellant's  father  has  taught  the  appellant's  about
    Ghanaian culture and even though they have been in  education  in  this
    country, they can continue that education in Ghana  with  their  mother
    looking after them. As stated in the jurisprudence, the United  Kingdom
    cannot educate everyone in  this  country  other  than  those  who  are
    legally entitled to the education.




39. The public interest considerations are now contained in section  19  of
    the 2014 Act introduced into the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    act 2002 as a new part five a containing  new  sections  117-A-D.  This
    sets out the statutory guidelines that must be applied with a Court  or
    Tribunal has to  decide  whether  an  immigration  decision  to  remove
    someone from the United Kingdom would be in breach of Article 8 rights.
    117B states that the maintainers of effective immigration control is in
    the public interest and that people seeking to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom should be able to speak English and are less  of  a  burden  on
    taxpayers on are better able to integrate into society. It states  that
    little weight should be given to  a  private  life  or  a  relationship
    formed with a qualifying partner that is established by a person  at  a
    time when the person is in the United Kingdom  unlawfully.  Furthermore
    little weight should be given to a person at a time when  the  person's
    immigration status is precarious.



40. The first, second and  third  appellants  have  been  in  this  country
    illegally and  therefore  their  immigration  status  has  always  been
    precarious to their mother's knowledge. She must have  known  that  she
    would  be  required  to  leave  the  country  with  her  children  when
    discovered that she has lived and worked here illegally. I accept  that
    the second and third appellant's have nothing to do with their mother's
    illegality and I do not penalise them for her mistakes.



41. The respondent's interests in a fair and  orderly  immigration  control
    must come before the appellant's and her sons wish to continue to  live
    in this country and benefit  from  the  free  educational  system  here
    whereas in Ghana the appellant  would  have  to  work  and  look  after
    herself and her sons.



42. Even taking into  account  the  appellant  sons  rights  as  a  primary
    consideration, I find that the  appellant's  son's  equilibrium  is  to
    remain with their mother wherever she lives. If she has to go  back  to
    Ghana, it is not unreasonable to expect her sons to go with her.




43. In respect of the second appellant,  even  if  he  is  granted  British
    citizenship, and taking into account his best interests  as  a  British
    citizen, I find that he is nine years of age and as his mother and  his
    brother  have  to  return  to  Ghana,  I  find  it  would  be  entirely
    proportionate to require him to go with them in order for them to enjoy
    family life together in that country.




44. Paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules state  that  where  (iv)  an
    applicant is under the age of 18 years and has  continuously  lived  in
    the  UK  for  at  least  seven  years  (discounting   any   period   of
    imprisonment) and (vi) that there would be very  significant  obstacles
    to the applicant's integration into the country to which he would  have
    to go if required to leave the United Kingdom.




45. I find that there are no significant obstacles to the second  appellant
    returning to Ghana with his mother and brother. I find that the  second
    appellant although now nine years old, would be able to integrate  into
    Ghanaian society with the help of his mother.




46. I find there are no circumstances in all  the  appellants'  case  where
    they should succeed pursuant to Article 8 when  they  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The  appellants'  circumstances
    have been catered for within the Immigration Rules and there is no need
    to go outside them.




47. I do not accept that at this time, the second appellant is a qualifying
    child under the Immigration Rules, as argued by Mr Waithe.




48. The respondent's interest in a fair and orderly immigration control  is
    not readily upset.  I  therefore  find  that  even  if  there  is  some
    interference in the appellant  and  her  son's  private  life  in  this
    country by their exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom,  this  will  be
    according to the law and proportionate.


DECISION

I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  first-tier  Tribunal   allowing   the
appellant's  appeal  and  I  re-determine  the  appeal   and   dismiss   the
appellants' appeals for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

The appellants' appeals are dismissed


Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A       Deputy       Judge        of        the        Upper        Tribunal
     The 28th day of June 2015




