
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12825/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated|
|On 8th December 2014                      |On 19th December 2014    |
|                                          |                         |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                 AMMAD WAKIL
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Adophy of Rana and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Eldridge promulgated on 27th June 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born 1st January  1990  who
    on 4th April 2013 applied for further leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student  under  the  Points-Based  System
    (PBS).

 3. The application was refused on 24th February  2014  with  reference  to
    paragraph 245ZX(c) and (d).  The Appellant was not awarded  any  points
    under Appendix A as he  had  not  submitted  a  valid  Confirmation  of
    Acceptance for Studies (CAS), nor  was  he  awarded  any  points  under
    Appendix C in relation to maintenance, as because he had not provided a
    valid CAS, the Respondent had been unable to assess his course fees  or
    monthly maintenance requirements.

 4. The appeal was listed for hearing on 2nd June 2014.  The Appellant  did
    not attend.  Judge Eldridge (the judge) determined the  appeal  in  the
    Appellant's absence and the appeal was dismissed.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and I set out below a summary of the grounds;

      i) The judge erred at paragraph 14 by failing  to  consider  that  the
         Appellant had made a further application for  leave  to  remain  on
         14th February 2014 which was still  pending  with  the  Respondent.
         This had been mentioned in the Appellant's  witness  statement  but
         was not considered.  The judge failed  to  consider  the  biometric
         letter in the Appellant's bundle.

     ii) The judge erred at paragraph 16 in finding that the Appellant could
         not show that he had a Sponsor and had failed to take into  account
         an offer letter issued by Ace College of IT  and  Management  which
         letter was sent with the fresh application for leave to remain made
         on 14th February 2014.

    iii) The judge erred by failing  to  consider  that  the  Appellant  had
         written to the Respondent requesting his passport so that he  could
         sit an English Language Test again as his previous certificate  had
         expired.

     iv) The judge erred by giving inadequate reasons for his findings.

      v) The judge  erred  by  either  misconstruing  facts  or  failing  to
         consider properly or at all the evidence.

     vi) The judge erred by not taking into account that the  Appellant  had
         an ACCA exam on the date of the hearing  and  his  request  for  an
         adjournment had been refused.  If he had been given the opportunity
         to attend the hearing he could have explained the circumstances and
         merits of his case.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Osborne and I set out  below  paragraphs  3  and  4  of  the  grant  of
    permission;

         "3.  In an otherwise  focused  determination  in  which  the  judge
             engaged  with  the  evidence  which  was  before  him,  it  is
             nonetheless arguable that the judge  failed  to  appropriately
             consider the evidence that was not before him  but  notice  of
             which had been given by the Appellant.  The  judge  failed  to
             refer to the fact that a further application had been made  on
             14th February 2014 and also failed to refer to the  fact  that
             the Appellant had requested the  return  of  his  passport  in
             order to arrange an IELTS test.  This information was arguably
             before the judge and so arguably should have been  taken  into
             account and further arguably should have been referred  to  in
             the determination.  The fact that the  evidence  was  arguably
             not considered amounts to an arguable error of law.

         4.   As this arguable error of law has  been  identified,  all  the
             issues raised in the grounds are arguable."

 7. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the  Upper  Tribunal  to  decide  whether   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    determination should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

 8. Mr Adophy commenced his submissions by contending that  an  adjournment
    should have been granted when requested on behalf of the Appellant.

 9. Mr Adophy, in contending that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination
    contained errors of law set out a chronology.  On 4th  April  2013  the
    Appellant had made an in time application for further leave  to  remain
    to study at Islington College.  On 17th December  2013  the  Respondent
    wrote to the Appellant advising that the Sponsor licence  of  Islington
    College  had  been  revoked,  and  consideration  of  the   Appellant's
    application would be suspended for a period  of  60  calendar  days  to
    enable him to submit a fresh application.  The 60 day period  ended  on
    15th February 2014.

10. Mr Adophy contended that a fresh application for leave to remain had in
    fact been made on 14th February 2014 although it was accepted  that  at
    that time the Appellant did not have  a  new  CAS  or  the  appropriate
    English language test, and he could not undertake such a  test  because
    the Respondent held his passport.

11. Mr Adophy submitted that the judge had erred by not taking into account
    the fact that this new application had been made,  nor  had  the  judge
    taken into account that the Appellant had requested his  passport  from
    the Respondent but had not received  it  so  could  not  undertake  the
    English test.  It was therefore submitted that the judge had  erred  in
    law by not acting fairly.

12. I made the point to Mr Adophy that the Tribunal file  did  not  confirm
    that evidence had been submitted to prove that a fresh application  had
    been made on 14th February 2014, and that this evidence  appeared  only
    to have been submitted with the application for permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal on 4th July 2014.  I invited Mr Adophy  to  consider
    this while I heard from Mr Nath, and he could  then  advise  me  as  to
    whether there was any evidence to prove that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had been notified of the further application made by the Appellant.

The Respondent's Submissions

13. Mr Nath submitted that the determination disclosed  no  error  of  law.
    Following the revocation of the licence held by Islington College,  the
    Appellant had failed to submit  a  new  CAS  within  60  days  of  17th
    December 2013 and the  judge  had  therefore  correctly  dismissed  the
    appeal.

The Appellant's Response

14. Mr Adophy stated that the further application  made  on  14th  February
    2014 was referred to in the Respondent's  refusal  dated  5th  November
    2014.  This refusal was clearly not before the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    June 2014, and was not on the Tribunal file.  Mr Adophy produced a copy
    which confirmed that  there  had  been  an  application  made  on  14th
    February 2014 and refused because there was no CAS submitted  with  the
    application.

15. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. I will firstly consider the sixth point made in the  grounds  contained
    within the application for  permission  to  appeal,  which  relates  to
    refusal of an adjournment application.

17. It is clear that there was no application made  to  the  judge  for  an
    adjournment as the application had been made in  writing  on  12th  May
    2014, and refused in abrupt terms by a judge other than Judge  Eldridge
    on 15th May 2014.

18. The solicitors  who  made  the  application  did  not  make  a  further
    application following refusal, but wrote to the Tribunal  on  31st  May
    2014 indicating that they had tried to obtain further instructions from
    the  Appellant  without  success,  and  therefore  they  would  not  be
    attending the hearing which they acknowledged was on 2nd June 2014  and
    requesting that they be removed from the record.

19. The appeal was listed as a float case on 2nd June 2014 and there was no
    attendance by or on behalf of the  Appellant.   There  was  no  further
    explanation for the non-attendance and no further  application  for  an
    adjournment.  I have considered the refusal of the adjournment  request
    made on 12th May 2014 in the light of the principles set out in Nwaigwe
    (Adjournment - Fairness) [2014] UKUT  00418  (IAC).   The  test  to  be
    applied is one of fairness, and whether there was  any  deprivation  of
    the Appellant's rights to a fair hearing.  I do not find any  error  of
    law although the  refusal  decision  was  inappropriately  worded.   An
    adjournment could not  have  assisted  the  Appellant  as  he  had  not
    submitted a further CAS within the 60  day  period.   The  Respondent's
    letter dated 17th December 2013 was clear in stating that  the  60  day
    period would end on 15th February 2014 and there would  be  no  further
    extensions beyond that date, and that  if  a  new  valid  CAS  was  not
    submitted within that 60 day period,  then  the  application  would  be
    considered on the basis of  the  information  currently  available  and
    would be refused.  As the Appellant accepted that he had not  submitted
    a further CAS within the 60 day period, an adjournment would  not  have
    assisted his case.

20. I will then consider the grounds as set  out  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.

21. Dealing with the first ground, I find no error of law.  It is contended
    that the  Appellant  mentioned  as  a  material  fact  in  his  witness
    statement, that he had made a further application for leave  to  remain
    on 14th February  2014.   I  can  find  no  reference  in  the  witness
    statement to the Appellant stating that he had made a  fresh  claim  on
    14th February 2014.   The  witness  statement  dated  18th  April  2014
    confirms that the Appellant has been unable to obtain a new CAS because
    his English certificate had expired and he needed to take a new English
    language test.

22. There is reference to a biometric letter from  the  Respondent  in  the
    Appellant's bundle, and the letter is dated 6th March  2014,  but  that
    letter gives no information regarding a new application.

23. The Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs 9 and 14
    make reference to the Appellant submitting a fresh  application  before
    the expiry of the 60 days from 17th  December  2013,  but  provided  no
    evidence that such an application had been made.  The  grounds  confirm
    that the Appellant did not have either  a  new  CAS  or  an  up-to-date
    English language certificate, and therefore even if a  new  application
    had been made before the 60 days expired, it could not have succeeded.

24. I find that there was no satisfactory evidence before the judge,  of  a
    new application having been made on 14th February 2014,  and  that  the
    first time that such evidence was produced to the Tribunal, was  a  fax
    dated 4th July 2014, when an application for permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal was made.

25. The Appellant's bundle which was before the First-tier Tribunal did not
    contain the application made on 14th February 2014 but  did  contain  a
    letter dated 14th February 2014 from the Appellant  to  the  Respondent
    but this letter requested an extension of time to enable the  Appellant
    to undertake an English language test, and to obtain a new CAS.

26. The second Ground of Appeal submits that the judge erred  at  paragraph
    16 by making a finding that the Appellant could not find a new  Sponsor
    and did not take into account an offer letter issued by Ace College  of
    IT and Management.  I am satisfied that this ground discloses no  error
    of law and that the letter from Ace College dated  14th  February  2014
    was not before the judge.  As with the application for further leave to
    remain made on 14th February 2014, I find that the first time that this
    document was presented to the Tribunal was on 4th July  2014  with  the
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

27. In any event the letter from Ace College is a conditional offer, and is
    therefore not a CAS, and specifically states that in order to obtain an
    unconditional offer the Appellant  would  need  to  submit  an  English
    language test equivalent to CEFR level B2.

28. The third ground contained within the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal refers to the judge not taking into account that  the  Appellant
    had written to  the  Respondent  requesting  his  passport.   The  only
    evidence of this was the letter referred to above dated  14th  February
    2014, which was written one day before the 60  day  period  expired  on
    15th February 2014.  I do not  find  this  is  of  relevance,  save  to
    confirm to the judge that with one day before the expiry of the 60  day
    deadline, the Appellant did not have a CAS nor an English language test
    certificate.

29. The fourth Ground of Appeal relates  to  adequacy  of  reasoning.   The
    Upper Tribunal made it clear in Budhathoki that a judge did not have to
    rehearse every detail or issue raised in  a  case,  but  a  judge  must
    identify and resolve any key conflicts  in  evidence,  and  explain  in
    clear and brief terms their reasons, so that parties  could  understand
    why they have won or lost.  I find no error of law is disclosed by this
    ground.  The judge considered all relevant evidence  before  him,  made
    findings which were open to him on the evidence, and  gave  sustainable
    and adequate reasons.

30.  The  fifth  Ground  of  Appeal  makes  reference   to   the   Tribunal
    misconstruing the facts, or failing to consider properly or at all  the
    evidence tendered.  Some of the evidence relied upon by  the  Appellant
    in making the application for permission to appeal was not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The judge considered all the  evidence  that  was
    before him and I find no indication that any facts were misconstrued or
    that evidence was not properly considered.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no error of law.

I do not set aside the decision which stands and the appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal, and no  anonymity  order  is
made.



Signed        Date 10th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.



Signed        Date 10th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

