
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12468/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|26 June 2015                         |On 21 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MUHAMMAD KASHIF
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr G Rea, of Maguire Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent (whom we shall call  the  claimant)  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision
    of the Secretary of State refusing to issue him a residence card on the
    basis of his marriage to Weronika Grzegorczyn,  a  national  of  Poland
    exercising treaty rights here, on the basis that  his  marriage  was  a
    marriage of convenience.  Judge Mozolowski  allowed  the  appeal.   The
    Secretary of State sought and obtained permission  to  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal on the basis that her findings of  fact  disclosed  errors  of
    law.  We heard submissions from Ms Petterson.  We did not need to  call
    on Mr Rea.

 2. We have examined the judge's notes of the evidence before her  and  the
    submissions made by the Presenting Officer.  There is no doubt, as  her
    determination reveals, that the judge took into  account  the  concerns
    expressed by the respondent.  But the judge had  other  concerns,  made
    apparent at the hearing.  One was that the parties were interviewed  in
    English, that they had some difficulties in English, and that they were
    not invited to confirm as accurate any record of what they had said  at
    the interview.  The  second  was  that  some  of  the  questions  asked
    appeared to the judge to be if not inappropriate, at any rate difficult
    to answer from the different cultural background of  the  appellant  in
    particular.  She summed up her conclusions as being that the  Secretary
    of State's concerns about the relationship between the claimant and his
    wife derived principally from the interviews, but that, for the reasons
    indicated, she was not prepared to give so much weight to the interview
    evidence.  There is no doubt that she  regarded  the  matter  as  quite
    close, but concluded in the end, that the marriage was not  a  marriage
    of convenience.

 3. The judge is not shown to have ignored any material that she  ought  to
    have taken into account, nor to have taken into  account  any  material
    that she ought to have ignored.  The Presenting Officer does not appear
    to have made specific submissions on the matters  of  concern  that  we
    have identified.  The judge, however, had the benefit of oral  evidence
    from both the parties to this marriage.  In the  circumstances  we  are
    wholly unable to say that the conclusion she reached was one which  was
    not open to her.  The fact (if it be a fact)  that  a  different  judge
    might have reached a different conclusion is, of course, wholly  beside
    the point.  Judge Mozolowski's determination discloses no error of  law
    and  must  stand.   The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is   therefore
    dismissed.



                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 13 July 2015
