

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12017/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 17 February 2015                           |On 22 May 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       THE HON. MRS JUSTICE THIRLWALL
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              jalal uddin hemel
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman, instructed by Lawland Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. At the end of the hearing we announced  our  decision  to  dismiss  the
    SSHD's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  This  statement  contains  our
    reasons.

 2. Mr Hemel arrived in the UK on 16 October 2009 with entry clearance that
    acted as leave to enter as a tier 4 (general) student migrant.   On  23
    May 2013, he was granted further leave  to  10  October  2016.   On  15
    December 2013 he applied for documentation to confirm he had a right of
    residence as an extended family member under  regulation  8(1)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 on the basis that
    he was dependent on his uncle, Mr Sheikh  Mansuruzzaman,  a  Portuguese
    national working in the UK.  Mr Hemel claimed to have been dependent on
    his uncle before coming to the UK  in  2009.   The  SSHD  rejected  the
    application on the grounds that Mr Hemel had failed to show that he was
    dependent on his uncle whilst living  in  Bangladesh.   On  3  November
    20114, First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell accepted the  evidence  given
    by Mr Hemel and Mr Mansuruzzaman and  allowed  the  appeal.   The  SSHD
    appeals that decision.

 3. The only criticism the SSHD makes of the statement of reasons  is  that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell did not make a clear finding  as  to
    when Mr Sheikh Mansuruzzaman became a Portuguese  citizen  and  thereby
    failed to comply with the guidance set out in the second head  note  of
    Moneke (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 341 (IAC).  For convenience, we
    set out the first two head notes.

      i.      A person claiming to be an OFM  [other  family  member]  under
        Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC may either be a dependant or a
        member of the household of the EEA national: they  are  alternative
        ways of qualifying as an OFM.
      ii. In either case the dependency or membership of the household  must
        be on a person who is an EEA national at  the  material  time.  For
        this reason it is essential that tribunal judges establish when the
        sponsor acquired EEA nationality.

 4. We are satisfied that the criticism is misplaced.


 5. First, we find the  contents  of  paragraph  31  establish  that  Judge
    Buckwell found the sponsor to be credible and that the oral evidence he
    gave at the hearing was reliable.  That evidence included the fact that
    the sponsor acquired Portuguese citizenship in June 2009,  as  recorded
    in paragraph 20.  This means  there  was  a  period  between  June  and
    October 2009 when Mr Hemel was dependent on his  EEA  national  sponsor
    while living in Bangladesh.

 6. We take account of  the  fact  that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
    sponsor's oral evidence as to when he became  Portuguese  despite  that
    evidence  being  given  in  cross  examination.     In  answer  to  our
    question, Mr Wilding accepted that oral evidence would be sufficient to
    discharge the burden of proof where it  was  unchallenged,  as  it  was
    here.  Whilst the SSHD might have preferred documentary  evidence,  the
    evidence before  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  judge  was  sufficient  to
    discharge the burden of proof.

 7. Our second reason for rejecting  the  SSHD's  appeal  is  that,  as  we
    discussed during the hearing, it is far from clear that the SSHD's case
    was mounted on the premise now advanced. The focus in the  reasons  for
    refusal and in the submissions recounted in  paragraph  24  is  on  the
    question of dependency and household membership and not on whether  the
    sponsor had been an EEA national at the material time. Judge Buckwell's
    positive  findings  as  to  dependency  and  household  membership  aer
    unchallenged.  It  would  appear  that  the  focus  changed  after  the
    decision and reasons statement was promulgated. This  indicates  to  us
    that the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is in reality an attempt  to  re-
    litigate the case on a different basis. Such an approach - based on the
    notion that the losing party might have done better if  it  had  argued
    differently - does not give rise to an arguable ground of appeal  on  a
    point of law.   There was no error by the judge.

 8. We have one final  observation  that  relates  to  the  reported  case,
    Moneke.  Neither Mr Wilding nor Mr  Coleman  was  able  to  offer  much
    assistance  when  we  asked  them  to  identify  from  where   in   the
    determination the second sentence of  the  second  head  note  derived.
    Although paragraph 40(ii) confirms that to benefit from the  rights  of
    free movement and residence an OFM person  must  show  that  they  were
    dependent on an EEA national before coming  to  the  UK  and  that  the
    sponsor must have been an EEA national at that time, we cannot see  the
    basis for saying that "it is essential that tribunal  judges  establish
    when the sponsor acquired EEA  nationality."   It  is  plain  from  the
    reported determination that  the  judge  must  be  satisfied  that  the
    sponsor was an EEA national and that the  OFM  was  dependent  on  them
    prior to the OFM coming to the UK.  It is evident from Judge Buckwell's
    statement of reasons when read as a whole that he was so satisfied.

 9. In conclusion, because we are satisfied that  Judge  Buckwell  accepted
    the oral evidence of the sponsor that  he  became  Portuguese  in  June
    2009, and that was before Mr Hemel came to the UK, the SSHD's appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal fails and we uphold the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Decision

The SSHD's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  There is no error  of
law in the statement of reasons of the First-tier Tribunal and its  decision
is upheld.






                               Signed                     Date


                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy
