
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12764/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st October 2018                      |On 25th October 2018               |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     M W
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Sanghera (Solicitor), J M Wilson
For the Respondent:    Mrs H. Aboni, Senior HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge J L Bristow, promulgated on 29th March 2018, following a  hearing
    at Birmingham on 19th March 2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Jamaica, and  was  born  on  28th
    August 1980.  He appeals against the decision of the  Respondent  dated
    28th May 2014, refusing his application for leave to remain in  the  UK
    on the basis of his Article 8 rights.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he married a [LW], on [  ~
    ] 2014.  A daughter of the marriage was born on [ ~ ] 2014.  She is now
    3 years of age.  There had been a rejection of that claim on  28th  May
    2014 and on 26th March 2015.   That  had  been  appealed.   An  adverse
    decision in the First-tier Tribunal had  been  reversed  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 14th February 2017.  Thereafter on 9th March 2018 a  second
    child had been born to the Appellant and his  wife.   The  decision  of
    Judge Bristow was against that background.

 4.  The  Appellant's  application  had   been   refused   essentially   on
    "suitability" grounds because of his criminal activities,  and  it  was
    decided that the Article 8 claim inevitably fell to be refused in those
    circumstances.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge had regard to the fact that the Appellant admitted that there
    had  been  convictions  at  Birmingham  Magistrates'  Court  in   2012.
    However, he disputed that he had a  caution  administered  to  him  for
    obstructing a police constable on 5th October 2009.  He  disputed  that
    he was associated with drugs and gangs on the basis that reference  had
    been made to an entirely different person in this regard  and  that  he
    had been wrongly implicated.

 6. The judge went on to consider  these  matters  and  observed  that  the
    Appellant's assertion that the caution for obstruction  of  the  police
    constable on 5th October 2009 not being his, was not  plausible.   This
    is because the log labelled 20F2606709 clearly set out why  the  giving
    of false details did not occur on the same day as the assault.  It  was
    not credible that another man was arrested on  5th  October  2009  (see
    paragraph 46).  The judge observed that the Appellant was cautioned for
    the offence on 18th March 2010 (paragraph 47).  As for  the  allegation
    that there were numerous police intelligence logs (at pages 43 to 59 of
    the Respondent's second bundle, and pages 39 to 123 of the Respondent's
    third bundle), confirming that the Appellant was a class A drug  dealer
    known as "Black K", the judge held that this was simply not made out as
    an allegation, because, for one thing, the Appellant  did  not  have  a
    shaved head when he appeared at the Tribunal and his vehicle was fuller
    than the one described in the two logs (paragraph 60).   The  Appellant
    also had two tattoos, a teardrop under his right eye and  the  name  of
    his son on his neck (paragraph 63).  In  conclusion,  the  judge  found
    that the Respondent had not proved  to  the  civil  standard  that  the
    Appellant was a drug dealer.  It had not been proved that he associated
    with gang and drug related activities (paragraph 70).

 7. However, in relation to the Appellant's Article 8 claim, when  it  came
    to considering the family life, the judge was  of  the  view  that  the
    Appellant's claim fell to be refused on the grounds  that  he  had  not
    been  able  to  demonstrate  that  he   satisfied   the   "suitability"
    requirements under S-LTRP.1.6.  He had entered the UK unlawfully  on  a
    false passport.  He had been cautioned for domestic violence.   He  had
    been cautioned for obstructing the police officer  in  relation  to  an
    assault.  The judge recorded that "the Appellant sought to mislead  the
    Tribunal by asserting that the caution was not his".  It was said  that
    he was then also convicted of offences on 14th March 2012.   (Paragraph
    73).  In addition, the Appellant was expressly asked in his application
    form of 27th May 2014 (at page 13) whether he had ever  been  convicted
    of "any criminal offence  in  the  UK  or  any  other  country?".   The
    Appellant had answered "no".  The judge observed that "that answer  was
    given after 2010 and 2012 cautions and convictions and  was  plainly  a
    failure  by  him  to  disclose  material  facts  in  relation  to   the
    application" (paragraph 74).   Accordingly,  the  Appellant  could  not
    succeed under Appendix FM (paragraph 75).  He could not  succeed  under
    paragraph 276ADE (paragraph 76).

 8. The judge went on to hold that it was true that he  had  established  a
    family life in the UK, and he was  married,  and  had  two  very  young
    children with his wife, together with another child  by  another  woman
    (paragraph 80).

 9. However, in looking at the question of  disproportionate  interference,
    given the legitimate public end sought to be achieved,  the  judge  was
    not satisfied that the Appellant could succeed.   This  is  because  in
    Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC, it had been held that the  critical  issue  for
    the Tribunal will be "the  strength  of  the  public  interest  in  the
    deportation of the offender" and that "in general, only a claim that is
    very strong indeed - very compelling, as it was put in MF  (Nigeria)  -
    will succeed" (paragraph 84).  The judge recognised that that  guidance
    was given in the context of deportation.  However, the judge went on to
    say that, "the principles are applicable  to  my  decision"  (paragraph
    85).  That being so, because the Appellant could not  show  that  there
    were "very compelling circumstances", the appeal would fail.  The judge
    set out (at paragraph  86)  all  the  matters  that  went  against  the
    Appellant.  He also set out all the matters that were in favour of  the
    Appellant (at paragraph 87).  However, in the end,  balancing  out  the
    two sets of circumstances,  the  judge  was  of  the  view  that,  "the
    Appellant has not proved to the required standard that there  are  very
    compelling circumstances which outweigh the clear  public  interest  in
    the maintenance of effective immigration controls" (paragraph 88).

10. The appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in  applying  too
    high a test when considering the suitability requirements of the Rules.
     Second, it was said that when  assessing  proportionality,  the  judge
    failed to take into account the Respondent's earlier grant of leave  to
    the Appellant on very similar facts, such that it must have  been  well
    within the knowledge of the Respondent  what  the  Appellant's  conduct
    was.  Third, it was said that the judge wrongly took  into  account  an
    incorrect answer, when the Appellant was asked whether he had ever been
    guilty of a criminal offence, and he had  answered  "no",  because  the
    Appellant had previously never  provided  such  incorrect  information,
    such that this was a mistake, rather than a  deception.   Finally,  the
    judge failed to give weight to the rights and  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant's three children and to properly consider Section 117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Act.

12. On 11th July 2018, permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that
    it was arguable that the judge did not consider the best  interests  of
    the children as a primary consideration.  He misapplied the  provisions
    of Section  117B(6).   When  considering  proportionality  outside  the
    Rules, it was arguable that the  incorrect  test  of  "very  compelling
    circumstances" was  applied  (at  paragraphs  84  and  88),  which  was
    applicable to deportation appeals, which was not the case here.

13. On 13th September 2018, there was a Rule 24 response by the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.  This made two points.  First, that the  judge  did
    not err in relation to the "suitability" assessment.  However,  it  was
    stated, secondly, that the reference to "very compelling circumstances"
    in an Article 8 assessment outside the Immigration Rules, was a mistake
    because the Appellant was not liable to deportation.  Accordingly,  the
    Secretary of State accepted that the judge had erred in law.  The Upper
    Tribunal was invited therefore to remake the decision.

Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 1st October 2018, Miss Sangera,  relied  on
    the grounds of application.  First, she submitted that  the  judge  had
    applied too high a threshold in  relation  to  suitability.   When  the
    Appellant had answered "no" to whether he had been guilty  of  criminal
    offences in the past, this was plainly a mistake, because in a previous
    application the Appellant had disclosed everything and had been granted
    leave to remain.  Indeed, even in the  current  application,  what  the
    Appellant had done was to have to set out  at  the  outset  his  entire
    history, which did not set out to in any way to deceive the  Respondent
    authority, which was telling as to his good faith in this matter.

15. The Appellant had been granted leave already outside the Rules  on  3rd
    December 2014.  His conduct, such as it was, was entirely known to  the
    Respondent.  Everything had been disclosed  in  the  application.   The
    Respondent had not found it disproportionate to  refuse  the  Appellant
    leave in the light of his conduct  previously.   In  any  "suitability"
    assessment, the essential question was whether there was an attempt  to
    mislead the Respondent, and this was a mischief that  was  targeted  at
    SLTR.2.2, which is not what the Appellant had set out to do  here.   He
    had previously disclosed his conduct.  There  had  previously  been  no
    attempt to mislead.  This ought to have raised in  the  proportionality
    balance.  It was wrong to simply isolate a particular answer,  such  as
    "no" and to conclude that on this basis alone the Appellant was  judged
    to have failed the "suitability" threshold.

16. If, submitted Miss Sanghera, she succeeded in  demonstrating  that  the
    Appellant satisfied the "suitability" test, then,  given  the  accepted
    the error by the Respondent Presenting Officer today, in relation to  a
    very high test of "very compelling circumstances" having  been  applied
    by the judge in the proportionality exercise, the appeal must stand  to
    be allowed, and she urged me to allow the appeal.

17. Second, and in the alternative, however, if this Tribunal  was  not  so
    satisfied, then regard should be had to the fact that the matter should
    be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to consider the position of
    the children, of which there were three in this  case,  as  well  as  a
    Section  117B(6)  statutory  requirement.   The   Appellant's   witness
    statement makes it clear that family law proceedings were in process in
    relation to the first child (see the Appellant's  bundle  at  page  19,
    paragraph  67,  as  well  a  paragraph  73)   which   described   these
    proceedings, this matter had simply not been referred to by the  judge,
    even though it was in the documentation.  It had to be remembered  that
    the best interests of the child was a primary consideration.  A failure
    to even refer to the first child in this respect was an error.

18. For her part,  Mrs  Aboni  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response.   She
    submitted that it was accepted that  there  was  a  material  error  in
    relation to Article 8,  when  the  judge  applied  a  test,  which  was
    applicable  to  someone  subject  to  deportation,  namely,  the  "very
    compelling circumstances" test (see paragraph 88), which the judge  had
    said did not outweigh the clear public interest in the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control.  However, the judge  did  not  misdirect
    himself in relation to "suitability" considerations.  The Appellant had
    not merely ticked the box saying "no".  He had  even  denied  that  the
    criminal activities referred to were attributed to him.  The  Appellant
    had attempted to mislead.  It was not material that the judge  did  not
    make findings here that the Appellant had set out to mislead.   It  was
    enough for the judge to say that the Appellant had  disputed  that  the
    record in question related in  him.   Second,  having  said  that,  the
    matter needed to be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  so  that
    the best interests  of  the  children  could  be  considered,  and  the
    proceedings in the Family Court in relation to the first child could be
    looked at more specifically.

19. In reply, Miss Sanghera submitted that one had to look at paragraphs 55
    to 70 of the determination, to note that the judge had  considered  the
    allegation against the Appellant of "association with drugs and gangs",
    only to throw that out, as being something  which  the  Respondent  has
    simply not been able to prove.  In the same way, the caution  that  had
    been handed to him, was dated 5th October 2009 (see  paragraphs  46  to
    47) but it had not been administered until 18th March  2010,  and  this
    was expressly recognised by the Respondent  herself  (see  C5  at  R1).
    Therefore, when the Appellant said that he had not  been  cautioned  on
    5th October 2009, he was entirely right, because the  caution  had  not
    been administered until 18th March 2010.  Accordingly, he would succeed
    on the basis of "suitability" assessments.

Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  Whilst Miss Sanghera has  sought  to  persuade  me  that  the
    Appellant did not attempt to mislead when he answered "no" in  relation
    to a very specific question that, whether he had any criminal offences,
    I am satisfied that this is not the case.  The judge was entitled, as a
    fact-finding Tribunal, to conclude that giving  a  wrong  answer  to  a
    question as simple as this, would have a tendency to mislead.  This  is
    despite the fact that other allegations, such as  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's association with drugs and gangs, were not accepted by  the
    judge, as being wrongly levied at the Appellant.

21. Second, however, that leaves the question, of the Article 8  assessment
    outside the Immigration Rules.  Both sides are ad idem that  the  judge
    erred in applying the standard applicable to deportation cases  of  the
    need to show "very  compelling  circumstances"  to  a  case  where  the
    Appellant here was not facing deportation.  In these circumstances, the
    judge's conclusion (at paragraph  88)  that,  "the  Appellant  has  not
    proved  to  the  required  standard  that  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances  which  outweighed  the  clear  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of  effective  immigration  controls",  was  unsustainable.
    This is especially in the light of what the judge set out (at paragraph
    87) in  relation  to  the  position  of  the  children,  which  it  was
    recognised was one where the best interests would be  served  by  there
    being able to live with their father, and the Appellant's  relationship
    with his wife, Mrs [W], who the judge recognised "will need support" in
    that her latest child is only a few days old.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to practice statement 7.2(b) of the Procedure  Rules,
    to be heard by a judge other than Judge Bristow, for the reasons that I
    have set out above.

23. An anonymity is order is made.

24. This appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2018
