

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ia12765-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   22.11.2013|
|on    22.11.2013                              |sent out:    29. 11.2013     |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                               Andries OLIVIER
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  H Davis  (counsel, by direct access)
For the respondent: Mr P Deller


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Sean Fox), sitting without a hearing (the  appellant  )
    at Belfast on 2 August, to  a student's husband appeal by a citizen  of
    South Africa, born 26 September 1985. Permission was given to challenge
    the lawfulness of the judge's upholding the removal  directions,  which
    had been  given  at  the  same  time  as  the  refusal  to  extend  the
    appellant's leave, against which he had  appealed.  That  part  of  the
    appeal is allowed by consent: see Adamally & Jaferi (section 47 removal
    decisions: Tribunal Procedures) [2012] UKUT (IAC) 414.



 2. So far as the appellant's challenge to  the  judge's  decision  on  the
    merits of the refusal of  leave  to  remain  is  concerned,  the  grant
    neither gave nor refused him permission to argue  that.  I  invited  Mr
    Davis to identify the grounds, which he did by reference to the grounds
    of appeal,  not  those  before  the  judge,  but  those  on  which  the
    application to this Tribunal had been based.  Clearly  however  similar
    grounds had been raised before the judge, and he had dealt with them at
    paragraph 18; so I invited Mr Davis to specify the basis  on  which  he
    said the judge's decision had been wrong in law on the material  before
    him, but he frankly acknowledged that there had been no arguable  error
    of law on the  part  of  the  judge,  except  for  confirming  (on  the
    authorities as they had been) the removal directions.

 3. The grounds raise  a  complaint  of  misleading  advice  given  to  the
    appellant or his wife on his behalf by Home  Office  staff,  whom  they
    were unable to identify. Mr Deller undertook to discuss this  complaint
    with them after the hearing, and to investigate  any  legitimate  basis
    for  it,  so  far  as  the  Home  Office  decision-making  process  was
    concerned. However, the judge was not wrong in law in his  decision  on
    this point, and the appeal against the refusal of leave to remain  must
    fail. Unfortunately the appellant and his wife knew no better  than  to
    take the option of having it decided in the First-tier Tribunal without
    a hearing: this is rarely to the appellant's advantage in an in-country
    case, and those responsible for designing the appeal forms  might  like
    to consider whether they should not carry some warning about that.

Appeal against removal directions allowed
Appeal against refusal of leave to remain



                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



