
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12693/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th October 2014                             |On 15th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               john kwesi-buor

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Henderson made following a hearing at Bradford on 25th June 2014.



Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Ghana born  on  14th  November  1971.   He
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse  to  grant
    him leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and  to  make
    directions for his removal.  He accepted that he  could  not  meet  the
    maintenance grounds because of a brief  shortfall  in  his  funds,  but
    argued that he ought to be allowed to remain in the UK on human  rights
    grounds because he had almost finished his PhD, and his  work  to  date
    would be wasted if he was unable to complete his thesis.  He was within
    weeks of achieving his goal.  He had been in  receipt  of  considerable
    resources in terms of scholarships and his area of studies was not only
    beneficial to him but was of wide application since it  was  linked  to
    humanitarian logistics and disaster relief.

 3. The judge recorded that the claimant had a wife and child in Ghana  and
    he would be returning to good employment there as an academic.  He  had
    no intention of remaining  in  this  country  but  the  timing  of  the
    decision to remove him was a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
    private life.  On that basis she allowed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 4. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred both in finding there to be an  arguable  case  for
    the existence of compelling  circumstances  not  recognised  under  the
    Rules before embarking upon an Article 8 analysis outside of them  and,
    second, had erred in finding Article 8 was engaged in this case.

The Hearing

 5. The claimant told me that he had hoped to have finished his writing  by
    last month but had not been able to do so.  He  was,  however,  in  the
    final stages and needed a little more time in order to finish his work.

Findings and Conclusions

 6. In Patel [2013] UKSC 13 the Supreme Court held that:-

         "It is important to remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power.  It is to be distinguished from the Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outsider  the  Rules
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right.  The merits of
         a decision not to depart from  the  Rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: Section 86(6).  One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call in
         Pankina  for  commonsense  in  the  application  of  the  Rules  to
         graduates who have been  studying in the UK  for  some  years  (see
         para 47 above).  However, such considerations do not by  themselves
         provide grounds of appeal under Article 8, which is concerned  with
         private or family life, not education as such.  The opportunity for
         a promising student to complete his course in this country, however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under Article 8."

 7. The judge erred in law in finding Article 8 to be engaged.  The  proper
    course, if the  claimant  needs  further  time,  is  to  make  a  fresh
    application for an extension.

Decision

 8. The judge erred in law.  Her decision is  set  aside.   The  claimant's
    appeal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


