
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia 12810 2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Sheldon Court                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 April 2013 and 29 July 2013             |On 24 September 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                             D--- R--- K--- B---
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, Counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin
                    Solicitors
     (on 23.04.2013)
     Ms C Meredith, Counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
     (on 29.07.2013)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (on 23.04.2010)
     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer (on 29.7.2013)
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although this case concerns the deportation of a rapist and is therefore
    a case in which there can be expected to be considerable public interest
    we decided to agree with the appellant's request that we make  an  order
    that this decision must not be reported in a  way  that  identifies  the
    appellant. This is because many of the arguments before  us  touched  on
    the interests of his children  in  the  United  Kingdom  who  should  be
    protected from publicity.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Tanzania who was born in 1971.  He appeals
    a decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  the
    decision of the respondent to deport him from the United  Kingdom  dated
    25 May 2012.

 3. At the hearing on 23 April 2013 we found that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.  The decision was made because the Presenting Officer,
    having heard our preliminary views, did not  feel  able  to  defend  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision.  However, as Mr Smart pointed out on  29
    July, the reasons given at the hearing  were  not  satisfactory  and  we
    explain below precisely why we found the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred
    in law.  In the event of anyone seeking  to  appeal  this  part  of  our
    decision then it is the reasons given here that are  to  be  taken  into
    account.

 4. As is plain from reading the notice of decision the  respondent  decided
    to make the appellant the subject  of  a  deportation  order  using  her
    powers under Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act  1971.   The  appellant
    was liable for deportation by reason of Section 3(6)  of  the  1971  Act
    because, following his conviction before  the  Crown  Court  sitting  at
    Kingston of  the  offence  of  rape  he  was  sentenced  to  six  years'
    imprisonment and recommended for deportation by the trial judge.

 5. The appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  but  permission  to
    appeal was ordered by a  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  who  (wrongly)
    described the appeal as  an  appeal  against  the  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order because removing the appellant was  conducive  to  the
    public good.

 6. The substance of the grounds were set out in paragraph 2  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge's grant of permission where he said:

         "The detailed grounds raise a number  of  arguable  errors  in  the
         FtT's decision.  First, it is arguable that the FtT failed properly
         to direct itself as  to  the  correct  approach  in  considering  a
         conducive deportation decision.  Secondly, it was relevant  to  the
         risk of the appellant re-offending that since 2008 he has  been  of
         good character.  The OASys Report was three years earlier.   It  is
         arguable that the FtT failed  to  consider  that  factor  and  give
         adequate reasons  for  its  view  that  the  risk  of  re-offending
         remained the same today.  Thirdly, whilst it was in the  discretion
         of the FtT whether to  grant  an  adjournment  on  the  appellant's
         request in the absence of certain witnesses, it was arguably unfair
         to make adverse findings against those witnesses (in particular the
         Church Pastor) when the Presenting Officer indicated  that  he  was
         content  that  their  witness  statements  should  stand  as  their
         evidence.  Finally (although I am less persuaded of this), the  FtT
         arguably failed to properly consider  the  best  interests  of  the
         appellant's children.  However, contrary to what  is  said  in  the
         grounds, these children are not British citizens and therefore  the
         reliance on EU law has no application in relation to them."

 7. Paragraph 4 of the grounds  points  out  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    directed itself that the respondent intended to deport the appellant "as
    conducive to the public good".  That this is an error on the part of the
    First-tier Tribunal is  plain  from  the  Notice  of  Decision  and  the
    supporting  "Reasons  for  Deportation  under  Section   3(6)   of   the
    Immigration Act 1971"  dated  25  May  2012.   Although  the  respondent
    asserted at paragraph 64 of the letter that "the presumption is that the
    public interest favours deportation" this case did not  arise  from  the
    respondent's decision that removal was conducive  to  the  public  good.
    The grounds say that this mistake was  compounded  into  material  error
    because, when the Tribunal balanced the rights of the appellant and  his
    family members against the public interest for the purpose  of  deciding
    if removal was a proportionate interference with his  or  their  private
    and family lives, it did not weigh the  right  things  in  the  balance.
    Rather the First-tier Tribunal said at paragraph  34,  "[t]he  appellant
    has committed a  serious  crime  and  this  effectively  discharges  the
    respondent's burden regarding Article 8 (Rocky Gurung  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    62).

 8. The decision in Rocky  Gurung  was  a  decision  on  an  appeal  against
    automatic deportation where the presumption in  favour  of  removal  was
    created by statute. It was  argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    misdirected itself by not making  any  findings  about  how  the  public
    interest that was served by  the  appellant's  removal  but  had  simply
    concluded without consideration that this was a case where there  was  a
    presumption in favour of removal by the authority of Parliament and this
    error had skewed the approach to Article 8.

 9. We make it plain that we find there is merit in that criticism.  Whether
    it in fact makes any difference can only be seen after the case  is  re-
    determined. The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  explain  correctly  the
    initial steps in measuring the proper  purpose  behind  the  appellant's
    removal and therefore the justification for the disruption  inherent  to
    his and other people's private and family lives.

10. It was common ground that  paragraph  364  of  HC  395  applied  to  the
    decision and Mr Smart  was  concerned  that  it  had  not  been  applied
    properly.

11. We set out below paragraph 364 which states:

         "Subject to paragraph 380 [Human  Rights  Convention],  while  each
         case will be considered on its merits, where a person is liable  to
         deportation the presumption  shall  be  that  the  public  interest
         requires deportation.  The Secretary of  State  will  consider  all
         relevant  factors  in  considering  whether  the   presumption   is
         outweighed in any particular case, although  it  will  only  be  in
         exceptional circumstances that the public interest  in  deportation
         shall be outweighed in a case where it would not be contrary to the
         Human Rights Convention and the Conventions and  Protocol  relating
         to the Status of Refugees to deport.  The aim is an exercise of the
         power of deportation which is consistent and fair  as  between  one
         person and another, although one case will rarely be identical with
         another in all material respects....".

12. Further we were not satisfied that proper regard had been taken for  the
    interests  of  the  appellant's  children.    Whilst   we   respectfully
    acknowledge  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge's   observation   in   granting
    permission to appeal that  the  appellant's  children  are  not  British
    citizens (or at least not in the case of the youngest  child  with  whom
    the appellant has a strong relationship) and therefore not  entitled  to
    remain under EU  law  they  have  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    sufficient time to have established a private and family life  of  their
    own. In any event they are clearly not going to be removed.

13. We also agree that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  its  treatment  of
    the supporting evidence from the appellant's spiritual advisors.  It  is
    wrong to find, as the First-tier Tribunal did at  paragraph  47  of  its
    Determination that the  supporting  letters  were  not  "genuine"  after
    indicating that it would accept such evidence. We  appreciate  that  the
    finding  that  the  letters  were  not  "genuine"  is  qualified  by  an
    alternative finding that the letter writers were not well  informed  but
    we accept that the appellant has cause to feel misled  by  the  Tribunal
    indicating when it refused an  adjournment  application  that  it  would
    accept the letters that it went on to find were "not genuine".

14. Having set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  we  had  to
    remake the decision. It is for the appellant to  show  that  his  appeal
    should be allowed under the rules or that removing him  would  interfere
    with his private and family  life.  If  it  does  then  it  is  for  the
    respondent to justify that interference. To the extent that  a  standard
    of proof is meaningful in a case such as this the "real  risk"  standard
    is appropriate to a claim based on human rights and the  usual  "balance
    of probabilities" is appropriate to an appeal under the rules.

15. For the avoidance of doubt we make it plain that although we do  comment
    on some of the evidence when we outline it we reached no conclusions  on
    the case without first considering the evidence as a whole.

16. Although  it  is  now  appreciated  that  the  decision  to  deport  the
    appellant was precipitated by the recommendation of a  sentencing  judge
    we agree with Ms Meredith's skeleton argument that in  deciding  if  the
    appellant ought to be deported we bear in mind the guidance given in  RU
    (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 651 by Aikens LJ at  paragraphs  33-
    35, concerning the nature of the public interest in  removal,  where  he
    said:

         33    In  OH(Serbia),[15]  Wilson  LJ  summarised  three  important
         "facets" of the public  interest  that  had  to  be  considered  in
         deportation cases  involving  non-British  citizens  who  had  been
         convicted of offences in the UK and where the  SSHD  had  concluded
         that deportation of the  person  concerned  was  conducive  to  the
         public good. The "facets" he identified were: (a) the risk  of  re-
         offending by the person concerned; (b) the need  to  deter  foreign
         nationals  from  committing  serious  crimes  by  leading  them  to
         understand that, whatever the other circumstances, one  consequence
         of them may well be deportation; and (c) the role of deportation as
         an expression of society's  revulsion  at  serious  crimes  and  in
         building public confidence in the treatment of foreign citizens who
         have committed serious crimes. Wilson LJ also emphasised  that  the
         primary responsibility for the public  interest  was  that  of  the
         SSHD, who would be likely to have a  broader  and  better  informed
         view of that interest than would a tribunal.

         34   The effect of sections 32(1)-(3) of the UKBA must be that if a
         person meets the conditions which bring him within  the  definition
         "foreign criminal", then his deportation is deemed by statute to be
         conducive to the public good. I therefore agree  with  Sedley  LJ's
         statement (when sitting in the Upper Tribunal)  in  SSHD  v  MK[16]
         that what was in the field of "executive policy"  (because  it  was
         for the SSHD to decide whether it was conducive to the public  good
         to deport a foreign criminal) has now become "legislative  policy".
         Parliament has stated that it is conducive to the  public  good  to
         deport  "foreign  criminals".  I  also  agree  with   Sedley   LJ's
         statement, at [24] in the same Determination, that where a "foreign
         criminal" challenges a deportation order made  by  the  SSHD  under
         section 32(5) of the UKBA, on the  basis  that  his  removal  would
         infringe his ECHR rights and it would be disproportionate to deport
         him, it is not open to that person to argue that his deportation is
         not conducive to the public good, nor is it necessary for the  SSHD
         to prove that it is. In such cases it will be so: see  the  proviso
         to section 33(7) of the UKBA.

         35   I further agree with Sedley LJ's statement, at [25] to [27] in
         the same Determination, that in a case where the SSHD  has  made  a
         deportation order against a "foreign criminal" which is  challenged
         on the ground that removal would infringe the potential  deportee's
         ECHR rights under Article 8(1) and would be disproportionate  under
         Article 8(2), a tribunal must move directly to consider whether (i)
         the person's ECHR rights would be infringed if removed and (ii)  if
         so,  whether  the  removal  would  be  disproportionate.   If   the
         "proportionality" exercise has to be carried out under Article 8(2)
         because it is concluded that removal of the deportee would infringe
         his Article 8(1) rights,  then  both  the  SSHD,  as  the  original
         decision maker, or any tribunal reviewing that decision, must  take
         into account the public interest  embodied  in  the  terms  of  the
         proviso to section 33(7) of the UKBA: viz. that  deportation  of  a
         "foreign criminal" is conducive to the public good, even if he  can
         demonstrate removal would infringe his Article 8 ECHR rights.

17. We were asked to adjourn the appeal.  There is a letter  from  Bishop  T
    explaining that he was about to commence an annual holiday on Monday  29
    July 2013.

18. We made it plain that we did not wish to frustrate  Bishop  T's  holiday
    but we gave clear directions  on  29  April  2013  that  any  additional
    evidence on which the appellant sought to rely should be served no later
    than 22 May 2013.  The pastor had not served such evidence and we really
    did not know what he intended to say.

19. As we explained at the hearing, the interests  of  justice  are  greater
    than the interests of the parties.  This hearing is already  rather  old
    and we saw no merit in adjourning further so that someone could come  to
    give evidence when he had not complied with directions. Further any such
    adjournment would unjustly inconvenience other  appellants  whose  cases
    would be delayed to accommodate this appeal being relisted.

20. We were then given letters from a Pastor K and  Bishop  P.  We  consider
    them below.

21. The appellant's wife has a serious problem with her  health.   This  was
    explained to us in some detail and was well understood and  accepted  by
    the respondent.  Although we have made an anonymity order we see no need
    to risk embarrassing her by saying more.

22. She gave evidence in accordance with her statement.  She  confirmed  her
    wish that we show discretion when talking about her  health.   She  also
    adopted her letter to the Tribunal dated 15 July 2012.

23. She described the appellant as someone she had known  for  twelve  years
    as her "common law husband", her closest friend and a father to their  8
    year old child, T, and his older brother H.

24. She described the appellant in glowing terms. She  said  how  since  his
    release from prison he had been affectionate and developed his character
    "on Christian values and morals".  She referred to his acknowledging his
    "mistakes in the past" and his being remorseful.

25. She also commented on the strong bond between T and his father  and  his
    father's role in instilling God-fearing Christian values.

26. She recalled how in July 2012 T was very upset having  had  a  dream  in
    which his father was removed  and  that  he  was  deeply  upset  by  the
    experience.  She said:

         "As a parent, this dream is  quite  disturbing  because  T  has  no
         knowledge of his father's deportation appeal.   The  only  possible
         explanation would be that, T still has memories of his father being
         away as he was growing up to the age of 4 and currently  living  in
         fear that his dad would be gone one day."

27. She and the appellant reassured him.

28. She also said how T had some contact with H and that  they  deserved  to
    be together.

29. She referred to a statement by a Home Office Minister in  2012  that  it
    was time society accepted the children needed fathers.   She  said  that
    the decision to deport the appellant:

         "could leave my son without a positive male role model, leading  to
         problems in later life and the likelihood to suffer  mental  health
         problems."

30. She explained how she could not go to Tanzania because  of  her  illness
    or to Zimbabwe with the appellant because her family lived in the United
    Kingdom.

31. We have not dwelt  on  this  part  of  the  evidence  because  Mr  Smart
    expressly and carefully conceded that it was not  reasonable  to  expect
    the appellant's family to go with him and the  decision  to  deport  him
    would split the family.

32. She continued by saying how she was raised without  knowing  her  father
    and knows the pain involved with that.

33. She explained in  answer  to  additional  questions  how  the  appellant
    helped her hold her job as a social worker by  giving  her  support  and
    child care when her illness weakened her.

34. The appellant played his role as father thoroughly and  diligently.  She
    illustrated this by saying how he went to school  and  made  appropriate
    enquiries and gave support there.

35. She was cross-examined.  She said she was not aware of  the  appellant's
    immigration status  when  they  first  became  friendly  but  made  more
    enquiries when the police showed an interest in him.

36. She was aware that the appellant had made an asylum  claim  in  a  false
    name.

37. She removed to the Midlands in April or May 2012  as  a  result  of  her
    finding work.

38. She accepted that she was aware of the support networks for people  with
    her health problems and could contact them.

39. In re-examination she said how she continued to  be  treated  in  London
    because she did not want  any  risk  of  her  condition  becoming  known
    locally.

40. There are many dimensions to this case. The  reasons  for  the  decision
    were given in a refusal letter dated 25 May 2012.

41.  This  began  by  acknowledging  that  the  appellant  was   liable   to
    deportation because he was recommended for deportation by the sentencing
    judge who imposed a term of six years' imprisonment for the  appellant's
    crime of rape.

42. The letter set out the salient  parts  of  the  appellant's  immigration
    history.  He entered the United Kingdom as a  student  in  January  1995
    using an entry visa issued by the British High  Commission  in  Tanzania
    and recognising the appellant as a Tanzanian national.  He  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 17 January 1995 and was given twelve months' leave  to
    remain.  Before his leave lapsed he applied for further  leave  but  the
    application was refused.  Thereupon he remained in  the  United  Kingdom
    without permission until he  came  to  the  attention  of  the  UKBA  by
    applying for asylum on 4 August 1998 in the assumed name of D K  with  a
    date of birth slightly different to the one presently said to be his. He
    identified himself as a Rwandan national  who  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 25 March 1998 using a false passport.   The  application  was
    refused in September 1998 but in May 1999 he  was  served  with  illegal
    entry papers and an appeal against the decision to refuse him asylum was
    not admitted because it was made late.

43. On 25 June 2004 he was convicted at Kingston Crown  Court  of  rape  and
    sentenced to six years' imprisonment.  He was given notice of  liability
    for deportation on 3 November 2005 and on 9 November 2009 he was  served
    with a decision to make him the subject of  a  deportation  order.   The
    order required that he be removed to Rwanda.

44. He appealed that decision unsuccessfully and the  appeal  was  dismissed
    in March 2006.  By then there  was  uncertainty  about  his  nationality
    although he maintained his claim to be Rwandan and the Immigration Judge
    had so described him.  A deportation order was  signed  on  21  November
    2006.  He declined to comply with the emergency travel document  process
    until he had received the outcome of an appeal to the European Court  of
    Human Rights and on 26 October 2007 he was  detained  under  immigration
    powers.  He again failed to comply with the  emergency  travel  document
    process.  He was bailed by a judge on 18 March 2008  subject  to  weekly
    reporting conditions.  He was refused permission to work.  On  28  March
    2012 the deportation order was revoked because the existing  deportation
    order was signed in the belief that the  appellant  was  a  national  of
    Rwanda but the respondent was now satisfied that the  appellant  was  in
    fact a national of Tanzania.

45. Under the heading "Circumstances of Offence" the respondent  noted  that
    the "Secretary of State regards as particularly serious  those  offences
    involving sex" and was concerned about the effect of the  crime  on  the
    wider community.  The respondent was particularly concerned  to  protect
    the public from serious crime and its effects and was not impressed with
    the appellant's personal circumstances.  The refusal  letter  summarises
    the sentencing judge's remarks including reference to the victim of  the
    rape being a "young girl".  This is slightly misleading if taken out  of
    context.  It was accepted before us, as is plain from the evidence, that
    the victim was a woman who had achieved her majority.  Rape is always  a
    very serious offence but the appellant has  not  been  convicted  of  an
    offence with a minor and should not be treated as if he had  been.   The
    appellant's offence was aggravated by reason of his being a  person  the
    appellant was entitled to trust "as an older man".  The gravity  of  the
    offence prompted the judge to say that it was:

         "contrary to the interests  and  welfare  of  the  people  in  this
         country that he remain - it is to the detriment of this country  to
         take the test that I have to apply - and therefore I recommend  you
         to be deported at the end of your sentence".

46. The letter then refers to the "presumption  in  favour  of  deportation"
    considered above and assesses the appellant's  case  against  his  human
    rights claim and the rights of the children.

47. Dealing with proportionality the letter suggests the appellant would  be
    able to re-establish himself in the country of which he was  a  national
    because he had lived there as an adult.  The  letter  acknowledges  that
    the appellant's partner and child have indefinite leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom but says that communication could  be  preserved  through
    "email, telephone,  social  network,  internet  science,  Skype,  mobile
    phones, texts or letter" and concludes that of  course  the  appellant's
    partner can travel to live with him "any split to your family cannot  be
    attributed to UKBA".  Education and health treatment would be  available
    in both Tanzania and Rwanda.  However,  as  indicated  above,  Mr  Smart
    disassociated himself from the suggestion that  the  appellant's  family
    could reasonably be expected to relocate.

48. In short the reason to deport this man is to  protect  the  public  from
    the appellant and to show disapproval of a particularly serious crime.

49. The appellant did not give evidence before us.  He gave evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and we repeat the summary of the evidence  given
    in the First-tier Tribunal's Determination of the appeal,  beginning  at
    paragraph 16.  The Tribunal said:

         "16. We have set out below what we consider  to  be  the  pertinent
         core evidence of the  appellant's  case.   This  is  based  on  the
         appellant's and the  witness's  oral  and  written  evidence.   The
         evidence is set out in the  Record  of  Proceedings  and  has  been
         considered by us in reaching our decision.

         17.  The appellant was born in Tanzania on 18 December  1971.   His
         stepfather was a Tanzanian Ambassador and  he  travelled  with  his
         parents to several countries.  He was  educated  in  Kenya  and  in
         Switzerland where he obtained a degree.  He returned to Tanzania in
         1994 but decided to further his education in England.   He  entered
         the United Kingdom on 17  January  1995  on  a  student  visa.   He
         applied for further  leave  to  remain  but  this  application  was
         refused on 9 July 1996.

         18.  He began a relationship with a Tanzanian national Miss L--- L--
         - in 1996.  L-- became pregnant in July 1998.  He wanted to  remain
         in the United Kingdom with L--- and to live with  her  and  support
         their unborn child, so on 4 August 1998 he made a claim for  asylum
         as a Rwandan national because he desperately  wanted  to  keep  his
         family together and accepts now 'that this was (not) a  way  to  go
         about it (sic)'.  L--- miscarried  in  September  1998  but  became
         pregnant again in December 1998 and his son H---  was  born  on  XX
         August 1999.  In 2000 the relationship with L--- broke down due  to
         her infidelity.  He was working as a security guard  from  2000  to
         2003 and when he stopped working he could not pay money to L--- for
         H--- and she became angry.

         19.  In 2000 he commenced his relationship with U---  a  Zimbabwean
         national  who  is  [ill].   In  December  2000  they  underwent   a
         traditional marriage ceremony.   The  relationship  was  undergoing
         difficulties and the appellant began an extramarital affair with M--
         -.  U--- found out about the affair and  the  appellant  ended  the
         relationship with M--- after six months.

         20.  U--- gave birth to their son T--- on XX February 2004.

         21.  The appellant and M--- remained friends  and  they  would  see
         each other socially on occasions.  He fell into temptation and  had
         sex with her believing that this was by mutual consent.  On 25 June
         2004 he was convicted of raping M--- after a trial and sentenced to
         six years' imprisonment.  He sought to appeal  the  conviction  and
         sentence but this was refused.  He is still of the belief that  the
         sexual activity with M--- was consensual and he regrets the mistake
         that he made.  He has not been in any trouble with the police since
         he has been released.  Upon  completion  of  his  sentence  he  was
         transferred to immigration detention and was released on bail on 18
         March 2008.  Since then he has cohabited with U---  and  with  T---
         and since U--- has found work he has become T---'s main carer.

         22.  On release from prison he has also regained contact with  H---
         and he now sees him  regularly  and  has  a  good  father  and  son
         relationship with him.

         23.  U--- and T--- were granted Indefinite Leave  to  Remain  on  6
         February 2009.  The appellant now wishes to maintain his family and
         private life in the United Kingdom, he wishes to work and take care
         of his family.  His wife requires specialist care  because  she  is
         [ill]  and  the  required  specialist  care  is  not  available  in
         Tanzania.

         24.  He has now been in the United Kingdom 17 years and has built a
         life in the United Kingdom with a wife and two sons whom he  wishes
         to support.  He is a practising Christian.  He accepts that he  has
         made mistakes in the past but since being released from  prison  he
         has strived to be a good Christian and a law-abiding  citizen.   He
         said that he is now a changed man and eventually  revealed  to  the
         immigration authorities in 2009 his true identity and  nationality.
         Whilst in prison at Wandsworth he was  given  trusted  status.   He
         asked that his appeal be dealt with compassionately.

         25.  We heard evidence from U---.  She is  a  Zimbabwean  national.
         We have considered her witness statement which adds little  by  way
         of factual information but consists  largely  of  a  plea  for  the
         appellant to remain in the UK.  She says that the  appellant  is  a
         changed man since he has been released from prison.   She  confirms
         that the appellant is now a practising Christian and that there  is
         a good father and son relationship not only with T--- but also with
         H---.  T--- and H--- have formed a close bond.  She states that T---
          became distressed when they tried  to  explain  to  him  that  his
         father might have to leave them."

50. We have a letter from someone identified as Pastor K---  of  the  Spirit
    Embassy Church UK.  It is dated 20 April 2013 and says  the  writer  has
    known the appellant  since  May  2012  when  he  joined  the  church  in
    Birmingham.  The appellant is described as "a very committed  member  of
    our church, a leader of the praise and worship team and  indeed  he  has
    volunteered to advise young adults on issues of staying away from  drugs
    and living  a  better  Christian  life."   He  is  "recommended  without
    reservation" because of his good  character,  integrity,  and  he  is  a
    family man he has been a valuable member of the community.  This  letter
    gives no indication at all of the writer's knowledge of the  appellant's
    background.  It does not say if he knows the appellant has a child by an
    earlier relationship.  It gives no indication that he  appreciates  that
    the appellant is a convicted rapist.

51. We do not doubt that Pastor K--- has expressed his opinion honestly  but
    we are not able to ascertain the evidence on which Pastor K--- has based
    his opinion.

52. This appellant has plainly been very manipulative.  This is how  he  has
    managed to sustain a claim in two  different  identities  for  prolonged
    periods of time.  Whilst we do not doubt that Pastor K---  has  told  us
    the truth as he sees it we are not in a position to put very much weight
    on his opinions about the  appellant  or  the  appellant's  private  and
    family life.

53. The letter from Bishop P--- is dated 24 July 2013.   It  is  clear  from
    the correspondence that Bishop P is a supervising minister in a group of
    free churches. He is not using the title to claim that he is ordained as
    a bishop in the Episcopalian church. This letter is of more help because
    although he describes the appellant as a man of  "proven  integrity"  it
    does say how he first met  the  appellant  when  the  appellant  was  in
    Wandsworth Prison as a serving prisoner and  is  based  on  knowing  the
    appellant for about six years.

54. The letter does  not  actually  say  that  the  Bishop  appreciates  the
    appellant is  a  convicted  rapist  but  it  certainly  appreciates  the
    appellant has been in prison.

55. We find it an extraordinary  omission  that  Bishop  P---  has  made  no
    effort to explain his opinions about the appellant's  integrity  against
    the background of his being a convicted  prisoner.   We  recognise  that
    people can change and that good people sometimes do very bad things  but
    we cannot regard Bishop P---'s letter as showing more than a superficial
    consideration of the appellant's circumstances.  It does  not  begin  to
    show us that the appellant has really faced up to his past wrongdoing or
    has resolved to change his ways.

56. There are supporting references from K--- W---, P--- S--- and A---  C---
    .  These letters show no indication that the appellant  has  been  frank
    about his past and his reasons for being subject to  deportation.   They
    reveal one side of his character but they do not show that he is  a  man
    who has faced up to his previous seriously bad  behaviour.  Rather  they
    reveal a picture of a man who  continues  to  deny  his  previous  wrong
    behaviour.

57. We have a report prepared by Christine Brown who  describes  herself  as
    an independent social worker holding the degrees  or  qualifications  of
    BSc. Hons, CQSC, DGDip Social  Worker,  MA  Social  Work  Studies.   Her
    report is dated 15 April 2013 and was  based  primarily  on  discussions
    with the appellant and his wife.   She  did  not  feel  able  to  pursue
    matters with T--- for fear of upsetting him.  She  shows  that  she  has
    been a qualified social worker since 1986 and has worked for three major
    local authorities as well as developing an independent practice.

58. The  report  draws  on  academic  opinion  to  support  the  essentially
    uncontroversial  assertion  that  little  boys  benefit  from  a   close
    relationship with their fathers and we are wholly unsurprised  that  her
    conclusion that the  appellant's  removal  could  not  be  done  without
    adversely affecting both his son and his partner.  T---'s year 4  autumn
    term report is before us.  It shows an impressive  100%  attendance  and
    speaks well of his abilities and attitude.  There are pictures from  the
    child and writing showing affection for  his  father.   There  are  also
    photographs of the appellant playing with his son.  Photographs are only
    of very limited value because  they  can  do  no  more  than  create  an
    impression from an image that froze a fraction  of  a  second  of  time.
    Nevertheless they are consistent with the picture of a meaningful father
    and son relationship.

59. As far as we are aware the appellant has not been in any  trouble  since
    his release from prison.

60. We have a very full skeleton argument from Miss Meredith  which  we  now
    consider.

61. By way of background it makes the  point  that  the  appellant  and  his
    partner have been together since 2000 when they met and that  they  were
    married in a traditional ceremony in 2003.  T--- was born on XX February
    2004 and so is now 9 years old.  H--- is now just 14 years old.

62. It is accepted that the  appellant's  appeal  cannot  be  allowed  under
    paragraphs 398 and 399 of HC 395.  Nevertheless she submitted  that  the
    best interests of T---  and  indeed  H---  (although  he  features  less
    prominently in the case) required constant contact  or  availability  of
    the appellant.  Given there is no suggestion of H--- being  removed  and
    it is accepted that T--- cannot reasonably be expected to be removed and
    there is clear evidence of the appellant living in the family unit  with
    T---, it is quite plain it is in T---'s best interest that the appellant
    remains in the United Kingdom.

63. She also asserted that the appellant's partner  needs  particular  care.
    She is under disability because of her serious ill-health and her  needs
    need to be given particular weight.

64. She argued that the appellant's private and family life has  been  built
    up in over seventeen years' residence in the United Kingdom and contains
    three particularly strong relationships.  These  are  the  relationships
    with his child T---, with  his  partner  and  the  less  important,  but
    significant, relationship with H---.  Miss Meredith  accepted  that  the
    respondent  relied  on  the  seriousness  of  the  conviction  and   the
    legitimate aim of the prevention of crime and disorder  to  justify  the
    decision but said that the appellant was  rehabilitated.   The  argument
    asserts that it is irrelevant to the prevention of  crime  and  disorder
    that the appellant made an asylum claim in a false identity from a false
    nationality. She then reminded us of the very well-known case of  Regina
    v. Secretary of State for the Home Department  ex  parte  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27.  She said the offence leading  to  the  deportation  order  was
    committed over a decade ago and the appellant's excellent  behaviour  in
    prison has to be taken into account.  He has not re-offended.   In  2006
    he was assessed to be at a low risk of recidivism.  The  implication  is
    there was no sensible basis for concluding any real risk of his creating
    further trouble.

65. He was clearly well-established  in  the  United  Kingdom  where  people
    depended on him and he made a contribution to the community.

66. Ms Meredith also relied on the delay in processing the claim but we  are
    not particularly impressed with this point.  Part of the delay at  least
    was because the appellant was not truthful about his identity.  A  fresh
    decision was made and the truth emerged.  Whilst it is in a way  to  the
    appellant's credit that he eventually told the truth it does not  excuse
    him from the considerable harm done to his credibility by his  being  so
    dishonest and manipulative.

67. Essentially the problem here is that the respondent  is  overworked  and
    under-resourced.  The appellant  has  used  that  to  his  advantage  by
    changing his account.  If this was  a  case  where  the  respondent  had
    contributed to the delay by her ineptitude there may be a  point  to  be
    made but the real problem here is not the respondent being lackadaisical
    but the appellant not telling the truth.

68. We make it plain that  we  accept  that  the  appellant's  partner  does
    depend on him from time to time because of her own ill-health  and  this
    is a real factor in favour of allowing the appeal.  We also accept  that
    his removal would be a big disruption in his private and family life and
    the private and family lives of his children.  They are clearly innocent
    of  his  wrongdoings  and  the  respondent's  delay  in  processing  the
    application.

69. We also reminded ourselves of the extremely serious nature of the  order
    being contemplated.  For  practical  purposes  the  appellant  would  be
    returned to a country where he has not lived for some years and left  to
    establish  himself  as  best  as  he  could  and  somehow   preserve   a
    relationship with his sons in the United Kingdom. For the  boy  T---  it
    would represent the father being  snatched  from  the  family  home  and
    removed to a point where he would be unlikely  to  have  any  meaningful
    contact with him for a long time.  Certainly there would be no  prospect
    of his father being involved in his day to day life in a  way  which  we
    believe is wholly beneficial to the child's development.  Deporting  the
    appellant is  in  some  ways  a  greater  threat  to  the  parent  child
    relationship than was imprisoning him. Apart from  possible  periods  of
    occasional contact the separation  will  last  longer  than  the  prison
    sentence and travel for the purposes of contact will be much harder  and
    expensive to arrange.

70. As we made clear above the rather cavalier way in which  the  respondent
    considers the effects of removal on T---,  implying  that  a  day-to-day
    relationship with a father can be satisfactorily  replaced  by  plugging
    into a computer is chillingly wrong.  Whilst  the  respondent  no  doubt
    takes very seriously her obligations to  protect  the  citizens  of  the
    United Kingdom it does leave us wondering just how much regard she gives
    to her obligation to respect and promote the private and family lives of
    people who live there lawfully.

71. Although not persuaded by them we understand the arguments for  allowing
    this appeal. Notwithstanding the  serious  nature  of  the  offence  the
    appellant has established a nuclear family in the United Kingdom  where,
    on the evidence before us, his wife is more than ordinarily dependant on
    him and his son T--- enjoys a lively  and  important  relationship  with
    him. Although guilty of  a  serious  offence  the  appellant's  criminal
    behaviour was sometime ago and has not been repeated. What  is  achieved
    by breaking up this family?

72. We do not accept that this is a case of a  man  who  has  put  his  past
    behind him.  Certainly there is no  evidence  of  his  having  committed
    further offences but neither is there is  any  evidence  of  his  having
    faced up to the consequences of what he did.  He denies  that  he  is  a
    rapist.  Further there is no evidence that he has been  frank  with  the
    people in the church who may have been in a position to assist him.  His
    history is one of a person who is "manipulative"  which  word  describes
    aptly a person who continues to  pursue  an  asylum  claim  in  a  false
    identity.  We do not accept that he is a man who has  put  his  criminal
    past behind him.  Rather we find he is a man  who  has  behaved  himself
    when he has been subject to intense scrutiny and that is not the same at
    all.  Whilst the risk of re-offending is probably low we find that there
    is a risk  of  his  becoming  violent  or  unlawfully  working  out  his
    frustrations on another innocent victim if he is thwarted in the future.
    His failure to accept his responsibility means, we find, that we are not
    satisfied that he does not present a risk to public safety and that is a
    reason for removing him.

73.  Further  his  failure  to  accept  responsibility  heightens  society's
    revulsion of his crime. We do not mean to imply that  the  appeal  would
    necessarily have been allowed if the appellant had  admitted  his  wrong
    doing. He would still have committed a very serious offence. However the
    need to  express  public  disapproval  is  diminished  (not  necessarily
    extinguished) where the appellant can say that however wrong he has been
    he has addressed his criminal behaviour and has  taken  steps  to  avoid
    further trouble and can point to many years without conviction  to  give
    substance to his claim. Such a line of argument is not open  to  someone
    such as this appellant who refuses to admit that he has done wrong.

74. We have reflected carefully on Counsel's argument but  we  cannot  avoid
    the fact that this is a man who has been to prison for six years for  an
    offence of rape which he continues to deny.  He  committed  the  offence
    when he had no lawful right to be in the United Kingdom  and  the  close
    family ties that have been developed since have been developed at a time
    when he knew that there was uncertainty concerning his status.

75. We do not think that deporting the  appellant  is  an  obvious  or  easy
    step.  It will cause significant disruption to the  private  and  family
    lives of innocent people.  However, we have come to the conclusion  that
    it is a justified interference.  If  an  unrepentant  rapist  cannot  be
    removed then perhaps no one could be removed.  He can be removed and  he
    should be.  We are aware that this will be a  hard  decision  that  will
    cause pain to his partner and his son H--- and maybe even  harm  to  his
    son T...

76. Before reaching a conclusion we  reminded  ourselves  expressly  of  the
    requirements of paragraph 364 of HC 395.  All relevant factors have been
    considered.  We have had particular regard to the needs of his  children
    and his partner and to the passage of time.  We accept that he is a  man
    integrated into the United Kingdom and who in some ways, albeit  perhaps
    modest ones, makes a positive contribution.  Nevertheless,  putting  all
    these things together we cannot ignore the public revulsion that is felt
    towards a rapist and the appellant's situation  is  made  worse  by  his
    refusal to admit the offence.

77. The appellant's offence  was  one  of  great  gravity  and  in  all  the
    circumstances we dismiss the appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 20 September 2013              |


