
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12432/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd January 2014                            |On 27th January 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                          mr chikezie peter ajaero
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Jeshani (instructed by Str8T Record Ltd))
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Napthine) in which he dismissed  his  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse him leave to remain
    as a spouse.

 2. The Secretary of State had refused the application because she was  not
    satisfied as to maintenance.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found  he
    was not satisfied that the Appellant  had  the  requisite  funds.   The
    appeal was argued on Article 8 grounds and on the basis  of  MM  [2013]
    EWHC 1900 (Admin). The First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds finding that the marriage was not subsisting.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal and the matter came before me
    on 26th November 2013.  Om that day I  found  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had erred in finding against the Appellant  on  the  basis  of  a
    matter not raised by the Secretary of State in the Refusal  or  at  the
    hearing or raised as a concern  by  the  Judge.  That  was  unfair  and
    amounted to an error of law.

 4. On 26th November the Home Office Presenting Officer  however  indicated
    that he was raising the subsistence of the marriage as  an  issue.  The
    Appellant's representative requested an adjournment in order to  adduce
    additional evidence about that and to call  the  Appellant's  wife.   I
    agreed and the case was adjourned.

 5. Thus the matter came before me to decide whether there is a  subsisting
    relationship and if so whether the Appellant should succeed on  Article
    8 grounds; it being accepted that  the  Appellant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM.

 6. I  first  heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant  who  adopted  his  two
    statements. He confirmed that he is in a genuine relationship with  his
    wife, that they love each other and would be devastated if he lost  his
    appeal.

 7. He was then cross-examined. At this stage I should point out  that  the
    hearing was delayed because although the Appellant had arrived on time,
    his wife had not. I was told by the Appellant that was because  he  had
    travelled from Portsmouth on the morning of the hearing  and  his  wife
    from London. He was unable to tell me why it was that he did not travel
    to London the night before the hearing to stay with his  wife  so  that
    they could  travel  together.  He  said  that  his  wife  had  been  in
    Portsmouth Sunday but returned to London on Monday. The hearing was  of
    course on Wednesday.

 8. The Appellant was asked why it was when he lives in Portsmouth and  his
    wife's family live in London they got married at a registry  office  in
    Aberdeen. He said he had a cousin in Aberdeen, although when asked  why
    his cousin was not a witness, said that the cousin did not in fact even
    attend the wedding. He said that they married in Aberdeen because  that
    was where he and his wife wanted to get married.

 9. The Appellant was asked what time his wife spent in  Portsmouth  living
    with him. After some prevarication he told us that she had travelled to
    Portsmouth on Sunday, 19th January,  returning  to  London  on  Monday,
    20th. The last time he saw her prior to that was when he came to London
    for Christmas. He travelled to London on Christmas Eve,  24th  December
    and returned to Portsmouth on 28th or 29th December. Prior to  that  he
    had not seen his wife throughout the month of December.

10. At the present time neither the Appellant nor his wife are  working  or
    studying. When the Appellant was asked why he did not  live  in  London
    with his wife, he said that he was planning to. He said she lives  with
    her mother when in London and that her mother is ill although  he  does
    not know what is the matter with her.

11. The Appellant did not know what his father-in-law or mother-in-law  did
    for a  living. He said that his father-in-law's name is Stuart.

12. The Appellant could not remember the colour of his own  bathroom  floor
    and told us that he had no curtains at the kitchen windows. He said  he
    had cloth over his bedroom windows but could not remember  the  colour.
    So far as his wife's mother's home in London is concerned he could  not
    remember how many bedrooms the flat  had  nor  could  he  remember  the
    colour of the living room carpet. He could not remember whether the bed
    that he had shared with his wife over Christmas was  made  of  wood  or
    metal. He could not remember what vegetables he had had at his  mother-
    in-law's house with his Christmas dinner.

13. The Appellant told us that he had not asked his wife to his  graduation
    as it was a private matter and he had not asked her. He  did  not  know
    what she was doing that day but she was not in Portsmouth.

14. The Appellant told us that his wife had been  studying  at  college  in
    Surrey but he could not remember the  name  of  it.  He  told  us  that
    notwithstanding his earlier stated intention to move  to  be  with  his
    wife in London, she was looking to go to university in Portsmouth.   He
    did not know what subject she proposed to study.

15. The Appellant was  asked  about  the  two  witnesses  on  the  marriage
    certificate. Thomas Drysdale, he said was a friend of his who lives  in
    Aberdeen, but he could not remember his address. The other  witness,  L
    Grant he said was his wife's friend whose name was Luna.

16. I then heard evidence from the Appellant's wife and the  contradictions
    between her evidence and that of the Appellant were numerous.

17. She adopted her two witness statements as being true and when asked  by
    the Appellant's representative, described  her  relationship  with  her
    husband as very good, that they love each other very much and that  she
    would be devastated if he lost his appeal.

18. She was asked when she was last in Portsmouth with  the  Appellant  and
    she said Monday, 20th January. However, she told us that she  had  been
    there for four days  having  travelled  there   on  Friday,  17th.  The
    Appellant had told us that she had travelled down on Sunday, 19th.  She
    was unable to explain why there was a difference in the evidence.

19. She was then asked when she went to Portsmouth prior to  that  and  she
    said it been the week before and that her habit was to spend  all  week
    in Portsmouth coming to London for the weekend. This again was in total
    contradiction to the Appellant's evidence.  He had said  that  she  had
    been to Portsmouth only one night this year and not at all in December.

20. The Appellant's wife was asked when he was last in London and she  said
    it was at Christmas. However, she said that he had travelled to  London
    four days before Christmas returning on 28th. She was unable to say why
    the Appellant told us that he had only travelled to London on Christmas
    Eve.

21. The Appellant's wife confirmed that she had no evidence  of  her  train
    travel between London and Portsmouth.

22. With regard to the kitchen curtains in Portsmouth, she said there  were
    net curtains whereas the Appellant had said there were none.  She  said
    that the bathroom tiles were blue-and-white whereas the Appellant  said
    they were white. She said that the kitchen floor was linoleum  and  the
    Appellant said it was carpet.

23. The Appellant's wife told us that her father's name is  George  whereas
    her husband  said  it  was  Stuart.  She  was  unable  to  explain  the
    discrepancy.

24. She confirmed she  is  not  currently  studying  but  wants  to  go  to
    Portsmouth University.  She was unable to  explain  why  the  Appellant
    said he was looking to move to London.

25. With regard to the Appellant's graduation ceremony, his wife said  that
    she was unable to attend because she had family  issues  but  that  her
    husband had wanted her to go. This again was in total contradiction  to
    his evidence.

26. When the Appellant's wife was asked why they had  married  in  Aberdeen
    she said that that was where there was space  available.  However,  she
    had not checked with the local registry office. When she was asked  why
    they had travelled so far to get married she said that her husband  had
    an aunt there. This was in contradiction to his own  evidence  that  he
    had a cousin. She  also  confirmed  that  no  family  members  actually
    attended the wedding. She said that her witness, L Grant  was  Lorraine
    and was unable to say why her husband had said her name was Luna.

27. The Appellant's wife confirmed that she  had  no  photographs  of  them
    together because she did not like having her picture taken.

28. It is quite clear from the evidence of the two witnesses that they know
    virtually nothing about each other or their lives or families.  On  the
    basis of the evidence I cannot accept that this pair are in any kind of
    relationship at all and  indeed  am  satisfied  that  this  is  a  sham
    marriage.   Accordingly  Article  8  is  not  engaged.  The  appeal  is
    dismissed.


Signed                              Date 23rd January 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
