
IAC-CH- CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12994/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29th April 2015                   |On 13th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AW
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Haq, Legal Representative


                                DETERMINATION

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal.  Neither party  invited  me  to  rescind  the  order  and  I
      continue it pursuant to Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008.

   2. In this document I will refer to the parties in  the  style  in  which
      they appeared before the First-Tier Tribunal.

   3. The appellant is a female citizen of Thailand, born 13 May 1974.   The
      appellant had entered the United Kingdom some years ago with leave  to
      enter and in August  2008  she  applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
      dependent spouse which was granted.  She then applied for leave  under
      the "10 year rule" this was refused in May 2013 and on 22 August 2014,
      she  sought  leave  to  remain  under  the  "Zambrano  Ruling".    The
      application was refused and she appealed that decision.

   4. The appellant's appeal came before Judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Obhi sitting at  Birmingham  in  September  2014.  Both  parties  were
      represented (in the appellant's case by Mr Haq).

   5. In a determination dated 18 September 2014, Judge Obhi found that  the
      appellant could not succeed  under  the  "Zambrano  Ruling"  (for  the
      reasons set out in paragraph 21 of the determination).  In summary the
      child through which the appellant claimed had a father in  the  United
      Kingdom and that father was available to care for  the  child  if  the
      appellant were required to leave the United Kingdom.  Accordingly  she
      did not come within the Zambrano  principles.   The  judge  went  onto
      consider the effect of  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  &
      Immigration Act 2009, but found (paragraph 22) that did not assist the
      appellant.

   6. However the judge then (paragraph 23) having noted the  appellant  had
      not made a separate application under Article 8 but that such a  claim
      had been raised in the  grounds  of  appeal  then,  in  a  very  brief
      paragraph, considered that the appellant succeeded under  Appendix  FM
      of the Immigration Rules.  The appeal was accordingly allowed.

   7. The Secretary of State sought leave to appeal.  The grounds  allege  a
      misdirection in law, in that the judge failed to properly consider the
      requirements of Appendix FM and the  assessment  of  the  requirements
      have been incorrectly  assessed.   The  appellant  had  not  made  any
      application under the rules to remain as the parent or  partner.   The
      decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  leave  under  "Zambrano"
      did not result in a removal decision and that  accordingly  Article  8
      rights were not to be interfered with.

   8. In granting leave to appeal another judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      gave the following as his reasons:

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal,  in  time,  against
         the  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Obhi  who,   in   a
         determination  promulgated  on  19th  September  2014  allowed  the
         Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse  her
         application for an EEA derivative residence  card  as  the  primary
         carer of a British child.

         2.    The  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  application  for   a
         derivative residence card but allowed the appeal under Appendix  FM
         of the Immigration Rules on the basis that the  Appellant  was  the
         parent of a British child.

         3.   The grounds maintain, inter alia, that  the  Judge's  decision
         was flawed as the Appellant had  not  made  any  application  under
         Appendix FM and that in any event the Appellant did not satisfy the
         requirements thereof.

         4.   The grounds are clearly arguable given that the Appellant  had
         not made any application for leave to remain under Appendix FM.

         5.   For these reasons  both  the  grounds  and  the  determination
         disclose arguable errors of law".

   9. Hence the matter came before me  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Mr  Mills
      relied upon the grounds seeking leave.  The procedure would be that if
      the Secretary of State sought to remove the appellant a decision would
      give rise to a claim (and subsequent  appeal)  under  Article  8.   In
      addition there had been no application under Appendix FM.

  10. I raised with Mr Mills the effect of JM (Liberia) and  the  effect  of
      Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; Regulation 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA Regulations) 2013
      UKUT 0089.

  11. Mr Mills indicated that the matter was uncertain, but it  was  clearly
      the case that no removal decision had been made or was  imminent.   It
      was open to the appellant to make application now in respect of  being
      the parent of a child present in the United Kingdom.

  12. In any event, Mr Mills referred to the inadequate reasoning  contained
      in the judge's determination.

  13. Mr Haq confirmed that no application had been made, but could be made.
       Mr Haq acknowledged the argument put forward in the grounds and  that
      the decision of the judge had been inadequately reasoned.

  14. At the end of the hearing I indicated that I found a material error of
      law and that I would set aside the decision and remake it.

  15. Consideration under the rules require an application under the  rules.
      No application had been made  in  this  case.   The  judge  had  found
      against the appellant in  respect  of  the  substantive  consideration
      under appeal. That decision remains unchallenged.   The  existence  of
      the  child's  father  precluded  her  succeeding  under  the  Zambrano
      principles.  The father could bring up the child should the  appellant
      be removed.  No removal decision had been taken and it was clear  this
      was not imminent.  Even though the appellant had raised  human  rights
      in the grounds of appeal, it was not open to the judge to consider her
      position against a background  of  removal.   Indeed  the  grounds  of
      appeal only touch briefly on the question of Article 8 ECHR.

  16. Even if it had been appropriate for  the  judge  to  move  on  towards
      Article 8 consideration, the eight lines contained in paragraph 23 are
      not sufficiently reasoned and it is not possible to understand how the
      judge arrived at the conclusion that  the  appellant  succeeded  under
      Appendix FM, and/or Article 8 ECHR.  These  failings  amounted  to  an
      error of law,  in  that  the  judge  misdirected  himself.   They  are
      material to the outcome.

  17. I take the view that in  the  circumstances  of  this  case  the  true
      situation is made out in the grounds seeking leave.  The decision that
      the appellant did not succeed under Zambrano has not  been  challenged
      by the appellant.  There is no removal decision and no application has
      been made under the  Immigration  Rules.   Accordingly  the  appellant
      cannot succeed.

  18. I remake the decision dismissing the appellant's appeal.



Signed        Date 8th May 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole
