
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12314/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 December 2016                        |On 20 January 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                florence ede
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss O Ukachi-Lois, Counsel instructed by Charles
Allotey & Co
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   On 24 June 2016 First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  Judge  Behan  dismissed  the
    appeal of the appellant, a citizen  of  Nigeria,  aged  75,  against  a
    decision made by the respondent on 11 March 2015 refusing her leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds and giving directions for removal.   The
    appellant had first come to the UK in the 1960s for several years.   In
    2002 she came back for a short  visit  but  overstayed.   Beginning  in
    2010, she has made several applications and  representations  prior  to
    the decision under challenge.

2.   The grounds are discursive but amount to the submission that the  judge
    erred in concluding that there were no  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration into Nigeria and that, having accepted that the
    appellant enjoyed a family life with  her  cousins  in  the  UK  and  a
    private life based on lengthy residence, the  judge  erred  in  stating
    that  little  weight  could  be  attached  to  her  private  life.   In
    amplifying the appellant's grounds Miss  Ukachi-Lois  said  that  there
    were three areas where the judge  made  significant  findings  of  fact
    which should have led him to allow the  appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and also outside the Rules: first  that  she  enjoyed
    family life with her cousins in the UK and could  show  strong  private
    life considerations arising from her age, frailty, debilitating illness
    and restricted mobility; second that she was a dependent on her cousins
    in the UK; and third, that in  Nigeria  she  had  no  significant  ties
    because her relationship with her son had broken down and there was  no
    family support network, only  'distant'  relations.   Miss  Ukachi-Lois
    submitted that these findings, taken  cumulatively,  sufficed  to  show
    very significant obstacles within  the  meaning  of  paragraph  276ADE.
    Miss Ukachi-Lois also highlighted the point that despite describing the
    appellant's evidence regarding her family in Nigeria as  "opaque",  the
    judge went on to accept that this may have been because of difficulties
    of memory and/or the fact that the appellant was struggling with pain.

3.   Miss Fijiwala emphasised that the Court of Appeal has  held  in  Kamara
    [2016] EWCA Civ 813 at [14] that the concept of integration is a  broad
    one and that the term:

     "calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made  as  to  whether  the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of  understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on  and  a
         capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
         day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable  time
         a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
         individual's private or family life"

     Miss Fijiwala submitted that  the  appellant's  grounds  did  not  rise
    above a series of mere disagreements with the judge's findings.

4.   Having considered the parties' submissions, I have concluded that  Miss
    Fijiwala is correct to characterise the grounds as  a  series  of  mere
    disagreements with the judge's findings of fact.  Miss  Ukachi-Lois  is
    right to highlight that the judge made a number of findings  indicative
    of there being obstacles to the appellant's integration  in  Nigeria  -
    her age, her poor health and restricted mobility, her lack of a  family
    network there, the fact she had not had recourse to public  funds,  her
    close ties with cousins in the UK  on  whom  she  was  financially  and
    emotionally dependent, being the main  such  indicators.   However,  as
    Sales LJ has emphasised in Kamara, there is no basis  for  interference
    in an FtT decision if it is within the "lawful parameters of legitimate
    evaluative judgement".  It may  be  that  another  judge  on  the  same
    evidence  may  have  been  persuaded  that  the  obstacles  facing  the
    appellant in integrating in Nigeria  were  very  significant;  but  the
    assessment by Judge Behan was certainly within the range of  reasonable
    responses.  The judge clearly had regard to factors indicating that the
    appellant would face obstacles - I have enumerated the  most  important
    of these.  But both in relation to paragraph 276ADE and the appellant's
    circumstances outside the Rules, the judge also took into account,  and
    was entitled to attach more weight to, the following factors: that even
    though she had no close family there  and  no  family  support  network
    there - only distant relatives - the appellant had lived in Nigeria for
    some 60 years; that she was familiar with  the  country's  culture  and
    traditions; that she spoke  the  languages  used  there;  that  it  was
    reasonable to expect her cousins who supported her financially  in  the
    UK, to assist her financially in Nigeria (it is pertinent to note  that
    previously in Nigeria she had lived in rented accommodation); that even
    though she had a family life in the UK, little weight could be attached
    to  her  private  life  because  it  had  been  established  when   her
    immigration status was precarious; that even  though  she  has  several
    debilitating medical conditions and her mobility is restricted and  she
    has discomfort and pain, she has no life-threatening medical conditions
    and would be able to access medical treatment in Nigeria.

5.   As regards the contention that the judge  fell  into  inconsistency  in
    his findings in respect of the appellant's family and private  life,  I
    see nothing untoward in the judge's conclusions on the  one  hand  that
    the appellant had strong family life ties with  her  cousins  but  that
    little weight could be attached to her private life.  To the  contrary,
    the latter finding was required by s.117B(4)(a) NIAA 2002 as amended.

6.   Amongst the various factors the judge took into account,  it  is  clear
    that particular weight was attached to the fact  that  the  appellant's
    cousins had confirmed that  they  would  support  her  financially  and
    emotionally in Nigeria.  At [11] the judge also said this:

         "11. The Respondent also noted that the  appellant  does  not  live
             with her cousins and there was no evidence that the help  they
             provide is a medical necessity or could  not  be  provided  by
             someone else.  Healthcare is available in Nigeria and  the  UK
             is not under an obligation to treat the appellant's  ailments.
             There was no evidence to support the assertion  the  appellant
             and her son are estranged."

7.   As a consequence the fact that the appellant would lack the support  of
    family members in Nigeria was properly found to be  not  determinative,
    since the support from cousins in  the  UK  would  go  a  long  way  to
    practically ensuring she could live there  without  hardship  and  with
    some degree of emotional support.

8.   For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law.  His decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal is upheld.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


