
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/12858/2014
                                                               Ia/12859/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd September 2015               |On 20th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                         PINALKUMAR KIRTIBHAI PATEL
                          CHARUBEN PINALKUMAR PATEL
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 7th November 2014
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker who refused the Appellants'  appeal
    against the decisions of the Respondent given on 5th February  2014  to
    refuse leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant and dependent under  the  points-based  system  (PBS)  and  for
    Biometric Residence Permits.

 2. Judge  Walker  dismissed  the  appeals  on  the  basis  that  the  bank
    documentation provided by the appellants from Punjab National Bank  and
    Allahabad Bank were not  genuine.   Judge  Walker  was  satisfied  that
    paragraph 322(1A) had been properly proved by the Respondent.

 3. Permission to appeal on error of  law  grounds  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McWilliam on 30th April 2015.  This  was  on  the  basis
    that the Respondent had produced a Document Verification  Report  (DVR)
    relating to the document from Punjab National Bank.

 4. The report related to an email that the senior manager of the bank sent
    to the Respondent confirming that the document had not been  issued  by
    the bank.  There was written confirmation in the report from  the  visa
    support assistant trained  in  forgery  detection,  who  verified  that
    documents submitted in support of the application are false.  There was
    no evidence specifically relating to the statement from  the  Allahabad
    Bank.  At the hearing, after the conclusion of the evidence and  during
    submissions, the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  produced  the  DVR
    relating to the Allahabad Bank statement.  It  would  appear  that  its
    absence was due to an error in photocopying only alternate pages of the
    DVR.

 5. The judge recorded that the missing pages from the DVR  were  submitted
    by the Presenting Officer after the conclusion of the evidence and that
    it had not been seen by the Appellant.  However, he proceeded to  admit
    the document.  The email referred to in the DVR relating to the  Punjab
    Bank was not produced by the Respondent.  Permission was granted  that,
    albeit the bank statement from Allahabad Bank had always been in  issue
    as set out in the reasons for refusal letter, there was no support  for
    the assertion that it was  not  genuinely  produced  until  submissions
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 6. There was no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants.  The
    Appellants' representatives are listed as Maalik & Co Solicitors of  78
    South Road, Southall, Middlesex UB1 1RD.  On attempting to contact  the
    representatives the clerk to the Tribunal established that  the  number
    provided for the representatives was no longer in service.   The  clerk
    also established that a subsequent Google search of the representatives
    indicated that the telephone number listed was unchanged.  I considered
    the relevant Procedural Rules and noted that there was no  request  for
    an adjournment.  I proceeded to consider the appeals before me.

 7. In relation to the non-appearance of the Appellants, I  note  that  the
    files before me contain an email dated 22nd May 2015 from Pinalkumar  K
    Patel who states that his Home Office reference number is P1679485  and
    his date of birth 11th March 1982.  The email of 22nd May 2015 goes  on
    to state that the Appellant wishes to change his address  and  that  "I
    took voluntary departure. And I am in India right now. But my appeal is
    still going on."  I advised Mr Clarke of the existence of  this  email.
    Mr Clarke indicated that there was no indication either way on the Home
    Office records.  However, in line with the  relevant  Procedural  Rules
    and Section 104(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
    Mr Clarke agreed with my  interpretation  that  the  departure  of  the
    Appellants from the UK meant that the appeal before me was abandoned.

 8. In the alternative that I am wrong and the appeals are not abandoned, I
    am of the view that there is no material error of law in  the  decision
    of Judge Walker.  In relation  to  the  issue  of  the  missing  emails
    relating to the Document Verification Report about the Punjab  National
    Bank document, Judge Walker in my findings adequately addressed this at
    paragraph 16 of his determination: finding that  the  absence  of  this
    correspondence  was  not  fatal  to  the  Respondent  showing  to   the
    appropriate standard that the bank letter was not genuine.   The  judge
    made findings properly open  to  him  that  the  information  contained
    within the DVR in relation to the Punjab National Bank document  showed
    that proper enquiries were made of a senior manager at the bank  and  a
    conclusive response was received from him to the effect that the letter
    had not been issued by the bank.

 9. In relation to the missing part of the DVR relating  to  the  enquiries
    made of Allahabad Bank, Mr Clarke  argued  that  the  judge  made  full
    findings including addressing at paragraph 19  that  the  only  efforts
    made by the Appellant was a claimed attempt to speak to Mr Shah on  the
    telephone.  The judge also found  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was
    inconsistent in that he said he called  the  Allahabad  Bank  but  then
    later said  he  also  called  the  Punjab  National  Bank.   The  judge
    established that there was no proof of these telephone calls.  When  it
    was put to the Appellant by the Presenting Officer  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that he had not contacted either of the banks and that it
    was a lie, he chose not to answer.   I accept  the  submissions  of  Mr
    Clarke that the argument in the Grounds of Appeal at paragraph  9  that
    the "Appellant did not even know Allahabad Bank had an issue  with  him
    until the appeal date" was disingenuous.  Indeed, it was incorrect,  as
    in the Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 5th February  2014  it  clearly
    states that the Respondent had:

         "... received correspondence from both of  these  banks  confirming
         that these documents were not issued by  Punjab  National  Bank  or
         Allahabad Bank and that the documents are not genuine."

10.  It was Mr Clarke's submission that the Appellants had known  for  some
    time about these issues and had not taken any adequate steps to address
    the Respondent's concern that correspondence  had  been  received  from
    both banks  stating  that  the  documents  were  not  genuine.    I  am
    satisfied therefore that the representatives would have been aware from
    the refusal that Allahabad Bank was  part  of  the  Respondent's  case,
    including a verification report; given that  there  was  oral  evidence
    that the Appellant stated he tried  to  obtain  information  from  both
    banks it is unclear what further information might have been  obtained,
    or what unfairness there was to the appellants by the judge continuing.
     There is also merit in Mr Clarke's argument that directions were given
    by the Upper Tribunal that the case  would  proceed  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal and no further rebuttal evidence was produced before the Upper
    Tribunal.

11. In the alternative that I am wrong in  relation  to  the  above,  I  am
    satisfied that any error made by Judge Walker in proceeding and  giving
    weight to the Allahabad  Bank  document  verification  report  was  not
    material.  This is because the judge made clear  freestanding  findings
    in relation to the documents and the document  verification  report  on
    Punjab National Bank and that the document was not genuine.  These  are
    specifically set out at paragraph  16  and  further  at  paragraph  19.
    Therefore the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal could not  succeed,
    even if the findings in relation to the Allahabad Bank are disregarded.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law
    and shall stand.  In  any  event,  I  find  that  the  appellants  have
    abandoned their appeal against the refusal of further leave  to  remain
    by leaving the UK.

Anonymity

13. No anonymity direction was sought or made either before the  First-tier
    Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.


Signed   Date: 24 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 24 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
