
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/12091/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On the 14th October 2016           |On the 2nd November 2016           |

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                            MR ANIL KUMAR ARMOOR
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal

Representation:
For the Claimant:      No attendance (letter from solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Raymond promulgated on the  27th  April  2016,  in
      which he allowed  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision to refuse him further leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4
      (General) Student Migrant upon the Points Based Scheme.

   2. At the appeal hearing, no-one attended at the appeal on behalf of  the
      Claimant.  However, the Claimant's Solicitors Messrs Westbrook Law had
      sent a letter dated the 4th October 2016 to the Upper Tribunal,  which
      arrived at the Upper Tribunal on the 5th October  2016,  stating  that
      "further to the Notice of Hearing  letter  dated  the  27th  September
      2016, please note we do not have further instruction in  this  matter.
      Client informed our office that he leave the  United  Kingdom".   That
      letter was considered by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill,  who  stated  that
      "the appeal before the Upper Tribunal is the appeal of  the  Secretary
      of State.  Furthermore, you have not clearly  stated  in  your  letter
      whether Mr Armoor has already left the UK or  whether  he  has  merely
      expressed an  intention  to  do  so.   In  such  circumstances,  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Gill has decided that the hearing of the  Secretary  of
      State's appeal will proceed on the 14th  October  2016".   No  further
      correspondence was received from Westbrook Law or from the Claimant in
      response to the reply given by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill.

   3. However, given that the appeal is the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal,
      even taking account of the letter received from Westbrook Law,  it  is
      appropriate for the appeal to proceed, and I therefore  continue  with
      the oral appeal hearing on the 14th October  2016,  despite  the  fact
      that no-one was present on behalf of the Claimant, either in terms  of
      the Claimant himself or in terms of his solicitors, given  the  letter
      that had been received.  I  did  not  consider  that  it  was  in  the
      interests of justice to adjourn the case in light of the  contents  of
      the  letter  that  indicated  that  the  solicitors  were  no   longer
      instructed, and it may be that the Claimant either  was  intending  to
      leave or had already left the country.

   4. Within the Grounds of Appeal, it was argued that the Judge  had  given
      weight to immaterial matters and that the burden of proof was  on  the
      Claimant  to  demonstrate  that  he  met  the  requirements   of   the
      Immigration Rules and that the Claimant had  failed  to  satisfy  that
      burden.  It was stated that paragraph 6 and  7  of  the  determination
      outlined the Claimant's  inconsistencies  in  explaining  why  he  had
      failed to declare his previous refusal on  his  application  form  and
      that the Claimant was an educated individual who admitted that a third
      party had completed his application form on his behalf and that he had
      signed the declaration without  checking  the  form  himself.   It  is
      argued that the Claimant did not qualify for further leave  to  remain
      having been refused under paragraph 322(1A) of the  Immigration  Rules
      and that the Claimant did not deny the issue.  It is argued  that  the
      Judge erred in law by allowing the  Claimant's  appeal  and  that  the
      appeal should have been dismissed.  Permission to appeal was therefore
      sought.

   5. Permission to appeal has been granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Mark Davies on the 9th September 2016, in which he  stated  that  "the
      Judge appears to have totally ignored the requirement that the  burden
      of proof is upon the Respondent, on the balance of  probabilities,  to
      show that the Appellant made false  representations.   The  Judge  has
      made  no  findings   whatsoever   in   relation   to   whether   false
      representations were made.  The grounds and the decision  do  disclose
      an arguable error of law".

   6. It was on that basis that  the  case  came  before  me  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal.

   7. In the appeal hearing before the Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Walker,  Senior
      Home Officer Presenting Officer on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,
      quite properly conceded that he was in difficulty arguing the  Grounds
      of Appeal, given the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond  at
      paragraph 10 of his decision and in light of the Court of Appeal  case
      of A (Nigeria) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010]
      EWCA  Civ  773,  being  the  relevant  authority  in  respect  of  the
      construction of the term 'false misrepresentation' for the purposes of
      paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.  He  conceded  that  given
      the Claimant's past history, namely that he had studied all  the  time
      that he had been in the country, it was difficult to see what he would
      gain by deliberately making a false representation on his  application
      form and that it appeared to him that whoever had drafted the  Grounds
      of Appeal had not taken account of the  Court  of  Appeal  case  of  A
      (Nigeria).  He conceded that there was nothing in fact in the  Grounds
      of Appeal which were in fact arguable as  a  material  error  of  law.
      Further, in respect of the grant  of  permission,  Mr  Walker  further
      quite properly conceded, that even though the Judge had said that  the
      burden of proof was on the Claimant on the balance  of  probabilities,
      rather than the burden being on the Secretary of State, that  although
      that was an error, it could not amount to a  material  error  of  law,
      given that if anything, the Judge had placed too high a burden on  the
      Claimant, by not reflecting the  fact  that  the  burden  was  on  the
      Secretary of State to prove that deception or dishonesty was  involved
      in respect of the false representations.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   8. In light of the concessions quite properly made by Mr Walker on behalf
      of the Secretary of State in this case, I do not accept that there are
      any material errors in  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Raymond.  In his application form the Claimant had stated  that  there
      were no previous refusals, whereas entry clearance had been refused in
      Chennai on the 24th February 2010.  The Judge quite properly  set  out
      the evidence given by the Claimant in his statement in respect of this
      error at paragraph 6, and the oral  evidence  given  by  him  in  this
      regard at paragraph 7 of the decision.  However,  in  respect  of  his
      findings, in respect of this error on the application form, First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Raymond at [10] of the decision, found that:

           "Despite the somewhat convoluted explanations of the  Appellant,
           and that his level of education suggests that he would have been
           well able to complete the form himself, it is surprising that he
           could have deliberately made such a costly mistake,  because  as
           Mr Mannan argued, it is difficult to  see  what  he  could  have
           gained by it, as his CAS and maintenance were in order,  and  he
           would have been within the 5 years which is  generally  the  cut
           off point for students, having entered in October 2010.  In  the
           circumstances, I consider that he should be given the benefit of
           the doubt as to a simple error having occurred, whether made  by
           himself or someone else completing the form".

   9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond therefore made  a  specific  finding
      that the error on the application form was a simple error, rather than
      being as a result of any deception being utilised on the part  of  the
      Claimant.

  10. Paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules states that leave to remain
      in the United Kingdom is to be refused:

           "(1A) where  false  representations  have  been  made  or  false
           documents or information have been  submitted  (whether  or  not
           material  to  the  application,  and  whether  or  not  to   the
           applicant's  knowledge),  or  material  facts  have   not   been
           disclosed, in relation to the application".

  11. The meaning of false representation  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
      322(1A) was conceded by the Court of Appeal in the case  of  A  v  The
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ  773.   The
      Court of Appeal found specifically that "dishonesty  or  deception  is
      needed, albeit not necessarily  that  of  the  applicant  himself,  to
      render a 'false representation' a ground for mandatory refusal"  under
      paragraph 322(1A) at paragraph 76 of the Judgment, went on to state at
      paragraph 77, in the decision of Lord Justice Rix, that  "if  it  were
      otherwise, then an applicant whose false representation was in no  way
      dishonest would not only have suffered mandatory refusal but  also  be
      barred from re-entry for 10 years if he was removed or deported".

  12. In this case, First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond has specifically found
      at paragraph 10 of his Judgment that the Claimant should be given  the
      benefit of the doubt as to a simple  error  having  occurred,  whether
      made by himself or someone else completing the form and therefore  has
      considered whether or not there was dishonesty or  deception  utilised
      and found specifically that there was not.  The  fact  that  the  form
      contained an error did not amount, in the  absence  of  dishonesty  or
      deception, to a false representation for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
      322(1A) and in such circumstances the Judge was perfectly entitled and
      correct to allow the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules,  given  his
      findings. Such findings were open to him on the evidence.

  13. In respect of  the  grant  for  permission  to  appeal  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Mark Davies, in which he found that the Judge  appeared
      to have totally ignored the requirement that the burden of proof is on
      the Secretary of State, on the balance of probabilities  to  show  the
      Claimant made false representations and that the  Judge  had  made  no
      findings whatsoever in relation to false representations were made,  I
      find that the Judge has made findings as to whether or not  the  false
      representations were made, and specifically stated  that  this  was  a
      simple error in paragraph 2 of his Judgment.  It therefore  could  not
      amount to a false representation, given  the  interpretation  of  that
      phrase from the Court of Appeal in the case of A (Nigeria).  The Judge
      has considered the issue and simply found that it was a  simple  error
      whether made by the Claimant himself or someone  else  completing  the
      form.

  14.  Further, although the Judge has seemingly  erred  in  simply  stating
      that the burden of proof is on the Claimant to the civil  standard  of
      the balance of probabilities, and has failed to recognise that as  far
      as deception or dishonesty is concerned, the burden of proof  will  be
      on the Secretary of State, on the civil standard  of  the  balance  of
      probabilities, to establish that deception or dishonesty was utilised,
      as was conceded by Mr Walker on behalf of the Secretary of State, that
      could not amount to a material error of law, given that  if  anything,
      too high a burden was placed upon the Claimant, in  terms  of  placing
      the burden on him, rather  than  the  Secretary  of  State.   In  such
      circumstances, even if the Judge had noted that the burden was on  the
      Secretary of State to prove dishonesty, the decision would  inevitably
      have been the same.  The fact that the Judge therefore wrongly  stated
      that  the  burden  was  on  the  Claimant  in  respect  of  the  false
      representations and did not note that the burden was on the  Secretary
      of State to prove dishonesty, does not in the  circumstances  of  this
      case, amount to a material error of law.

  15. In such circumstances, as properly conceded by Mr Walker on behalf  of
      the Secretary of State, the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Raymond does not disclose any material error of law, and the  decision
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond is maintained.  The Secretary  of
      State's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Raymond  does  not  disclose  any
material error of law and is maintained.  The Secretary  of  State's  appeal
is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made, no such Order having been sought before  me,
and no such Order having been made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed
R F McGinty
Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGinty                                 Dated
14th October 2016
