
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12369/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2016                           |On 26 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                ANJAM SHAHZAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Bremang, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Anjam Shahzad, was born on 1 January 1981 and is a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  He appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Hillis) against a decision of the respondent dated  23  March  2015  to
    curtail his leave to remain as  a  partner  of  a  person  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom and to remove him under Section 47 of the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 to Pakistan.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 1  August  2016,  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant has drafted the grounds  of  appeal  himself.   As  Judge
    Parker noted when  granting  permission,  the  grounds  of  appeal,  as
    drafted, do little  more  than  disagree  with  the  judge's  findings.
    However, because the appellant was  not  represented  at  the  time  he
    applied for permission to appeal, Judge Parker went on to examine Judge
    Hillis's decision in its entirety.  It appeared that she was  concerned
    that the curtailment decision appeared not to have been accompanied  by
    any reasons and that the judge had  wrongly  indicated  the  burden  of
    proof in respect of the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  curtailment
    decision rested on the appellant.  She also wrote:

         The decision to remove under Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum
         and Nationality Act 2006 is included in the refusal  notice  of  23
         March 2015 but references are made throughout the judge's  decision
         to a decision to deport  the  appellant.   The  judge  purports  to
         dismiss the appellant's appeal against deportation  although  there
         is no decision to deport and no notice  of  appeal  in  deportation
         proceedings on the file.

 3. Before the Upper Tribunal, the appellant was represented by Ms  Bremang
    of Counsel.  She relied on  Saeed  [2013]  UKUT  144  (IAC)]  and  drew
    attention to the fact that the appellant had indicated in his notice of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal that "a decision notice was sent  but
    the letter explaining reasons for the decision has  not  arrived".   If
    the  curtailment  decision  had  not  been  properly  served  upon  the
    appellant, then it was not effective.

 4. Judge Parker's observations are problematic.  In the bundle  of  papers
    before the First-tier Tribunal (and before the Upper Tribunal) there is
    a reasons letter addressed to the appellant and  dated  4  March  2015.
    This is the same date as the decision itself which the appellant claims
    that he did receive.  I  accept  that  the  appellant  has  raised  the
    question of the reasons letter in his notice of appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal but equally I have little doubt that the  reasons  letter
    was sent on 4 March 2015 either together with or on that  same  day  as
    the decision letter to the appellant.   In  any  event,  the  appellant
    correctly anticipated the reason for the curtailment of  his  leave  to
    remain had been "the alleged (and false) end of our marriage" [see  the
    appellant's notice  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal].   That,
    indeed, was the very issue which he went on to address at  paragraph  G
    of the notice of appeal and which was considered by Judge Hillis in the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  (a)   the
    appellant did receive the decision letter; (b) there appears to  be  no
    reason why he did not receive the reasons letter which was written  and
    apparently posted on the same date to the  same  address;  (c)  in  any
    event, it is difficult to see what prejudice  the  appellant  may  have
    suffered  since  he  has  correctly  identified  the  basis   for   the
    curtailment of his leave; (d) those reasons were  the  subject  of  the
    appeal before Judge Hillis.

 5. It is quite correct for the appellant to  say  that  Judge  Hillis  has
    incorrectly used the words "deport" and "deportation"  when  he  should
    instead have been referring to removal under Section 47.  At [28] Judge
    Hillis even went so far as "to conclude that the decision to deport the
    appellant to Pakistan on the basis that his presence in the UK  is  not
    conducive to the public good is not  in  breach  of  the  law  and  the
    Immigration Rules".  That was, of course,  not  the  issue  before  the
    judge in respect of the Section  47  removal  decision.   However,  the
    passage which I have just quoted shows every  sign  of  having  been  a
    "template error"; the judge has mistakenly assumed that he was  dealing
    with a deportation and had inserted the paragraph which I  have  quoted
    directly from a precedent or template.  The question  is  whether  that
    error has vitiated the reasoning behind his decision.  Having read  the
    decision very carefully, I find that it does not.  I do not  find  that
    the judge has incorrectly directed himself  to  legal  provisions  with
    which he was not concerned.  He has, quite properly, dealt not with the
    question of whether the appellant's presence in the United  Kingdom  is
    conducive to the public but rather whether his marriage was subsisting.
     His findings on that issue have not been challenged by  the  appellant
    or, at the Upper Tribunal hearing, by Ms Bremang.  It follows that  the
    appellant's leave was curtailed for reasons which the judge has  upheld
    and which the appellant has not attempted to challenge.

 6. In conclusion, I am not satisfied that the appellant  did  not  receive
    the reasons letter and I find that he did, in any  event,  receive  the
    decision letter to curtail his leave.  In any event, he has always been
    aware of the reason why the Secretary of State curtailed his leave  and
    has had the opportunity of addressing that in his appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Secondly, whilst the  judge's  incorrect  reference  to
    deportation is to be regretted, I find that he has used that word as  a
    synonym for 'removal'; importantly, he has, notwithstanding his use  of
    somewhat inaccurate forms of expression, addressed the issues which  he
    was required to address in considering the appeal against the  decision
    to remove the appellant under Section 47.  I find, therefore, that even
    though the judge has erred in law, I should exercise my discretion  not
    to set aside his decision in this instance.

Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 20 January 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 20 January 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
