

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/12842/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                    |Determination Promulgated |
|On: 7th November 2014                    |On: 10th December 2014    |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mubashar Nawaz
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ehtesham-Khan, Pride Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan date  of  birth  22nd  May
         1988.


      2. On the 21st August 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  M.  Whalan)
         allowed his appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
         remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  s10  of  the
         Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.   The  matter  in  issue  in  this
         appeal is whether he had the power to do so.


      3. The Respondent believed himself to be  in  the  UK  with  leave  to
         remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant when on the 4th  March
         2014 he was encountered in  a  take-away  called  Tabaq  Chicken  &
         Pizza. The Immigration Officers who found him there allege that  he
         was clearly working in breach of the  conditions  attached  to  his
         leave.  Checks established that the licence of his Tier  4  Sponsor
         had been revoked by UKBA in the previous October, and that  on  the
         21st November 2013 a Curtailment of Leave Notice  had  been  issued
         under paragraph 323A(b)(i) of the Immigration Rules.  These  events
         led the Secretary of State to serve  the  Respondent,  on  the  4th
         March 2014, with an 'IS151A' - a 'Notice  to  a  Person  Liable  to
         Removal'.


      4. The Respondent then made an application  for  leave  to  remain  on
         human rights grounds. That application  was  refused  on  the  17th
         March 2014 when he was served  with  an  'IS151B'  -  a  notice  of
         directions to remove. The Secretary of State  certified  the  human
         rights claim as clearly unfounded  under  paragraph  94(2)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   This  limited  the
         Respondent's right of appeal to an out-of-country appeal only.


      5. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal it was accepted
         by the Respondent's representatives that he had no right of  appeal
         under Article 8 because  his  human  rights  application  had  been
         certified. He pursued his appeal on the grounds that  the  decision
         was not in accordance with the law. He submitted that he had  never
         received  the  curtailment  notice  in  November  2013;  this,   he
         submitted, rendered the IS151A unlawful and  in  turn  the  IS151B.
         Paragraph 10 of the determination records this legal  framework  as
         being  agreed  between  the  parties.  The  Judge  found  that  the
         curtailment notice had indeed never been served,  that  the  IS151A
         was invalid and so too the IS151B. The decision was  not  therefore
         in accordance with the law and the appeal was allowed.


      6. The Secretary of State now has permission to appeal on  the  ground
         that the legal framework allegedly agreed by the parties on the day
         was in fact wrong.  That  is  because  regardless  of  whether  the
         curtailment notice had ever been served, the IS151A served  on  the
         4th March 2014 operated to invalidate any leave that the Respondent
         had previously held. Section 10(8) of the  Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 1999  (as  amended  by  s48  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
         Nationality Act 2006) reads:


             "when a person is notified that a decision has  been  made  to
             remove him in accordance with this section,  the  notification
             invalidates any leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             previously given to him"


    The validity of the IS151A does not therefore  depend  on  any  earlier
         curtailment. Indeed, it might be observed that  if  the  leave  had
         already been curtailed there would have been no need to serve  this
         document at all.  The Respondent therefore submits that the  IS151B
         was perfectly valid, as was the certification, and there was no in-
         country right of appeal.  The Upper Tribunal is requested  to  find
         an error of law and remake the decision by finding there  to  be  a
         want of jurisdiction.


      7. In response the Respondent makes two arguments. The first  is  that
         the removal decision could only properly  have  followed  a  lawful
         curtailment.   Since  the  latter  had  not  been  served  on   the
         Respondent it followed that the  decision  to  remove  pursuant  to
         section 10  was  not  lawful.  The  second  argument  is  that  the
         Respondent had in fact two concurrent avenues of appeal  under  the
         Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  because  he  appeals
         against two distinct immigration decisions: s82(2)(e)  as  well  as
         s82(2)(g).  Since s92 of that Act only  excludes  the  latter,  the
         Respondent had an unfettered in-country right of appeal against the
         decision to vary his leave so that he has no leave to  remain  (the
         curtailment).


    My Findings


      8. The matter in issue  in  this  appeal  is  whether  the  First-tier
         Tribunal had the jurisdiction to hear  and  determine  this  appeal
         whilst the Respondent remained in the UK.


      9. The Secretary of State submits that this is a straightforward  case
         of there being no in-country jurisdiction. The factors which led to
         the service of the IS151A were that the Respondent was in the UK as
         a Tier 4 Migrant and on  the  day  he  was  apprehended  apparently
         working in breach of conditions he had not  been  studying  for  at
         least the preceding five months, the licence of his Tier 4  Sponsor
         having been revoked. He had made no applications to vary his  leave
         nor had he identified an alternative Sponsor.    The  Secretary  of
         State therefore deemed him to be a person who had failed to observe
         a condition attached to his leave to remain or enter.  Those  facts
         plainly justified service of  the  IS151A.   The  IS151B  that  was
         served subsequent to the rejection of the Respondent's human rights
         claim  was  therefore  valid.    It  was  this  decision  that  was
         identified as the decision appealed against, and duly  attached  to
         the Respondent's application to appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.
          That was a decision to remove under s10  of  the  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 1999 and as it stated on its face, s10(8) provides  that
         its service invalidates any previous leave to enter or remain  held
         by the recipient.


     10. Mr Ehtesham-Khan  submits  that  the  decision  was  therefore  two
         immigration decisions in one. It was a  decision  to  remove  under
         s10, which would provide an out-of-country appeal, but it was  also
         a decision to vary so that the subject  was  left  with  no  leave.
         This, he submits, would give the Respondent an in-country right  of
         appeal: s92 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


     11. This argument was rejected by the Court of  Appeal  in  RK  (Nepal)
         [2009] EWCA Civ 359 at paragraphs 29-37, see in  particular  Aikens
         LJ at 35-36:


             35. It must follow from the Court of Appeal's decision in Lim
             that the court has to respect the fact that the "immigration
             decision" against the applicants that was stated to be made
             under section 10 of the 1999 Act was just that. Therefore, it
             must fall within section 82(2)(g) of the 2002 Act and so must
             only be capable of appeal out of country. I agree with Deputy
             High Court Judge Dove QC that a decision made under section
             10(1) of the 1999 Act cannot fall within section 82(2)(e),
             when Parliament has stipulated that it falls within section
             82(2)(g). It is, in my view, irrelevant that the SSHD might
             have made a decision to curtail the applicants' leave under
             the Immigration Rules, thus bringing the case within section
             82(2)(e). She did not do so and there is no challenge in these
             proceedings to the fact that the decision to remove was made
             under section 10.


             36. Parliament has decided that the SSHD can make a decision
             to remove a non - UK citizen under section 10(1) of the 1999
             Act, or by using the curtailment provisions of the Immigration
             Rules. The two routes are distinct and must not be blurred. If
             the SSHD decides to use the section 10(1) procedure, then that
             can only be challenged in the very limited circumstances
             described by Sedley LJ in Lim. If that is not possible (and it
             has not been attempted at all in this case) then the applicant
             is confined to an out of country right of appeal.


     12. Mr Ehtesham-Khan asks me to disregard that decision  on  the  basis
         that the judgement makes  "many  references"  to  IDIs  and  policy
         guidance, "all of which, post  Alvi,  have  no  standing  in  law".
         Setting aside the fact that the latter submission perhaps reveals a
         misunderstanding of Alvi, it is apparent from the  decision  in  RK
         (Nepal) that the focus of the  Court's  analysis  was  the  statute
         itself. Moreover it is an interpretation  that  has  been  recently
         (that is to say, post-Alvi)  upheld by in R (on the application  of
         Mohamed Bilal Jan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         (section 10 removal) IJR [2014] UKUT 00265 (IAC).


     13. There was, as far as I can see, no statutory basis for finding that
         the Respondent had an in-country right of appeal. This decision  is
         therefore set aside.


    Decisions


     14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an  error  of
         law and it is set aside.


     15. I re-make the decision as follows:


         "the matter is dismissed for want of  jurisdiction.  The  Appellant
         has no right of appeal".






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          30th November 2014
