
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12691/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th January 2015                         |On 5th February 2015          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MS GA BLACK


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                             Mrs BIBI ASMAHAM NASEEM AUNOWAR
                                      (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan ( Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer)

For the Respondent:    Mr S Gokhool (Solicitor)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Metzer) who in  a  decision  promulgated  on
    31st October 2014 allowed the appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  under
    Article 8 ECHR.  For ease of reference I shall refer to the parties  as
    the Secretary of State who is the appellant in this matter and  to  the
    Claimant.

    Background

 2. The Claimant is a citizen  of  Mauritius  and  her  date  of  birth  is
    13.10.1954.  She entered the UK as student in May 2005 and was  granted
    further leave to remain until 2013.   Her  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain as an adult dependent relative under paragraph 371  was
    refused on 19th February 2014.

 3. I observe that paragraph 371 is no longer open  to  application  having
    been replaced by provisions in the new rules ECDR.  Yet in the  reasons
    for refusal letter the Secretary of State considered that the  Claimant
    had applied for a purpose not covered by the Rules.  She considered the
    matter outside of the rules with reference  to  Article  3  on  medical
    grounds, Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE. Article 8 was not considered
    as  the  Secretary  of  State  found  no  exceptional   or   compelling
    circumstances.

    First-tier Tribunal findings and decision

 4. In a decision and reasons the Tribunal found that the Claimant lived in
    the UK for over 9 years, all of her family were living in the  UK,  she
    suffered from various medical  problems  including  psoriasis,  angina,
    diabetes, osteoarthritis, facial neuralgia  and  a  recently  diagnosed
    lipoma (sic).  She was financially dependent on her  sons  in  the  UK.
    There was no one in Mauritius who could look after her, there  were  no
    family members living there and the Claimant had severed  all  ties  in
    Mauritius.

 5. The Tribunal considered freestanding Article 8 ECHR finding that  there
    was private and a strong family life. The Tribunal  took  into  account
    paragraph 276ADE [10] but made no findings or conclusion. Reliance  was
    placed on Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 00060 as to the  meaning  of  "ties"  as
    involving a rounded assessment of relevant considerations. At [13]  the
    Tribunal referred to the "Gulshan" test, the 5 stage test in  "Razgar",
    Appendix FM and Paragraph 276 ADE for the purposes of  self  direction.
    At [15] the Tribunal concluded that in all the circumstances it was not
    "desirable" to expect the Claimant to return to Mauritius to apply  for
    entry clearance following (Zhang V. SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  891)  and  that
    there would be a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  Claimant's
    family and private life if returned to Mauritius.

    Grounds

 6. (i) The Secretary of State  argued  that  the  Tribunal's  approach  to
    Article 8 was flawed.   He failed to make findings as to  the  lack  of
    social, cultural and linguistic ties in Mauritius, which  was  perverse
    given that Claimant had lived for 50 years in that country.

    ii) There was no consideration of private and family life under the new
    Immigration Rules. The Tribunal  had  not  first  considered  paragraph
    276ADE .

     iii) There was no consideration of the Gulshan test re "arguably  good
    grounds ".

    iv) The findings were inadequate as to adult dependent relative.



   Permission to appeal

 7.  Permission was granted by FTJ JM Holmes on  12th  December  2014.   He
    stated that it was common ground that the Claimant could not  meet  the
    rules and that the appeal was pursued on Article 8 outside of the Rules
    only.

 8. It was arguable that the Tribunal should have considered Article 8   in
    the context of the Claimant having  failed  to  meet  the  Rules.   The
    Tribunal failed to have regard to section 117A and  section  117B.   It
    was arguable that there was no evidential basis for  finding  that  the
    Claimant had no ties in Mauritius. She could return there  safely,  had
    lived there for 50 years and the evidence did not show  severance  from
    her country of birth. The Tribunal gave no  adequate  reasons  for  the
    findings.

Hearing

 9. At the error of law  hearing  Mr  Tufan  relied  on  the  grounds.   He
    submitted that the decision was short and failed properly to deal  with
    the evidence and law re private  and  family  life.  The  Tribunal  had
    neither followed the two stage approach to Article 8 nor the  5  Razgar
    questions, made no  proper  findings  re  family  life  between  adults
    (Kugathas) [10] and had not considered  the  new  rules  for  dependent
    relatives.  The Tribunal was unclear as to whether or not it found that
    the Claimant met paragraph 276ADE. The evidence failed to show that all
    ties with Mauritius were severed. He submitted that the entire decision
    was flawed. He relied on the recent IJR judgment of Oludoyi [2014] ULUT
    539(IAC) and Bailey[2014]EWHC  1078  (Admin)  to  clarify  the  current
    position re Gulshan.

10. Mr Gokhool responded that the Tribunal's findings and decision were  in
    accordance with Ogundimu and sustainable on  the  evidence  before  it.
    Reference was made to section 117A and  117B  at  paragraph  3  of  the
    decision. However, such provisions were not applicable to the  Claimant
    whose immigration history was good and she  had  no  convictions.   The
    Tribunal's approach  to  the  need  to  return  in  order  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance  was  sound.  The  Claimant  was  fully
    dependent on her family in the UK and  had  established  strong  family
    ties. Article 8 was engaged and the interference  to  family  life  was
    disproportionate   and   which   amounted   to   unjustifiably    harsh
    consequences.

    Discussion and decision

11.  I  am  entirely  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal's  approach  to  legal
    principles amounted to an     error of law.  I indicated as much to the
    representatives at  the  end  of  the  hearing.  There  was  no  proper
    consideration of the either Appendix FM or  Paragraph  276ADE.  It  was
    unclear whether the Tribunal had in fact reached a decision  under  the
    Rules or not, contrary to what the Judge  who  granted  permission  has
    stated. There was no appearance by the Respondent at the hearing.

12. Although reference was made to Ogundimu as to the meaning of "ties" the
    Tribunal made no findings as to social or cultural  ties  in  Mauritius
    having regard to the fact that the Claimant lived there  for  50  years
    before moving to the UK.

13. In dealing with Article 8 ECHR the Tribunal failed to demonstrate  that
    it adopted a two stage approach to family and private life. Although no
    longer a necessary stage the Tribunal ought to have considered if there
    were "arguably good grounds", having cited Gulshan.  Furthermore  there
    was no  adequate  consideration  of  Article  8  ECHR,  relevant  legal
    principles or public interest  factors  [9].  The  Tribunal  failed  to
    follow the staged process in accordance with Razgar and there  were  no
    proper findings of fact made as to  family  life  between  adults,  the
    Claimants' health and need for care and the circumstances in Mauritius.
     Finally, the Tribunal  focused  solely  on  the  Claimant's  interests
    without proper regard to public  interest  factors  in  general  or  in
    recent legislation  as  required  in  section  117A  and  117B  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014.

14. At the initial hearing I formed a preliminary view that the errors were
    capable of correction by  the  Upper  Tribunal  having  regard  to  the
    evidence and findings before the First-tier  Tribunal.  However  I  now
    consider that the findings made were very limited and not sufficient to
    enable me to remake the decision.   A  decision  is  needed  under  the
    Immigration rules and proper consideration of Article 8.  The  Tribunal
    failed to engage with the totality of the evidence and any findings are
    inadequate. In particular there is no finding as to ties in  Mauritius.
    I have decided to remit the mater for fresh  hearing  at  Taylor  House
    (excluding Judge Metzer)

    Decision

15. I find material errors of law and I set aside the decision.

16. The appeal is to be reheard at Taylor House on a date to  be  arranged,
    with an interpreter and a time estimate of one hour.  Not before  Judge
    Metzer.

    No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 30.1.2015


Judge GA Black

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.

Signed                              Date 30.1.2015


Judge GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

