
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12831/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 1 July 2015                           |             On 14 July 2015        |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE OF THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          MS ADETUTU HAIRAT BALOGUN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr S Kandola, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Ms Celia Record, Counsel instructed by
Direct Access

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is  the  resumed  hearing  of  the  claimant's  Article  8  appeal
    following an error of law hearing at Field House on 20 April 2015,  and
    my error of law decision and reasons which were promulgated  on  1  May
    2015. I found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in allowing
    the claimant's appeal against the decision to refuse to issue her  with
    a residence card as an OFM, and I further found that her  appeal  under
    the 2006 Regulations should be dismissed. I directed a further  hearing
    to determine the claimant's alternative claim under Article 8 ECHR.

 2. The appellant was called as a witness.  She lived with her brother  and
    sister-in-law, Naimat.  She worked for an  agency  but  she  could  not
    recall the name of the agency.  Naimat was at work now.  She could  not
    get off work in order to come and give evidence today.  She worked at a
    care home.

 3. In cross-examination she said that she had not always lived at the same
    address with her brother and sister-in-law.   In  2010  they  lived  in
    Tilbury, where they had been since 2008.  They  moved  to  Dagenham  in
    2011, and then to Romford in 2012.  They were always living  in  rented
    accommodation.  She was not on the tenancy agreement  as  she  did  not
    have a passport.  She had submitted her Nigerian passport to  the  Home
    Office in 2012, and they had moved to Romford in 2013 (not 2012 as  she
    had mistakenly said earlier).  She asked why therefore she was  not  on
    the tenancy agreement in Dagenham when she still had her passport.  She
    said they were not the only ones there.  It was  shared  accommodation.
    She had not returned to Nigeria after her brother's wedding because she
    had discovered she was pregnant.  She thought that she was  six  weeks'
    pregnant when she miscarried  in  April  2010.   The  appellant  became
    tearful at this point in her evidence.

 4. Before she came here, she lived with her mum.  She was now living  with
    one of her sisters in Lagos.

 5. She would work in the UK, if she had status.  She would like  to  be  a
    childminder or to work in a hospital  with  children.   She  had  never
    worked before.  She  was  asked  why  she  delayed  until  2012  before
    attempting to regularise her status.  The appellant said she was always
    home alone, and she again became tearful.

 6. The claimant's brother, Olalekn Fadeyi, was brought into court to  give
    his  evidence.   He  adopted  as  his  evidence-in-chief  his   witness
    statement dated 8 May 2013.  His mother and step-father  divorced  when
    Adetutu was in primary school.  He used to send money to  Adetutu,  and
    Naimat did as well.  They supported Adetutu because they wanted her  to
    go to university.  At the time he was working as a mortgage specialist,
    and so he and Naimat could afford to support Adetutu.

 7. Ms Record asked Mr Fadeyi  what  would  happen  if  she  went  back  to
    Nigeria.  He said that they would continue to support her  in  Nigeria,
    and they would invite her to come back  here.   He  was  working  as  a
    development researcher.  His wife also worked, but he did not know  the
    name of the agency for which she worked.

 8. In cross-examination, he said that his sister graduated from university
    in Lagos with a degree in industrial and labour relations.   In  answer
    to questions for clarification purposes from  me,  he  said  that  this
    course of study gave rise  to  the  following  possible  career  paths:
    working as an arbitrator,  working  for  a  government  department,  or
    working as a consultant.  But she would have more opportunities in  the
    UK than she would in Nigeria.

 9. In his closing submissions on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr
    Kandola referred to Section 117B of the 2002 Act, and said  there  were
    more adverse factors in play than there  were  positive  factors.   The
    claimant had established private life here unlawfully.   There  was  no
    Kugathas dependency.  She was forced to rely  on  the  support  of  her
    brother and sister-in-law due to her illegal status.  She  was  capable
    of working, and she wanted to work.  She  could  apply  for  a  job  in
    Lagos.

10. In reply,  Ms  Record  referred  me  to  her  skeleton  argument.   She
    submitted that this was an  exceptional  case.   The  claimant  had  an
    established family and private life with her brother and sister-in-law,
    and lived as part of their family.   Although  she  did  not  meet  the
    letter of the Rules, the Tribunal was asked to apply the  reasoning  in
    Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC).  After applying the requirements of  the
    Rules only if there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave  to
    remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on  to
    consider whether there are compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
    recognised by them.  In this case, there was a compelling circumstance,
    which was that the claimant had lived as a dependant on her brother and
    his wife prior to entering the UK, and after entering the UK.  She  was
    an overstayer, not an illegal entrant.  She would be returned  back  to
    Nigeria, and she would still remain dependent on her  brother  and  his
    wife, and so would satisfy the  Rules  for  re-entry  under  Regulation
    8(2).

11. The only reason why the claimant did not meet the 2006 Regulations  was
    because she had entered before  her  brother's  marriage,  rather  than
    after  her  brother's  marriage.   So  she  had  missed   meeting   the
    Regulations by a matter of days or weeks.

Discussion and Findings

12. Mr Kandola did not specifically challenge  the  case  advanced  by  the
    claimant that she was financially dependent on her brother and  sister-
    in-law before she arrived in the United Kingdom on a visit visa.  It is
    reasonable to question whether the Entry Clearance Officer  would  have
    granted the claimant entry clearance  if  the  claimant  had  presented
    herself in her application form as a dependant of her UK  sponsors,  as
    opposed to leading an independent life in Nigeria and thereby having an
    adequate incentive to return to Nigeria on completion of a short family
    visit.  But even if it is assumed in the claimant's favour that she was
    financially dependent on her brother and sister-in-law before she  came
    here, she does not come within the scope of  Regulation  8(2)  for  the
    reasons given in paragraph 18 of my error of law decision.

13. Accordingly, the necessary starting point is that the claimant  is  not
    entitled to remain in the United Kingdom under the Regulations, and nor
    does she have any entitlement to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    Appendix FM or Rule 276ADE.

14. Given her length of residence in the  United  Kingdom,  I  accept  that
    questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test should be answered in  her  favour
    with regard to the establishment of private life  here.   The  claimant
    was born on 30 April 1985, and she is thus now 30 years of age.  She is
    a university graduate, and with her degree she is capable of working at
    a managerial level.  Although there has been de facto dependency on her
    brother and sister-in-law in the United Kingdom, this  has  come  about
    because of her illegal status as an overstayer and not because  of  any
    inherent  inability  on  her  part  to  lead   an   independent   life.
    Accordingly, insofar as it is material, I  do  not  consider  that  the
    claimant should be treated as having established family life in the  UK
    with her sponsors.  But even if I am wrong about that, it does not have
    any material bearing on the issue of proportionality, as is illuminated
    in the analysis conducted by Sir Stanley Burnton in Singh  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630 at  [25].   It  is
    not the label  of  family  or  private  life  which  matters,  but  the
    underlying realities.  The appellant is  a  healthy  and  well-educated
    adult, who does not have any particular vulnerability and  who  is  not
    shown to have an emotional dependency on her sponsors which goes beyond
    the normal emotional ties to be expected between close  family  members
    who are all adults (but who are not related to each  other  as  husband
    and wife).

15. Questions 3 and 4 of the Razgar test fall to be answered in  favour  of
    the Secretary of State, and on the issue of proportionality, the public
    interest considerations are, as Mr Kandola submitted, heavily  weighted
    against the claimant.  It  is  in  her  favour  that  she  speaks  good
    English.  But she is not financially independent, as she is not allowed
    to work, and she has built up her private life in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully since her visit visa expired.   There  are  not  significant
    obstacles to her re-integration into life in Nigeria.   She  will  have
    the financial support of her brother, and she will enjoy family reunion
    with her mother.

16. Ms Record submits that it is disproportionate to require  the  claimant
    to go back to Nigeria, as she would be able to re-apply immediately for
    entry clearance under the Regulations. I am  doubtful  about  this,  as
    there would be  no  nexus  between  her  asserted  dependency  and  the
    exercise of free movement rights by her brother. Also,  as  a  putative
    OFM she would not have an  automatic  right  of  entry.  She  could  be
    refused entry on discretionary grounds under Regulation 17(4).

17. But even if Ms Record is right,  it  would  not  militate  against  the
    proportionality of the refusal decision for two reasons.  Firstly,  the
    effect of the refusal is simply  that  the  claimant  is  not  given  a
    residence card.  She is not facing a removal decision.  Secondly, it is
    in the public interest that those who are present in the United Kingdom
    unlawfully should voluntarily return to their country of origin  rather
    than remaining here unlawfully.  This is a desirable end in  itself  to
    encourage compliance with the Rules.  It matters not that in some cases
    the person concerned may be eligible to apply for entry clearance  from
    the country of return.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: this appeal  is  dismissed  under  the  Regulations  and  under
Article 8 ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
