
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12395/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2017                           |On 25 January 2017            |


                                   Before

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN


                                   Between

                       Akinkunmi Olugbemileke AKIWUMI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr S Nwaekwu, solicitor
For the respondent:    Mr Stephen Staunton


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from Judge Stuart Taylor, dealing with  the  case  on
    the papers at Taylor House  on  1  September  2016,  by  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria.  On 1 July 2014 he was married to a Portuguese lady, and on 12
    November he was refused a residence card as her  husband,  because  the
    Home Office said there was no evidence she was a qualified person.

2.   The judge did not seem to have been entirely clear as to what  the  law
    required  contrary  to  the  position  with   a   points-based   system
    application.  It was enough in a case of this kind, as the decision  in
    Boodhoo (EEA Regs: relevant evidence) Mauritius [2013] UKUT  346  (IAC)
    made clear, to produce evidence which showed that  the  sponsor  was  a
    qualified person as of the date of the  hearing.   There  was  evidence
    which would have shown that but the judge would not accept  it  because
    it had been sent in by fax, which he described as open  to  abuse,  and
    not to be relied on without seeing the originals.

3.   It is suggested in the grounds of appeal that further inquiries  should
    have been made by the judge. Whether that was right or wrong  does  not
    matter now, because the original documents have been produced and  seen
    by  Mr  Staunton  for  the  Home  Office,  who  agreed  that   in   the
    circumstances the judge's decision  can  be  reversed  and  the  appeal
    allowed.

Appeal
                               [pic]                       (a judge of the
                                   Upper Tribunal)


