
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/12694/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15th November 2016                |On 16th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     Y Y
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Counsel instructed by Kothala & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of China born  on  16th  April  1988.  He
       arrived in the UK as a Tier 4 student migrant and had leave in  this
       capacity until 3rd May 2014. He applied on 29th April 2014 for leave
       to remain on the basis of his relationship with a  Chinese  national
       with limited leave to remain who has a British citizen child from  a
       previous relationship. This application was refused  on  18th  March
       2015. His appeal against the decision was  dismissed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Hembrough in a determination promulgated on the  27th
       May 2016.

    2. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Shimmin on 17th October on the basis  that  it  was  appropriate  to
       extend time, as the application was lodged 3 days out of  time,  and
       because it was arguable that the First-tier judge had erred  in  law
       in finding the appellant lacked credibility and in assessing that it
       would be proportionate to require  family  life  to  take  place  in
       China.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions- Error of Law & Remaking

    4. The appellant asserts that as his partner has been granted leave  to
       remain in the UK until 19th December 2016 by the respondent  because
       she is the parent and primary carer of a British child (and he would
       otherwise have to locate outside  of  the  EU)  then  it  cannot  be
       rational or legally correct for the First-tier Tribunal to find that
       the child can reasonably be expected to leave the UK,  and  thus  to
       find it is proportionate to the acknowledged family life between the
       appellant and his partner to expect the appellant to leave  the  UK.
       The decision  fails  to  give  appropriate  weight  to  the  British
       citizenship of this child and the child's entitlement  to  have  the
       benefits of that citizenship. This is particularly the case  as  the
       appellant is not an immigration or criminal offender and  there  are
       no deportation proceedings.

    5. It is also submitted by the appellant that  the  decision  that  the
       appellant and his partner were not credible witnesses  because  they
       gave consistent evidence to the Tribunal in cross-examination, about
       contact between the appellant's partner's child and  his  biological
       father, on the basis that it was "contrived and  well-rehearsed"  is
       also irrational. It was not contained in the witness  statements  so
       had not been obviously "planned", and was a simple  history  of  the
       boy being dropped at the park for the day to play  with  his  father
       and being returned to the appellant and his partner in the  evening.
       This was an important factor as the contact with the partner's son's
       biological father, who would not  agree  to  his  son's  removal  to
       China, is important in making it further unreasonable to require the
       child to leave and thus in qualifying the appellant to remain in the
       UK under s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
       2002. There were good reasons why no  letter  was  provided  by  the
       child's father about this contact, as it was clear from paragraph 16
       of the decision that the appellant's partner was not on  good  terms
       with him.

    6. The respondent submits that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
       is not irrational. It is accepted that the appellant cannot meet the
       family  life  Immigration  Rules  (as  his  partner  does  not  have
       indefinite leave to remain/ is not a British citizen), and the First-
       tier Tribunal finds that family in China will support the  appellant
       and his partner as they do in the UK.  S.117B  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  is  considered.   The   British
       citizenship of the appellant's partner's child is not a trump  card.
       The credibility findings were also rationally open to the First-tier
       Tribunal in the absence of any evidence from the  biological  father
       of the British citizen child about contact, and given the similarity
       of evidence at paragraphs 23 and 28 of the  decision.  The  ultimate
       and central decision of whether it was "reasonable" to  require  the
       partner's British citizen son to  leave  under  s.117B  (6)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is properly  considered
       by reference to all the facts. MA (Pakistan) & Ors v Upper  Tribunal
       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  705  means,
       as is clear from paragraph 45 of that case, that  the  wider  public
       interest  is  considered  when  looking  at   reasonableness   under
       s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

    7. At the end of the hearing I informed the parties that  I  found  the
       First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law  both  with  respect  to  the
       application of s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
       Act 2002 and the credibility findings. Both parties  confirmed  that
       they had no further submissions to make with  respect  to  re-making
       and that they were happy for me to re-make my decision on the  basis
       of the evidence as before the First-tier Tribunal. The appellant and
       his partner, who had attended the hearing before the Upper Tribunal,
       were not therefore called to give evidence. I reserved  my  decision
       on this re-making.

Conclusions - Error of Law and Re-making

    8. The First-tier Tribunal has erred in law  as  the  decision  is  not
       lawfully in line with s.117B (6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
       Asylum  Act  2002  when  considering  the  proportionality  of   the
       appellant's removal outside of the Immigration Rules.

    9. The First-tier  Tribunal  accept  that  the  appellant  has  assumed
       parental responsibility for his partner's British citizen  child  at
       paragraph 52. It is also the finding of the First-tier Tribunal that
       the British citizen's child's natural father did not  have  parental
       responsibility for him and does not make major  decisions.  This  is
       the case put forward by the appellant  and  his  partner.  In  these
       circumstances it was clearly open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
       find, as they did, that the appellant had taken on this role, see  R
       (on the application of  RK)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department (s.117B(6);  "parental  relationship")  IJR  [2016]  UKUT
       00031 (IAC).

   10. The First-tier Tribunal accept that this child is a British  citizen
       and therefore a qualifying child.

   11. The Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) & Ors v Upper Tribunal  &  SSHD
       [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at paragraph 49 (the concluding paragraph of the
       section regarding the application of the reasonableness  test)  find
       that the correct  construction  of  s.117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  is that if the child is British  or
       has been in the UK for seven  years  then  this  "establishes  as  a
       starting point  that  leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are
       powerful reasons to the contrary". This was not the  starting  point
       of the First-tier Tribunal and hence they erred in law.

   12. I find that there are no powerful reasons to the  contrary  to  mean
       that it was reasonable to  require  the  partner's  British  citizen
       child to leave in this case, and thus that the appellant is entitled
       to succeed in his appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds  outside  of  the
       Immigration Rules by application of s.117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. I set out my reasons below.

   13.  The appellant is not an overstayer, there is  no  evidence  he  has
       breached his conditions or committed any criminal  offences.  It  is
       accepted that he has a genuine family  life  relationship  with  his
       partner, as is evidenced by the fact that they have their own  child
       as  well  as  caring  for  the  one  from  his  partner's   previous
       relationship. It is clear his partner  has  been  granted  leave  to
       remain by the respondent as it would not be reasonable to expect her
       child to leave the UK due to his British citizenship. I find  it  is
       in the best interests of this child to remain in the UK, the country
       of his nationality where he has lived all of his life and  where  he
       attends school. I find that that the appellant and his  partner  are
       able to support themselves financially through work which  they  are
       entitled to take and some additional financial  support  from  their
       families. They have their own accommodation  they  are  entitled  to
       occupy. I find that they will not be a burden on taxpayers.  I  also
       find that the appellant has an ability to speak English, although he
       chose to give evidence to the Tribunal in his native Mandarin, as he
       has been granted leave as a Tier 4 student migrant by the respondent
       and obtained a BTEC HND Diploma in  Travel  and  Tourism  Management
       from a college in the UK in March 2014. It follows that I find  that
       the appellant is in a good position to integrate in the UK.

   14. I find that the credibility findings of the First-tier Tribunal  are
       flawed with respect to the evidence  of  contact  with  the  British
       citizen child's biological father. It was not rationally open to the
       First-tier Tribunal to find the appellant and his partner  were  not
       credible witnesses with respect to the evidence of  contact  between
       the partner's British son and his father on the basis set out in the
       decision. As submitted by the appellant the evidence  at  paragraphs
       16 and 25 is that  both  witnesses  said  simply  that  the  child's
       natural father saw him every two months or so, when he spent time in
       the park with him. It is very hard to see how rationally this  small
       and plausible contact arrangement could be said to be not  credible,
       as "contrived and well-rehearsed" on the basis that the matters were
       put in the same order and the same "terminology" was used.  This  is
       all the more so given that the evidence was given through a Mandarin
       interpreter, who clearly may have chosen the same "terminology" when
       translating slightly different words with the same meaning.

   15. I overturn this finding, and substitute a finding that  the  contact
       took place as claimed by the witnesses, and that this adds a further
       issue making it unreasonable to expect the British citizen child  to
       leave the UK as it would deny him this  periodic  contact  with  his
       biological father which I find is in his best interests to maintain.





          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on the basis  that
      decision is not in accordance with the UK's obligations under  Article
      8 ECHR.



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
    direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date: 16th November 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley




Fee Award        Note: this is not part of the determination.

    In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal  by
    allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award. I have  had
    regard  to  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards   in
    Immigration Appeals. I have decided to make no fee award  as  none  was
    requested by the appellant's representative.

Signed: Fiona Lindsley                       Date: 16th November 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley






