
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12006/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Prepared at Field House On the Papers         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 November 2013                           |On 16 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG



                                   Between

                            MISS PRIMROSE MUSHABE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a national of Uganda who was born on  10  October  1987,
    has appealed against a decision of Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Murray, who had dismissed her appeal against the respondent's  decision
    refusing her permission to remain on the basis of her family life.   At
    the same time as refusing this application, the respondent had  made  a
    decision to remove the appellant by way of directions under Section  47
    of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act   2007.   In   her
    determination, Judge Murray made no mention of the removal decision.

 2. On 14  October  2013,  I  refused  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    substantive decision,  which  gave  permission  to  appeal  limited  to
    arguing that the Section 47 decision was not  in  accordance  with  the
    law.  At the  same  time,  in  a  Notice  of  Provisional  Decision,  I
    indicated to the parties that  it  was  the  provisional  view  of  the
    Tribunal that the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  removal  decision
    should be allowed without a hearing to the extent  that  this  decision
    was not in accordance with the law.

 3. I stated further that before giving  a  formal  determination  to  this
    effect, I would consider any representations as to  why  I  should  not
    make such a decision, so long as these were filed with the Tribunal  by
    no later than 7 days after this  Notice  had  been   sent  not  to  the
    parties.

 4. Following service on the parties of my decision granting permission  to
    appeal and of  my  Notice  of  Provisional  Decision  setting  out  the
    Tribunal's  provisional  view,  a  response  was  received   from   the
    respondent, dated 31  October  2013,  expressing  agreement  with  this
    provisional view.  No further representations have been  received  from
    or on behalf of the appellant.

 5. Accordingly, I now make the decision which I indicated  I  intended  to
    make.

Decision

I set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The appeal against the respondent's substantive decision, refusing to  grant
the appellant permission to remain, is dismissed.

The appeal against the respondent's simultaneous decision to remove  her  by
way  of  directions  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum   and
Nationality Act 2006 is allowed to the limited  extent  that  this  decision
was not in in accordance with the law.


Signed:                                 Dated: 10 December 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


