
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12948/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26th September 2014                          |On 6th October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                               mr MUHAMMED ALI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Saini (instructed by MTG Solicitors)
For the Respondent:  Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant  with regard to a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Mailer) promulgated on 23rd December 2013 by which he  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse her leave to remain as an academic visitor in a  decision  taken
    on 3rd April 2013.

 2. My first task is to decide whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an
    error of law and if so whether and to  what  extent  the  determination
    should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant came to the UK on 12th August 2008 with leave to enter as
    a student. That leave was variously renewed until March 2012. She  made
    an application in time on 3rd March 2012 for  leave  to  remain  as  an
    academic visitor.

 4. The background is that the Appellant had been studying at Riyat College
    and in November of 2011 paid them to register her  with  IAM  to  resit
    exams in December 2011. The college failed to do so but  then  promised
    to register her for the  March  2012  exams.  After  that  the  college
    stopped responding to  her  queries.  Unknown  to  the  Appellant,  the
    college's license was suspended in October 2011. It closed its doors in
    December 2011 and its license finally revoked with immediate effect  on
    24th February 2012.

 5. Ms Everett clarified that nothing is triggered  by  the  licence  being
    suspended but once it is revoked  it  has  the  effect  of  the  policy
    stemming from the Patel (revocation  of  sponsor  license  -  fairness)
    [2011] UKUT 211  (IAC)  judgment  coming  into  effect.  If  a  student
    studying at a college has more than six months  left  on  their  leave,
    that leave is curtailed to 60 days for  them  to  find  an  alternative
    college. If a student has an outstanding  application  to  study  at  a
    college, that application is stayed for a period of 60 days  to  enable
    them to obtain another CAS.

 6. The Appellant in this case did not have an outstanding application  nor
    did she have more than six months left. Her application was  made  only
    the day before her leave was due to expire. She had been  told  by  the
    examining  body,  IAM,  that  they  would  register  her  to  sit   her
    outstanding exam but she would need a CAS to show that she was a lawful
    student. She did not have enough time to find a CAS.

 7. It was the Appellant's case that she did not know that the college  was
    in any trouble until she saw a BBC news article in December of 2011.

 8. It is clear that the Appellant could not succeed under the  Rule  under
    which she applied as she does not meet the requirements for an academic
    visitor as governed by paragraph 46J. She could not succeed  under  the
    provisions for a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant either  as  she  does
    not have a CAS. It was argued  on  her  behalf  that  she  should  have
    benefited from the spirit of the Patel policy. Her  circumstances  were
    unique in that she had  no  time  to  do  anything  about  obtaining  a
    replacement CAS.

 9. It was argued on the Appellant's behalf that  the  Secretary  of  State
    should have given anxious scrutiny to the  covering  letter  which  she
    submitted with her application and in which she set out her difficulty.
     She submitted her application without legal advice.   The  content  of
    that letter should have put the caseworker on notice that she could not
    have had time to secure a CAS and all she was  asking  for  was  for  a
    period of leave to allow her to resit her exams and finish the course.

10. That is the basis that it is argued that the Appellant  should  succeed
    in her appeal. However, as I  indicated  I  was  dealing  firstly  with
    whether or not the First-tier Tribunal made an  error  of  law  in  its
    determination. The First-tier  Tribunal  was  clearly  considering  the
    above arguments when it was told by the Appellant's representative that
    the exam governing body, IAM,  had  ceased  trading.  That  effectively
    "pulled the rug" from under the appeal  and  as  a  result  the  Judge,
    unsurprisingly, dismissed it.

11. It was in fact an error by  the  representative  that  IAM  had  ceased
    trading. IAM had transferred to another organisation  and  was  and  is
    still carrying out the exam in question. The Judge cannot be criticised
    but that nevertheless made his decision based on  a  mistake  of  fact.
    Through no fault of the Judge therefore his determination  contains  an
    error of law. Had the Judge not been labouring under  that  mistake  of
    fact it may be that he would have considered allowing the appeal on  an
    Article 8 basis following the fairness principles set out in Patel.

12. On that basis the determination  must  be  set  aside  and  the  appeal
    redecided.

13. As the issue has not been fully argued and determined as  a  result  of
    the mistake of fact it was agreed by both representatives that this  is
    an appropriate case to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    decided before it.

14. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing by  any  Judge
    other than Judge Mitchell.






Signed                              Date 3rd October 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
