

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: IA/12386/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 8 December 2014                     |On 9 December 2014        |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MS NATALIA FEDOROVA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Nikolaos Gourof, sponsor



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted on 13 October 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lambert
           against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cooper
           allowing  the  Respondent's  appeal  seeking  the  issue  of   a
           residence card under regulation 7 of the  Immigration  (European
           Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (as   amended)   ("the   EEA
           Regulations").  The determination was promulgated on  12  August
           2014.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of Russia, born on 27 August  1981.
           It was accepted by the Secretary of State  that  the  Respondent
           was  married  to  an  EEA  national,  Mr  Nikolaos  Gourof  ("Mr
           Gourof"), a student studying in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  the
           Secretary of State did not accept that the EHIC cards held by Mr
           Gourof and by the Respondent satisfied regulation 4(ii)  of  the
           Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006   (as
           amended),  i.e.,  that  the  EHIC   cards   were   evidence   of
           comprehensive sickness cover in the United Kingdom.  The  appeal
           was determined on the papers as the Respondent had requested.


      3.    Permission for the onwards appeal was granted by  Judge  Lambert
           because she considered it arguable that the judge had  erred  by
           failing to apply Ahmad v Secretary of State [2014] EWCA Civ 988,
           which held that entitlement to NHS treatment is beside the point
           in that it does not  establish  the  required  element  of  self
           sufficiency  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
           Regulations 2006.


      4.    By notice under rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,
           the Respondent indicated that she opposed  the  application  for
           permission to appeal.


      5.    Mr Jarvis  for  the  Appellant  submitted  that  the  judge  had
           manifestly failed to apply Ahmad (above), which had settled  the
           comprehensive  sickness  point  against  the  Respondent.    The
           determination had to be remade, and  that  could  only  be  done
           correctly by dismissing the appeal.  As had been pointed out  in
           the reasons for refusal letter, the Respondent had the option of
           obtaining the required insurance cover and  submitting  a  fresh
           application under the EEA Regulations.


      6.    Mr Gourof, with  the  indulgence  of  the  tribunal,  sought  to
           contest Ahmad.  The rule 24 notice was expanded into  a  written
           submission of no less than 10 pages.  The written submission was
           well presented and of a high standard. In summary Mr Gourof (who
           is not a qualified lawyer) argued  that  Ahmad  was  incorrectly
           decided  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  and  was   in   any   event
           distinguishable on the facts because the Respondent was  seeking
           a residence card, not a permanent residence card  as  in  Ahmad.
           The Court of Appeal  had  not  taken  account  of  the  European
           Commission's carefully reasoned position which  was  opposed  to
           the United Kingdom's restrictive interpretation.  Mr Gourof  had
           in effect severed his ties with Greece and had not himself  been
           required to provide evidence of comprehensive sickness cover  to
           the Secretary of State.   Foreign  students'  health  cover  was
           provided via the tuition fees paid by them or on  their  behalf.
           The result was  a  double  standard  which  was  discriminatory.
           Preventing  the  Respondent  from  working  by  denying  her   a
           residence card stopped  her  from  contributing  to  the  United
           Kingdom economy and thus to the  United  Kingdom's  welfare  and
           sickness cover systems.   Additionally Mr Gourof submitted  that
           the First-tier Tribunal judge had failed to consider his written
           submissions.


      7.    There was nothing which Mr Jarvis, who had provided  a  copy  of
           Ahmad to the tribunal and to Mr Gourof wished to add.


      8     The tribunal indicated at this point that had Judge  Cooper  had
           his attention drawn to Ahmad (the Court of Appeal's judgment was
           reported on 16 July 2014, before promulgation of Judge  Cooper's
           decision) then he would have had no option but  to  dismiss  the
           appeal before him.  Ahmad dealt authoritatively with the  issues
           of principle which Judge Cooper mistakenly believed had not been
           decided.  His failure to follow Ahmad was a  material  error  of
           law.  His determination must be set aside and remade.


      9.    The tribunal notes in passing Mr  Gourof's  concern  that  Judge
           Cooper had not referred in any detail to the written submissions
           which were made to him.  There was no cross  appeal  and  indeed
           there could not have been one because Judge Cooper  had  allowed
           the appeal.  The Respondent has had  sufficient  opportunity  to
           raise all relevant points before the Upper Tribunal.


      10.   Mr Gourof's submissions  need  not  and  indeed  should  not  be
           addressed at any length here.  The tribunal  is  satisfied  that
           Ahmad  was  correctly  decided  after  full  argument.   It   is
           important that the AIRE Centre was permitted to intervene by the
           Court of Appeal, which was recognition of the importance of  the
           issues.  Guidance on the comprehensive sickness policy issue has
           long been awaited from a suitable case and  there  is  no  doubt
           that the  Court  of  Appeal  intended  to  and  did  produce  an
           authoritative decision.  There is  no  material  difference  for
           present purposes  between  a  residence  card  and  a  permanent
           residence card, so Mr Gourof's attempt to distinguish  Ahmad  on
           the facts must fail.  No doubt some  of  his  arguments  may  be
           raised in the event that the disappointed party  in  Ahmad  seek
           and are granted permission to appeal to  the  Supreme  Court  or
           there is a reference to the CJEU,  but  they  are  incapable  of
           persuading the tribunal that it should depart from  Ahmad,  even
           it had power to do so.


      11.   The tribunal accordingly remakes the original  decision  in  the
           only way that it can, namely that  the  original  Appellant  was
           required to show that she held comprehensive sickness  insurance
           cover while her sponsor was studying in the United Kingdom.  She
           admitted that she held no  such  insurance,  and  so  could  not
           satisfy regulation 4(ii).  Her appeal must be and is dismissed.


      12.   No application  was  made  to  the  tribunal  for  an  anonymity
           direction and the tribunal can see no need for any such order.


       DECISION


      There was a material error of law in part of the First-tier Tribunal's
      determination, which is set said.  The Secretary of State's appeal  is
      allowed.  The following decision is substituted:


      The original Appellant's appeal is dismissed


      No anonymity direction is made


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


      TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE
      FEE AWARD


      The appeal was dismissed and there can be no fee award.


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


