


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12055/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 25 February 2014                         |On : 04 March 2014           |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           segun jeremiah adekoya
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In Person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Adekoya's  appeal
against a decision to refuse to issue him  with  a  residence  card  as  the
family member of an EEA national, under the Immigration  (European  Economic
Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").  For the  purposes  of  this
decision, I shall refer to the Secretary of State as the respondent  and  Mr
Adekoya as the appellant, reflecting their positions as  they  were  in  the
appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 4 July 1974. On 13  September
2012 he made an application for a residence card as the  spouse  of  an  EEA
national who was exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom. He  claimed
to be the spouse of a French national, Sonia Almeida, whom  he  had  married
on 9 June 2012.

The appellant's application was refused on 7 April 2013. The respondent,  in
refusing the application, noted that as evidence that he was related  to  an
EEA national he had provided  a  certificate  of  registration  of  marriage
dated 11 June 2012 that stated that he married the EEA national  on  9  June
2012. However the respondent's  records  showed  that  he  had  submitted  a
marriage certificate alongside previous applications  stating  that  he  was
married to his EEA national spouse on 17 February  2011.  The  date  of  his
marriage was therefore unclear.  The  respondent  did  not,  in  any  event,
accept that the marriage was valid since there was no evidence to show  that
either party had travelled to Nigeria to attend the wedding and it  was  not
accepted that customary marriage via  proxy  was  considered  to  be  valid.
Furthermore, it was considered that the various conditions which  needed  to
be fulfilled for a customary marriage to be valid in Nigeria  had  not  been
fulfilled, such as the need for consent and for a dowry.

The appellant's grounds of appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  asserted
that the marriage was valid in the United Kingdom because it  was  valid  in
the place where it was celebrated, namely Nigeria. References were  made  to
the Nigerian Marriage Act and codes of Nigerian  law  which  made  provision
for customary marriages and which recognised proxy  marriages.  The  grounds
also raised Article 8 of the ECHR.

At the appellant's request,  his  appeal  was  determined  by  a  First-tier
Tribunal Judge on the papers, without an oral  hearing.  First-tier  Maxwell
allowed the appeal in a determination issued on 11  November  2013,  finding
that the appellant's marriage was valid. His reason for  so  concluding  was
that the respondent was wrong to consider  that  proxy  marriages  were  not
valid and ought to have relied upon a letter of  1  February  2013  from  HM
Foreign and Commonwealth Office confirming that such marriages  were  valid.
Since he considered that that was the only basis upon which the  application
had been refused, the judge concluded  that  the  appellant's  marriage  was
valid and that he was, therefore, the spouse of an EEA national and that  he
was entitled to a residence card as such.

The respondent sought permission  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on the grounds that the judge had failed to give  adequate  reasons
for concluding that the appellant was the spouse of an EEA national and  had
based his decision purely on general background evidence.

Permission to appeal was granted on 16 January 2014.

Appeal before the Upper Tribunal

 The appeal came before me on 25 February  2014.  Although  the  appellant's
representatives  had  advised  the  Tribunal  that  he  wanted  the   appeal
considered on the papers without an oral hearing, the appellant appeared  at
the hearing. He was no longer represented. His wife was not present  and  he
told me that she was visiting her mother in France, having gone there on  12
February 2014, and was due back on 15  March  2014.  He  did  not  have  any
evidence to confirm that.

Mr Avery made submissions on the error of law. He submitted that  the  judge
had made only general comments about proxy marriages  without  applying  the
relevant considerations to the appellant's case. He  had  not  engaged  with
the evidence or provided any real reasons for his findings.  The  appellant,
in response, asked me to find that the judge's decision was correct.

I advised the parties that in my view the judge had erred in  law  and  that
his decision had to be set  aside.  As  Mr  Avery  submitted,  he  had  only
considered the general  position  on  proxy  marriages  but  had  failed  to
consider the appellant's individual circumstances. It was not the  case,  as
the judge said, that  the  refusal  of  the  appellant's  application  arose
solely out of an incorrect conclusion on the validity  of  proxy  marriages.
Clearly the respondent had engaged with the appellant's  own  circumstances,
considering the various conditions of a customary  marriage  which  had  not
been fulfilled in his case. The judge had failed to give  any  consideration
to that matter. Accordingly his decision was materially flawed  and  had  to
be set aside.

Having first established that the appellant did not want an oral hearing  in
order for his wife to attend and  that  he  preferred  that  I  re-made  the
decision on the basis of submissions on that occasion, I proceeded  to  hear
from both parties.

Mr Avery stood by the refusal decision and also relied on  the  recent  case
of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT  24  in  which  the
Upper Tribunal found that the starting point in such cases was  whether  the
marriage was valid in the EEA  national's  country,  in  this  case  France.
There was no evidence that the French authorities would  recognise  a  proxy
marriage.

I asked the appellant for his response.  He  was  unable  to  state  if  the
marriage was recognised in France and submitted simply that he and his  wife
had been together for three years, as shown by the documentary  evidence.  I
asked him if he was happy for me to make my decision  on  the  documents  he
had submitted previously and he confirmed that he was. I  asked  him  if  he
wanted to add anything and he said that he did not.

Consideration and Findings

Whilst, as Judge Maxwell found, proxy marriages can be recognised  as  valid
in Nigeria  under  customary  law,  the  fact  is  that  there  is,  in  the
appellant's case, a dearth of reliable evidence to show  that  any  ceremony
took place in Nigeria which can be  considered  as  a  proxy  marriage.  The
appellant stated in his witness statement that there was such a ceremony  at
which his wife was represented by her aunty who was  based  in  Nigeria  and
who received the dowry on her behalf and gave her consent to  the  marriage.
He also referred to his family members who were present at the ceremony  and
stated  that  his  father  subsequently   registered   the   marriage.   The
information provided in the statement  from  Sonia  Almeida  was  the  same,
albeit very brief. There is also a statement from Michell Martins,  said  to
be  Sonia  Almeida's  aunt.  However,  neither  witness  was  available  for
examination and, significantly, the appellant did not seek  to  produce  his
wife in order to  confirm  her  evidence.  Other  than  statements  made  by
persons unavailable for examination,  the  only  evidence  of  the  marriage
consists of a certificate of registration of  marriage  which  suffers  from
many of the evidential deficiencies identified in  the  case  of  Kareem  at
paragraphs 39 to 43 and which leads me to the same  conclusions  as  reached
by the Tribunal at paragraph 43  with  regard  to  the  reliability  of  the
evidence.

In the light of such unreliable evidence it  seems  to  me  highly  unlikely
that a ceremony such as that described in the  witness  statements  actually
occurred and that there has in fact been any form of  marriage  between  the
appellant and Ms Almeida. There are, indeed, no photographs of any  ceremony
and no detailed accounts of the occasion such that would lend  any  credence
to the accounts given in  the  witness  statements.  Clearly,  the  evidence
produced by the appellant falls way short of demonstrating that  he  and  Ms
Almeida would be regarded as being married according to Nigerian law.

However, in any event, there is a clear  absence  of  any  evidence  of  the
validity of the claimed proxy marriage under French law  and  no  indication
that the French authorities would  regard  the  parties  as  being  lawfully
married according to Nigerian law or French  law.  That  was  found  by  the
Tribunal in Kareem to be an essential ingredient in such  marriages  and  in
the absence of any evidence in that regard it is clear  that  the  appellant
has failed to show that he has entered into a  valid  marriage.  Indeed  the
credibility of his claim is further undermined by the inconsistency  in  the
evidence of the dates of his marriage, as relied upon by the  respondent  in
refusing his application. The appellant sought to provide  some  explanation
for the discrepancy in his witness statement, but he has  not  produced  any
evidence to support that explanation. Given the nature of the evidence as  a
whole, I consider that to be yet one more reason to conclude that there  has
never been any marriage.

Accordingly, I do not accept that the appellant is married  to  Ms  Almeida.
As such, he is not entitled to a residence card as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
national and he has failed to show  that  the  respondent's  decision  of  7
April 2013 was in breach of the EEA Regulations.

With regard to Article 8, I do not accept that  there  is  any  family  life
between the appellant and Ms Almeida such as to  engage  Article  8  of  the
ECHR. The appellant's appeal bundle contains various pieces  of  documentary
evidence upon which he relies as evidence of cohabitation.  However  in  the
light of the overall unreliability of the evidence and  in  the  absence  of
any appearance by Ms Almeida, I consider that the weight to be  attached  to
the documents is limited and shows no more than that their names  have  been
associated with the  same  address.  Likewise,  I  find  the  weight  to  be
attached to the photographs produced to be limited and I do not accept  that
they  amount  to  reliable  evidence  of  a  subsisting  relationship.   The
appellant has not produced evidence of any established private life  in  the
United Kingdom.  There  is  a  lack  of  information  about  his  length  of
residence and his past immigration status. In the circumstances, and in  the
light of the evidence as a whole, I consider that the interference with  any
private life he may have established here would not be  disproportionate  to
the legitimate aim of maintaining  an  effective  immigration  control.  The
appellant  relies  upon  evidence  indicating  that  he  has  close   family
remaining in Nigeria and, as such, there is no  reason  why  he  cannot  re-
establish his private life in that  country.  Any  requirement  for  him  to
leave the United Kingdom would not be in breach of Article 8.

Accordingly  I  would  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal   under   the   EEA
Regulations and on Article 8 grounds.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly  allowed  and
the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  I  re-make  the
decision by dismissing Mr Adekoya's appeal on all grounds.











                               Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
