
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12288/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 September 2016                       |On 20 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR BOULOS SALEEB
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Konusanac, instructed by Igor & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Egypt, appealed against a decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 26 January 2015.  The matter  came  on  appeal
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg (the judge) who, on 8  March  2016
    allowed the appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

3.   The Secretary of State had challenged that  and  permission  to  appeal
    was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro on 3 August 2016.

4.   It is common ground the judge took the view that  the  application  was
    for a permanent residence card whereas that was not the case.

5.   Evidence  was  called  nevertheless  relating  to  a  claim  seeking  a
    residence card and the judge was satisfied, for reasons given  which  I
    find sufficient and adequate, that the Sponsor was, for the purposes of
    the Regulations, a qualified person : In the circumstances the Claimant
    was effectively an extended family member.  The  position  is  that  Mr
    Whitwell did not draft the grounds of appeal but stands by them without
    making any concession.

6.   Nevertheless, the position is that on a fair  reading  of  the  judge's
    decision in the round the  judge  did  enough  to  demonstrate  that  a
    residence card at least could be issued by the Secretary of State under
    the Regulations because he and the Sponsor had discharged the burden of
    proof on a balance of probabilities that he met the requirements of the
    Regulations.  Whether I would have reached the same decision is neither
    here nor there but the judge found it so and there  is  no  substantive
    attack on the credibility and  reliability  findings  which  the  judge
    made.

7.   Where I found the original Tribunal had made an error  of  law  was  in
    purporting to grant the appeal outright.  It seems to me that this is a
    matter which fell to be returned to the  Secretary  of  State  for  the
    exercise of discretion under Regulation 17(4) in the light of the  case
    such as Ukus [2012] UKUT 307, Ihremedu [2011] UKUT340 and  that  whilst
    on the face of it there is nothing to indicate a good reason as yet why
    the residence card should not be issued, the fact is that  is  for  the
    Secretary of State in making a new decision to exercise her  discretion
    upon it.  Therefore, the Original Tribunal's decision does not stand in
    allowing the appeal. The findings of  fact  by  the  Original  Tribunal
    stand.

DECISION
8.   In these circumstances the Secretary of State's appeal succeeds but  to
    the limited extent of the matter being returned  to  the  Secretary  of
    State for the exercise of discretion.

ANONYMITY
No anonymity order was made and none is necessary or appropriate.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD
The fee award made by the judge does stands.

Signed                                  Date: 17 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


 P.S. I regret the delay in promulgation which was due  to  the  file  being
    mislocated.


