
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/12690/2013
     IA/12692/2013
     IA/12696/2013
     IA/12697/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19 November 2013                             |On 4 February 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Talat Jabeen
                                 Qamar iqbal
                               Muhammad Fahad
                               Mohammad Ahmed
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T Hussain, instructed by Harris & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondents are citizens of Pakistan.  The second, third and fourth
    respondents are dependents upon the application for  further  leave  to
    remain  made  by  the  first  respondent,  Talat   Jabeen.    In   this
    determination, I shall refer to Talat Jabeen as "the appellant" as  she
    was before the First-tier Tribunal; I shall refer to the  Secretary  of
    State as "the respondent".

 2. The appellant had applied for leave to remain as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant.  Her application was refused on  5  April  2013.   The
    appellant had failed to demonstrate that she had the necessary  English
    language skills required by the Immigration Rules.  She  satisfied  the
    other requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Thorne) which, in a determination promulgated on 1
    October 2013, dismissed the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  but
    allowed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The Secretary  of  State
    has been granted permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against
    that decision.  There is no cross-appeal in respect  of  the  dismissal
    under the Immigration Rules.

 4. There is one ground of appeal.  It is asserted in the grounds that  the
    First-tier Tribunal misdirected itself in law as to "what amounts to  a
    proportionate interference with private life.  Reliance was  placed  on
    the judgment of Burnton LJ in Miah [2012] EWCA Civ 261:

         in my judgment, there was no near-miss principle applicable to  the
         Immigration Rules.  The  Secretary  of  State,  on  appeal  as  the
         Tribunal, must assess the strength of an Article 8 claim,  but  the
         requirements of immigration control is not weakened by  the  degree
         of non-compliance with the Immigration Rules [26].

 5. At [52], Judge Thorne wrote:

         "I take into account the following matters:

          a) There was  a  legitimate  interest  in  maintaining  effecting
             immigration control.

          b) There is a general administrative desirability of applying  no
             Rules if a system of immigration control is  to  be  workable,
             predictable, consistent and fair as between one  claimant  and
             another.

          c) There is a legitimate need to discourage breaches of  the  law
             especially serious criminal offences.

          d) The appellant's private life in the UK has been  built  up  by
             her in the full knowledge that her immigration status  in  the
             UK was not secure.

          e) The appellant has invested a large amount of time and money in
             the UK in furthering her education.

          f) The appellant through her representative requested  only  that
             leave now be extended for a further three months to allow  the
             appellant to re-sit her English language test.

          g) There is no dispute that the appellant is able to finance  her
             studies in the UK and could have done so at the  date  of  the
             decision."

 6. The judge went on at [53] to conclude "that in this case the  prejudice
    to the private life of the appellant is so serious as to  amount  to  a
    breach of the fundamental right protected by  Article  8".   The  judge
    allowed the appeal "to the extent only that leave  to  remain  for  the
    appellant is granted for three months on the date of this determination
    to allow the first appellant to re-sit her English language test."

 7. Mrs Pettersen, for the Secretary of State, submitted that the fact that
    the decision to remove the appellant by way of directions under Section
    47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006  had  been
    withdrawn by the Presenting Officer at the First-tier Tribunal hearing,
    the appellant was not, therefore, facing an imminent removal  from  the
    United Kingdom and her Article 8 ECHR rights would not be breached.

 8. I do not agree with that submission.  Judge Thorne was right to  go  on
    and consider the human rights appeal notwithstanding the withdrawal  of
    the decision to remove (see JM [2006] EWCA  Civ  1402).   Further,  Mrs
    Pettersen did not submit that the allowing of the Article 8 ECHR appeal
    on the particular  facts  of  this  appeal  was  necessarily  perverse.
    Consequently, this Tribunal should  not  interfere  with  the  decision
    unless the judge's approach to and  analysis  of  the  Article  8  ECHR
    issues are so flawed as to require the determination to be set side.  I
    refer to the determination of the First-tier Tribunal at [52]  which  I
    have quoted in full above.  The judge has taken a  properly  structured
    approach to the Article 8 analysis.  He has rightly concluded  at  [51]
    that the appeal turned on the question of proportionality.  The matters
    which he took into account at [52] are, in my view,  an  indication  of
    the even-handed view which  he  has  taken  of  the  evidence,  seeking
    neither to downplay nor overemphasise factors for  and  against  either
    party.  Referring to the grounds of appeal, I can see nothing  in  [52]
    which indicates the judge has wrongly adopted  a  "near-miss"  approach
    although I accept that it is arguable that  he  should  not  have  been
    influenced by the fact that the appellant only required a few months of
    further leave in order to re-sit her English language  test  (which  he
    has now passed).  However, I do not consider that to  be  an  error  so
    great as to undermine the determination.   The  same  is  true  of  the
    direction he has given for the appellant to be  granted  three  months'
    leave to remain; the period of leave  is  properly  a  matter  for  the
    Secretary of State.  Although he does not refer to it,  I  accept  that
    the judge was also told at the hearing  that  the  appellant  had  been
    unable to re-sit the  examination  prior  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing because she had been without her passport which was given  back
    to her at that hearing.

 9. I find that the outcome of this appeal was available to  the  judge  on
    the evidence and his reasoning is not so seriously flawed in law as  to
    require the determination to be set aside.  Another  judge  might  have
    reached a different conclusion but that  is  not  the  point.  For  the
    reasons I have given, I do not intend to interfere with his decision.



DECISION

10. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 21 November 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
