
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA124722015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On               the               1st               June               2016
                    On the 10th June 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                              MRS TARA DEVI RAI
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Blundell (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Mr Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Landes promulgated on the 5th September 2015, in  which
      she  refused  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  paragraph  287  of  the
      Immigration Rules in respect of her application for  indefinite  leave
      to remain as a spouse.   The  Appellant  has  sought  to  appeal  that
      decision to the Upper Tribunal.

   2. Within the original Grounds of Appeal it  is  argued  that  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Landes  accepted  that  the  relationship  between  the
      Appellant and her British Sponsor  husband  Birju  Limbu  began  as  a
      genuine marriage and that the marriage continued to  subsist,  despite
      the fact the Appellant and her husband had lived apart  from  December
      2013 to May 2014, when the Sponsor had worked in  Hong  Kong.   It  is
      said that at [17] of the determination Judge Landes recorded the  fact
      that the couple again lived apart from each other as the Sponsor moved
      to Brecon in Wales in order to secure employment and that his  motives
      for seeking employment in Wales and remaining there  were  "plausible"
      [19 and 20].  It is said that Judge  Landes  recorded  the  fact  that
      there was evidence of the Appellant visiting the Sponsor in Wales  and
      remaining in touch with him via telephone and Skype, but it  was  said
      that Judge Landes had concluded that the marriage was  not  subsisting
      because   of   discrepancies   in   the   evidence    regarding    the
      frequency/number of visits by the Appellant  to  Wales,  the  lack  of
      effort made by the Appellant to relocate to Wales  and  little  detail
      about their plans for the future.  It was  argued  that  whilst  Judge
      Landes was entitled to note  the  discrepancies  over  the  number  of
      visits made by the Appellant to Wales,  the  fact  remained  that  the
      Appellant visited the Sponsor in Wales on 5  or  6  occasions  between
      July 2014 and the date of the appeal hearing in light of the  evidence
      of the Sponsor, her 2 witnesses  and  the  uncontroverted  documentary
      evidence of those visits [7].

   3. It is said that Judge Landes did not grapple with the fact that whilst
      the Appellant had not made active efforts to  relocate  to  Wales  the
      couple had remained in regular telephone contact  and  had  seen  each
      other for a weekend every 2 months and that those are simply hallmarks
      of a long distance relationship.  It is said that  in  concluding  the
      marriage was not genuine Judge  Landes  neither  considers  nor  gives
      weight to the fact that the couple make efforts to see each other on 5
      or  6  occasions  and  had  failed  to   factor   in   this   material
      consideration.  It is said that  the  Judge  failed  to  look  at  the
      purposes of those visits if  it  was  not  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship and that in finding that this was not a relationship  the
      Judge arguably ignored the real possibility that  this  is  a  genuine
      couple who are at present, living apart.

   4. Permission to appeal was originally  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Nicholson on the 2nd February 2016 who found that the Judge  had
      noted that there was "No one model of a genuine marriage" at [35], but
      that the Judge considered the evidence  of  contact  and  visits,  but
      concluded for good reasons that the full truth had not been  told  and
      that  given  the  inconsistences  in  the  evidence,   the   lack   of
      cohabitation and the vagueness regarding the future plans,  the  Judge
      had found that the case was not proved on the balance of probabilities
      and that these findings were open to the Judge.

   5. The Appellant sought to renew the application for permission to appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal, in which it is argued that in addition  to  the
      original Grounds of Appeal submitted that the First-tier Judge had not
      given adequate reasons for concluding that she was not satisfied  that
      she  had  been  told  the  truth  about  the  current  state  of   the
      relationship at [35].  It is said that  those  findings  also  do  not
      reconcile with the Immigration Judge's earlier findings  in  the  same
      paragraph.  It is further argued that the Judge's findings in relation
      to the intention of the parties to live  together  in  the  future  is
      merely speculation and that the parties are in a genuine  relationship
      and do have a firm intention to live together in the future  and  that
      the Judge failed to appreciate the  parties'  circumstances  and  take
      into account the circumstantial evidence before  her.   It  is  denied
      that this is simply a disagreement with the Judge's  factual  findings
      and that the Judge arguably ignored the real possibility that this was
      a genuine couple who are at present living apart.

   6. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  McGeachy  on
      the 15th April 2016,  when  she  found  that  "Having  considered  the
      determination and the findings of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      which include the fact that she had found  that  the  marriage  was  a
      genuine marriage, I consider that it is arguable that  the  Judge  has
      placed too high a burden of proof on the Appellant.  I therefore grant
      permission to appeal".

   7. It was on that basis that  the  case  came  before  me  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal.

   8. Mr Blundell on behalf of the Appellant had  submitted  a  supplemental
      bundle to be used  if  an  error  of  law  was  found.   In  his  oral
      submissions Mr Blundell argued that this was  an  unusual  application
      for indefinite leave to remain and that the Appellant lived in  Harrow
      in London, whereas the husband lived in Brecon and had done so at  all
      material times.  He agreed that the Judge needed to consider  if  this
      was a genuine and subsisting marriage and  also  whether  or  not  the
      parties  intended  to  permanently  live  together.   He  argued  that
      although  there  were  some  difficulties  with  the  oral   evidence,
      including contradictions as to how the bus tickets had been bought for
      the Appellant to go to Wales and the Judge's  concerns  regarding  the
      frequency of the visits and the difficulty regarding  whether  or  not
      the Sponsor had been working on the date of the  visit  prior  to  the
      appeal hearing on the 14th August,  10  days  before  the  appeal,  he
      argued that the Judge had nevertheless accepted at [33] that this  was
      a genuine marriage at inception, and that there had been  visits  from
      the Appellant to the Sponsor and that the Judge  had  also  considered
      the pre and post-decision evidence regarding phone  contact  which  he
      argued the Judge had  found  showed  a  pattern  consistent  with  the
      parties keeping in contact.  He argued that they  had  kept  up  their
      relationship at a distance.  He argued that the Judge  had  not  asked
      the ultimate question as to why the phone  contacts  and  visits  were
      happening, if this was not a genuine marriage.   He  argued  that  the
      Judge  had  failed  to  reflect  adequately  on  the  nature  of   the
      relationship in light of the findings made and that the  decision  had
      been inadequately reasoned given the lack of consideration as  to  why
      the contacts and visits had been maintained, if it was not  a  genuine
      marriage.  He argued that the Appellant was  challenging  all  of  the
      findings between paragraph 17 and 35 of  the  decision  including  the
      findings in respect of the lack of  active  steps  having  been  taken
      regarding the Appellant relocating.

   9. Mr Tufan in his oral submissions on behalf of  the  Respondent  argued
      that the Judge had considered the evidence of the Appellant and of the
      witnesses and had considered the evidence in detail and made  findings
      which were open to her.  He argued that the Judge  had  found  a  huge
      number of discrepancies.  He argued that Mr Blundell  had  not  argued
      that this was a perverse decision.  He  argued  that  marriages  often
      start as genuine marriages and fail and that some contact did not mean
      that it was a genuine relationship.  He  argued  that  the  Judge  had
      properly considered the state of the  relationship  at  [35]  and  had
      considered  whether  or  not  this  was  a  subsisting   and   genuine
      relationship and whether or not the parties  intended  to  permanently
      live together.  He argued that the Judge had  made  findings  open  to
      her.

   My Finding on Material Error of Law

  10. At [10] of her decision First-tier Tribunal Judge  Landes  noted  that
      the burden of proof was on the Appellant and  the  standard  of  proof
      required is the  balance  of  probabilities.   She  noted  within  her
      determination the requirements under paragraph 287 of the  Immigration
      Rules for the marriage to be still subsisting  and  for  each  of  the
      parties intends to live permanently with  the  other  as  his  or  her
      spouse. These are separate requirements under  paragraph  287  of  the
      Immigration Rules, and Judge Landes properly considered those separate
      requirements individually.

  11. However, when considering the evidence in respect of both  issues,  as
      to whether or not the marriage was subsisting and as to whether or not
      the parties intended to live permanently together, Judge Landes had to
      consider, as she did, the evidence pointing in favour of the  marriage
      being  a  subsisting  marriage  and  the  parties'  intent   to   live
      permanently together, and the evidence pointing against  the  marriage
      still subsisting and the intention of the parties to live  permanently
      together.  The Judge had to weigh, as she clearly did, the evidence in
      the round, and in this regard, the Judge did fully take  into  account
      the evidence of phone contact between [22 and 24]  and  clearly  found
      that the pattern demonstrated of phone contacts and text messages  was
      consistent with a couple who are indeed keeping  in  contact  and  the
      varying length of the calls including some long calls, but by no means
      exclusively long calls or calls of or around the same length are again
      consistent with a couple who  are  keeping  up  a  relationship  at  a
      distance.  However, the Judge went  on  to  consider  that  the  other
      evidence of contact was more equivocal at [25].  She  noted  that  the
      birthday card was post-decision and that in respect of the  Valentines
      card the envelope was not legible.  In respect of the bus reservations
      which she found were consistent  with  the  Appellant  having  visited
      Wales on 7 occasions post-decision since the beginning of April  2015,
      there was no documentary evidence  of  visits  pre-decision  and  that
      there were some contradictions in the oral evidence, in  that  in  her
      statement she said that pre-decision she bought the bus  tickets  over
      the counter, but did not keep them, but when asked by  the  Judge  she
      had said that she had always since she had been visiting  her  husband
      made reservations over  the  internet.  Judge  Lanes  found  that  the
      Appellant then appeared to contradict herself by saying  that  at  the
      time she had not realised that proof was needed as most  of  the  time
      she used cash [35] and that when this inconsistency  was  pointed  out
      she said that she had bought the tickets over the counter rather  than
      using the internet.

  12. The Judge went on at [27], to  consider  what  she  considered  to  be
      significant inconsistences in the  witness  statements  and  the  oral
      evidence about contact in that firstly, both in  the  covering  letter
      sent with the application, but also  the  Appellant's  statement  sent
      with the application referred to Mr Limbu travelling to London once  a
      month to see the Appellant, Mr Limbu said in evidence that he had  not
      travelled to London since he  moved  to  Brecon  in  July  2014.   She
      further noted that whereas the Appellant said in  oral  evidence  that
      she visited Mr Limbu twice a month in Wales,  which  she  found  would
      mean that she visited him over 20 times and that it was said that  she
      had visited him 5 or 6 times in the last 2 months, Mr Limbu had  given
      contrary evidence and found that the Appellant  visited  him  5  or  6
      times in total since July 2014 and that he  thought  it  was  about  a
      month before the most recent visit on  the  14th  August  although  he
      could not remember exactly and it was only after some difficulty  that
      he had decided that his wife had visited on the weekend  of  the  31st
      July.

  13. Judge Landes noted that Usha Rai's evidence was that the Appellant had
      visited Mr Limbu 5 or 6 times in the 3 months from July  to  September
      2014 and that Ms Magar's evidence was that the Appellant  had  visited
      Mr Limbu 5 or 6 times since they had  shared  a  flat  from  September
      2014.

  14.  The Judge noted that although  she  did  not  expect  the  couple  to
      remember the precise number of visits there was a striking  difference
      between 5 and 6 visits or over 20 visits and that she would expect the
      couple in a genuine and subsisting relationship to be able to remember
      in general terms whether the visits were in the order  of  once  every
      other month or twice a month.  In such circumstances she was  entitled
      to conclude that she was not being told the truth about the number  of
      visits the Appellant had made to Mr Limbu and this was a finding  open
      to her on the evidence given the inconsistences in this regard.

  15.  Although  the  Judge  did  find  that  she  was  satisfied  that  the
      relationship began as a genuine marriage [33] this does not in  itself
      necessarily mean that the relationship was still subsisting and I find
      that the Judge fully considered the evidence point in favour  of  this
      being a subsisting relationship and the evidence against it, and  that
      the Judge gave clear and adequate reasons  for  finding  that  in  her
      judgment it had not been proved that the marriage was subsisting.

  16.  The Judge noted that the telephone evidence indicated that the couple
      were in frequent contact and of course she noted this  was  consistent
      with a couple in a genuine relationship, she considered that  she  had
      not been told the truth about the number of visits that the  Appellant
      had made to Mr Limbu and that  there  were  a  number  of  significant
      inconsistences in the evidence about the visits and  the  purchase  of
      the tickets for the visits.

  17. The Judge noted that there was no one model of a genuine marriage  and
      took account of the fact that given  the  inconsistences  against  the
      background and despite the evidence of phone contact and the  evidence
      of a relative and friend she was not satisfied she had been  told  the
      truth about the current state of the couple's relationship  which  was
      presented as one of a continuously happy marriage with no  reason  for
      living  apart  other  than  work  circumstances.   She  was  therefore
      entitled to find on the evidence that this was not  a  marriage  which
      was still subsisting.  This was a finding open to her in light of  the
      discrepancies in the  evidence.   The  Judge  did  not  need  to  make
      specific findings as to the purpose of the phone  contact  or  of  any
      visits that were in fact made, but did have to and  clearly  did  take
      that evidence into account when considering the evidence in the  round
      which she has done.

  18. The Judge further considered that it was plausible that Mr  Limbu  had
      moved to Brecon to look for work and that it was plausible that he had
      restricted himself to looking for jobs through friends and that it was
      through a friend that he had heard of the vacancy in Brecon.   However
      the Judge went on at [20 and 21] to consider the efforts that had been
      made by the couple to look for work in the same  place  so  that  they
      could be together and in my judgement the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      gave clear and adequate reasons for her findings  in  respect  of  the
      lack of active efforts made by the couple to look for work in the same
      place.  I further find that  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
      account the fact that the couple did not go into detail  when  invited
      in evidence to say what their future plans were at [30].




  19. I further find that the Judge  gave  clear,  adequate  and  sufficient
      reasons for her findings that the  parties  did  not  intend  to  live
      permanently together at [34 and 35] of her judgement.  The Judge noted
      in this regard the fact that the relationship had begun as  a  genuine
      marriage but that since Mr Limbu's return to the UK over  a  year  ago
      and obtaining work in Brecon the couple had not made active efforts to
      look for work in the same area and that although it might be difficult
      for Mr Limbu to find work without the recommendation of a friend,  the
      Appellant who would have not had the same difficulties did not seem to
      have tried very hard.




  20. It was open to the Judge to find that given the lack of active efforts
      of the couple to seek to live together over the  previous  year,  that
      they  had  not  proved  in  any  event  that  they  intended  to  live
      permanently together when circumstances permitted.  Again, this was  a
      finding open to the Judge on the evidence before her, such  that  even
      if I am wrong and there were  any  errors  in  the  Judge's  reasoning
      regarding the current state of their relationship,  I  find  that  any
      such error would in any event not be material, given the finding  that
      the lack of active steps was more  than  adequately  reasoned  and  in
      light of that finding, that it was open to the Judge to find that  the
      parties did not intend to live  permanently  together  such  that  the
      appeal would not have been successful in any event.



  21. In such circumstances,  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Landes does not disclose any material error of law and is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Landes  does  not  disclose  a
material error of law and is maintained.

Signed
R F McGinty
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty   Dated 4th June 2016

