
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/12069/2015
                                                ia/12070/2015, ia/12071/2015
                                                               ia/12072/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 15 December 2016                  |on 17 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                       & UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     MACHADO MOREIRA HENRIQUE SANTOS + 3
                                                                 Respondents


For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Duheric, of Duheric & Co, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as described above, but  the  rest  of  this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the FtT.

 2. On 19 January 2015 the first appellant ("the  appellant")  applied  for
    further leave to remain in the UK as a Tier  1  (entrepreneur)  migrant
    under the points-based system. The other appeals depend on his.

 3. The SSHD refused the application on 13th of March 2015. 20  points  had
    been claimed under the heading, "Applicant registered as  self-employed
    or director within 6 months of grant". At pages  2-3  of  the  decision
    documents were found not be acceptable  "because  they  are  not  dated
    within the 8 months after your initial grant of leave". No points  were
    awarded. 20 points were claimed under the heading, "Creation of jobs in
    the UK". At pages 3-4 the decision states that payments to one employee
    were discounted because he had been paid less than the national minimum
    wage. No points were awarded under this heading either.

 4. If the points claimed under those two headings had  been  awarded,  the
    application would have succeeded.

 5. Designated FtT Judge Murray allowed the appellant's appeal by  decision
    promulgated on 15 April 2016. She  found  the  appellant  and  his  two
    witnesses credible; that he had coped without legal assistance with the
    stringent rules in his  first  entrepreneurial  application;  that  the
    respondent misled him into believing that in his further application he
    would not be required to provide the  exact  documents  requested;  and
    that the respondent "must have known  that  he  was  self-employed  and
    running his business as he should have been" (paragraphs 58 to 63).

 6. At paragraph 64  the  judge  went  on,  "It  is  true  that  the  exact
    specifications of the rules have not been satisfied, but I find that in
    a case like this the rules should be  interpreted  on  a  common  sense
    basis. The SSHD should have exercised her  discretion  differently  and
    considered all the evidence provided in the round."

 7. Turning to the second point of refusal, the  judge  found  this  to  be
    explained by an  error  admitted  by  the  appellant's  accountants,  a
    multinational firm, and said at paragraph 66, "The Home  Office  states
    they had no choice but to refuse the application on this basis but this
    is where I find that evidential flexibility should have come in".

 8. At paragraph 68 the judge said that the appeal fell also to be  allowed
    on the basis of article 8 of the ECHR, outside the immigration rules.

 9. The SSHD appeals to the UT on 3 grounds: (1)  whether  the  judge  took
    into account evidence prohibited by section 85A of the  2002  Act;  (2)
    error in allowing the appeal under the rules, having acknowledged  that
    the rules had not been met; and (3) inadequacy  of  reasoning  for  the
    outcome under article 8.

10. In view of the way the case developed in course of  submissions  before
    us, and in light of concessions on both sides, we need not  delve  into
    the extent of error disclosed by ground (1).

11. On the best possible view for the appellant, there was  nothing  before
    the FtT by which it could properly have been held that his  application
    met the terms of the immigration rules.

12. The points-based system does not include any provisions  by  which  the
    judge could apply "common sense" or "discretion" and find  that  points
    "ought" to have been awarded.

13. The reference to "evidential  flexibility"  is  vague.   There  are  no
    provisions under that heading in the rules, case law  or  elsewhere  to
    permit the conclusion reached by the judge.

14. The respondent accepts the judge's factual  findings  on  error  coming
    about through the fault of the appellant's accountants and  through  no
    fault of his, and on the matter being corrected since;  but  no  matter
    how convincing the  explanation,  it  was  legally  irrelevant  to  the
    outcome.

15. Mr Matthews helpfully confirmed for us that (a) if the outcome of these
    proceedings was adverse to the appellant he would have  until  14  days
    after proceedings were exhausted to submit an application of a  similar
    nature, and if it complied with the rules, there was no reason to think
    that it would  not  succeed;  (b)  the  document  at  page  D1  of  the
    respondent's bundle, a "small earnings exemption certificate" from HMRC
    dated 1 March 2014, would be accepted  in  any  future  application  as
    satisfactory under paragraph 46SD of appendix A; and (c) Judge Murray's
    findings on the facts, so far as relevant, would be taken into account.

16. Our decision was formally reserved, but we indicated that it  would  be
    along the following lines.

17. The judge erred in law by allowing the  appeal  under  the  immigration
    rules, there having been no evidence by which it could  be  shown  that
    the application met the terms of the rules.

18. It is irrelevant whether there is evidence, provided at a  later  date,
    by which the application (or a further similar application) might  have
    succeeded.

19. The appeal could not properly be  allowed  under  article  8  when  the
    appellants have the recourse of an application under  the  points-based
    system which is likely to succeed.  It  is  never  disproportionate  to
    expect that someone in a position to make such an application should do
    so.

20. The decision of  the  FtT  is  set  aside.   We  remake  it  thus:  the
    appellant's appeal,  as  brought  to  the  FtT,  is  dismissed  on  all
    available grounds.

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


             [pic]


             16 December 2016
             Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
