
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12895/2015
                                                             & IA/12896/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10 October 2016                   |On 21 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                1) Alina [B]
                         2) Vladislav [B] (a minor)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr B. Hawkin, instructed by Arlington Crown,
solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellants are both citizens of the Ukraine. The first appellant
       was born on the 27 November 1985.  Where  the  context  admits,  the
       expression 'the appellant' refers to her.  The second  appellant  is
       her son. He was born on 7 April 2009. The appellants appeal  against
       the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Maka  promulgated  on
       17 February 2016 in which he dismissed the appeals of each appellant
       both under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

    2. On 21 October 2015 the  appellants'  representatives  had  requested
       that the appeal was determined on the papers. It was for this reason
       that neither the appellants  nor  the  respondent  appeared  at  the
       hearing. It was conducted  on  the  papers.  Although  much  of  the
       evidence was uncontroversial, there were  a  significant  number  of
       issues on which the judge would have been assisted by evidence  from
       the first appellant. Further, given the  respondent's  rejection  of
       the application on the basis that the first appellant did  not  meet
       the requirements of the Immigration Rules,  the  burden  was  placed
       upon the claimant to establish those requirements had  been  met  or
       that there were other circumstances justifying  a  consideration  of
       the appeal outside the Rules.  It is difficult to understand why the
       first appellant did  not  grasp  the  importance  of  assisting  the
       Tribunal by giving evidence.

    3. Notwithstanding this, the grounds of appeal now assert  that  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge erred in law in  failing  to  allow  the  appeal
       under Article 8.

    4. The appellants' immigration history is set out in paragraph 6 of the
       respondent's decision of 17 March  2015.  The  first  appellant  had
       entered the United Kingdom on 2 April 2005 under the terms of a visa
       valid until 29 August 2005. Her son Vladislav was  born  four  years
       later.  An application made in May 2012 to remain as a partner of  a
       person   settled   in   the   United   Kingdom   was   refused.   On
       reconsideration, the claim was rejected once again. On the basis  of
       this unpromising start, a further application was made for leave  to
       remain on human rights grounds.  The appellant's claim based on  her
       family live with a partner was rejected.  The  evidence  established
       the couple had been living together for a period in  excess  of  two
       years and the eligibility requirements of Appendix FM had been  met.
       The decision went on to consider the requirements of family life  as
       a parent. The couple were jointly responsible  looking  after  their
       son, the second appellant, but he was neither a British citizen  nor
       had settled  status.  Furthermore,  he  had  not  been  continuously
       present for at least seven years preceding the date  of  application
       in the United Kingdom.

    5. The decision letter went on to consider that as it was reasonable to
       expect the second appellant to leave the United Kingdom  as  he  was
       then not six years old.  The transition would not be difficult given
       the mother's familiarity with Ukraine and the opportunity  available
       to her partner to join her in the Ukraine if he chose to do so.  The
       best interests of Vladislav would be met by his remaining  with  his
       mother. There were  no  very  significant  obstacles  in  the  first
       appellant's integration into Ukraine given the  fact  that  she  had
       spent the first 20 years of her life there.

    6. The decision letter went on  to  consider  the  fact  that  although
       Vladislav had spent his entire life in the United Kingdom, he  could
       safely live in the Ukraine  with  his  mother.  Such  activities  as
       formed part of the appellant's private life in the  United  Kingdom,
       such  as  her  activities  within  the  Ukrainian  Catholic   Church
       indicated her familiarity with Ukrainian  life  and  there  were  no
       exceptional circumstances meriting a right to remain in  the  United
       Kingdom having failed to meet the public interest  criteria  of  the
       Immigration Rules.

    7. The appellant has appealed against the determination of  Judge  Maka
       and in granting permission of the Tribunal Judge Freeman  considered
       the subsequent decision of Kamara might require consideration.

    8. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v Kamara  [2016]  EWCA
       Civ 813 (11 August 2016), Sales LJ (with whom Moore-Bick LJ  agreed)
       recited that the Secretary of State wished to deport  Mr  Kamara  to
       Sierra Leone as a foreign criminal.  Mr  Kamara  had  come  to  this
       country in 1993 as a young child, aged 6, with his sister,  aged  8,
       to live with his adult half-sister who was in the UK with indefinite
       leave to remain. That was some 23 years before.  He was  brought  up
       here. On 30 August 1995 he and his sister  were  granted  indefinite
       leave to  remain  as  dependants  of  his  half-sister.   The  Upper
       Tribunal found that he had no ties with Sierra  Leone,  having  lost
       all contact with the country a long time ago.  Mr Kamara  could  not
       speak any of the local languages in use  in  Sierra  Leone;  he  was
       fully integrated into society in the UK.

    9. The principal factual issue in dispute at  the  hearing  before  the
       Upper Tribunal was whether Mr Kamara had maintained links  with  his
       natural mother in Sierra Leone. Mr Kamara's evidence was that he had
       not.  The Tribunal found Mr Kamara's natural mother had  disappeared
       in about 1994 and she could not be traced.

   10. The important question was whether there would be  very  significant
       obstacles to Mr Kamara's integration into Sierra Leone, if  deported
       there.  The Upper Tribunal found  that  Mr  Kamara  had  no  family,
       familial links or friends in Sierra Leone.  The passage  of  general
       application was expressed in these terms:

          1. In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's  "integration"
             into the country to which it is proposed that he be  deported,
             as set out in section 117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph  399A,  is  a
             broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability  to  find  a
             job or to sustain life while living in the other  country.  It
             is not appropriate to treat the statutory language as  subject
             to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a court or
             tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms that  Parliament
             has chosen to use. The idea of "integration" calls for a broad
             evaluative judgment to be made as to  whether  the  individual
             will be enough of an insider in  terms  of  understanding  how
             life in the society in that other country is carried on and  a
             capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
             opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate  on  a
             day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
             reasonable time a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give
             substance to the individual's private or family life.

   11. The Secretary of State's two  criticisms  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
       decision focussed on the Tribunal's failure to have  regard  to  the
       facts that Mr Kamara was a young man in good health and  capable  of
       work which the Court of  Appeal  firmly  rejected  as  this  was  so
       obvious a piece of the background finding of fact that  it  required
       no special mention.  Secondly, it was said the  Tribunal  failed  to
       give proper reasons to explain its conclusion that Mr Kamara  should
       not be deported, notwithstanding he was a young man in  good  health
       and capable of work.  That argument, too, was  rejected.   The  fact
       that the claimant was a young man in good health and capable of work
       was insufficient to cancel out the reasons it gave for finding  that
       there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration  into
       Sierra Leone.

   12. The decision in Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Kamara
       [2016] EWCA Civ 813 was published on 11 August 2016, a month  before
       the grant of permission of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Freeman  and
       many months after  the  determination  in  the  instant  appeal  was
       promulgated (17 February 2016).   Inevitably,  when  assessing  very
       significant  obstacles  to  the  claimant's  integration  into   the
       Ukraine, the First-tier Tribunal had not  had  the  benefit  of  the
       contents of paragraph 14 of the judgment of Sales LJ.  However, this
       was not a  matter  of  law  on  which  he  was  expounding  and  the
       sentiments  there  expressed,  I  am  sure,  would  not  have   been
       considered by him as ground-breaking or initiating a  new  direction
       in approaching the  issue  of  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
       claimant's integration into.  Rather, it is a passage full of  sound
       good sense drawing, as so often occurs in  this  jurisdiction,  upon
       making an evaluation  in  broad  terms,  omitting  nothing  that  is
       material to the sensitive task of making findings of fact  and  then
       reaching a reasonable and proportionate conclusion on the reality of
       the consequences for an individual of his return to his  country  of
       nationality.  In Mr Kamara's  case,  the  result  was,  I  think,  a
       reasonably obvious conclusion and the Secretary of  State's  attempt
       to make light of those consequences was  properly  resisted  by  the
       Court of Appeal.

   13. In the context of the present  appeal,  the  situation  is  markedly
       different.   The  broad  evaluative  judgment  (as  to  whether  the
       appellant will be enough of an insider in terms of understanding how
       life in the society in that  other  country  is  carried  on  and  a
       capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a   reasonable
       opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
       day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable time a
       variety of human relationships to give substance to the individual's
       private or family  life)  was  limited  by  the  known  facts.   The
       appellant was born on 27 November 1985 and was 19 years old when she
       had entered the United Kingdom in April 2005.  She had been  brought
       up in the Ukraine.  Her activities  within  the  Ukrainian  Catholic
       Church indicated her familiarity with Ukrainian life.  The length of
       time in the United Kingdom was not such as to have erased  that  up-
       bringing or her association with  Ukraine.   The  evidence  did  not
       establish any specific reasons why she would not be able to  operate
       in Ukraine at a social level or to participate in life there.

   14. Mr Hawkin did not pursue this element of the appeal before me.  I am
       satisfied that the basis on which the grant of permission  was  made
       does not make out a case that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in
       law.

   15. Instead, Mr Hawkin pursued the appeal on the basis  of  the  several
       criticisms levelled at the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination
       in his grounds to the Upper Tribunal.

   16. I reject entirely the criticism directed to the judge's reasoning in
       paragraph 45. Quite correctly, the judge said that as Vladislav  had
       not  lived  continuously  for  at  least  seven  years   immediately
       preceding the date of application, he did  not  need  to  go  on  to
       consider whether it was reasonable to expect him to leave the United
       Kingdom. However, sensibly, he did deal with that issue and  reached
       an entirely rational conclusion that it  was  reasonable  to  expect
       Vladislav to leave the UK with his mother.  This  was  part  of  the
       picture that the judge was in entitled to assess.

   17. In  paragraph  8  of  the  grounds,  the  appellant  challenges  the
       assessment of whether there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
       appellant and her partner continuing their family life  outside  the
       United Kingdom. It is  said  that  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
       partner is not Ukrainian is a strong indication of an insurmountable
       obstacle. I  reject  that  submission.  Where  a  couple  who  speak
       different languages embark upon a relationship, there is  inevitably
       the need to acquire skills to  communicate.   There  is  nothing  to
       suggest the appellant's partner, living in the  United  Kingdom,  is
       unable to do so. Further, as Mr Clarke properly asserts, paragraph 8
       of the grounds tends to reverse the burden of proof. It was for  the
       partner to establish the obstacle.

   18. Similarly, it is suggested that there was  no  indication  that  the
       partner would be permitted to enter or settle in the Ukraine  or  to
       gain employment there.  This  is  not  a  matter  of  inference.  It
       required the partner to make  the  case  out.  If  he  sought  entry
       clearance as a spouse and met the relevant requirements in  Ukraine,
       there is no reason why he should  not  be  permitted  to  enter  the
       Ukraine. It is speculation to assert that he would be refused entry.
       Similarly, having adapted to life in the United  Kingdom  apparently
       over the past 13 years, there is nothing to suggest he is  incapable
       of work or incapable of adapting to life elsewhere.

   19. The grounds also assert that it was not  clear  on  what  basis  the
       judge could be satisfied that the appellant had friends  and  family
       in the Ukraine upon whom she could rely. However, the appellant  had
       spent her childhood in the Ukraine and had only been in  the  United
       Kingdom since 2005. It was for the appellant to establish  that  her
       friendships, her acquaintances, her family and her other links  with
       Ukraine had been dissolved over the last 10 years.  She did  not  do
       so. I note that there is no express averment that the applicant  has
       no family or friends you Ukraine; rather, the challenge  is  limited
       to the basis upon which the judge satisfied himself that she had.

   20. In response to the Ground at paragraph 8 (v),  the  judge's  comment
       that the partner may choose to work in the United Kingdom  and  make
       periodic visits to see his family 'as many other nationals  do'  was
       no more than a statement of fact.  They do so voluntarily but  there
       is no difference in  principle  between  the  partner  who  does  so
       voluntarily and the appellant's partner who may be constrained to do
       so in order to maintain the relationship.  He may not wish to do  so
       and the family may prefer to remain in the United Kingdom  but  that
       is a far cry from claiming that to do so entails a violation of  the
       human rights of any member of the family.

   21. The fact that the Ukraine is  engaged  in  hostilities  with  Russia
       falls  far  short  of  establishing  that   this   amounts   to   an
       insurmountable obstacle to the appellant and her partner  travelling
       to the Ukraine.

   22. Paragraph 9 of the grounds challenges what  are  they  a  series  of
       perfectly sensible considerations. It was open to the judge to  make
       the obvious point that the experience that the appellant has  gained
       over the last 10 years both by working and earning will put  her  at
       an advantage on return.  Similarly,  letters  of  support  from  the
       Ukrainian church do indeed, contrary to what  is  suggested  in  the
       grounds, make it plain that the appellant continues to benefit  from
       social, religious and cultural ties with the Ukraine.  There  is  no
       question but that the appellant failed to establish there were  very
       significant obstacles in her integration into Ukraine.

   23. The grounds go on to say that the judge's consideration of Article 8
       outside the  Immigration  Rules  was  unlawful.  In  doing  so,  the
       appellant relies upon her absence from Ukraine are a period of  over
       10 years, the presence of her son Vladislav and a  newborn  baby  as
       well as the presence of her partner in the United  Kingdom.  All  of
       these factors were considered by the judge  who  properly  concluded
       they do not make out a  case  that  the  appellants'  removal  would
       violate  their  human  rights.  There  is  nothing  exceptional   in
       requiring a couple who do not meet the requirements  for  settlement
       in the United  Kingdom  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.  Where  the
       children will be  accompanied  by  her  mother  that  is  protection
       against the violation  of  their  human  rights,  at  least  in  the
       circumstances of this case. Whilst the length of stay is, of course,
       a factor that has to be taken into account, it is not  determinative
       and, given the context in which the appellant's immigration  history
       has to be considered, it did not give rise to a  viable  claim  that
       the appellants' human rights would be violated.

   24. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal made no error of law.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error  on  a  point  of  law  and  the
original determination of the appeal shall stand.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                            18 February 2021
