
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12163/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th October 2016                          |On 13th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                               Mukhtar Samina
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Radford of Counsel instructed by Turpin &
                    Miller Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Lawrence of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 4th May 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born 7th  May  1980.   On
    7th July 2011 the Appellant entered the United Kingdom as  the  partner
    of her husband, a Tier 4 Migrant.  She had leave which was valid  until
    30th April 2014.

 3. On 30th April 2014 the Appellant applied for further leave to remain as
    a dependant of a Tier 4 Migrant.  On 8th December 2014 she  applied  by
    letter, asking that her application to remain as  the  dependant  of  a
    Tier 4 Migrant be varied to an FLR(FP) application.

 4. The application  was  refused  on  11th  March  2015.   The  Respondent
    considered the application under the partner route of Appendix  FM  and
    found that the application could not succeed  because  the  Appellant's
    husband was not in the United Kingdom either as a British  citizen,  or
    as a person present and settled in this country, or as  a  person  with
    refugee leave or with humanitarian protection.  The Respondent took the
    view that because the Appellant had  failed  to  meet  the  eligibility
    requirements, she could not benefit from the criteria set out at  EX.1.



 5. The Respondent considered the application under the parent  route,  and
    found that the Appellant failed to qualify because  she  did  not  have
    sole parental responsibility for her children and she  lived  with  her
    husband.

 6. The Respondent considered the Appellant's private life under  paragraph
    276ADE(1) noting that she had lived in the United Kingdom  since  2011.
    The Respondent did not accept that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's integration into Pakistan,  and  therefore
    found  that  paragraph  276ADE(1)  did  not  assist   the   Appellant's
    application.

 7. The Respondent considered Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention) outside the  Immigration  Rules  and
    did not accept that there were any exceptional circumstances that would
    justify granting leave to remain outside the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Respondent accepted that the Appellant and her husband had two children
    (a daughter born 27th February 2013 and a son born 14th November  2014)
    and when considering the best interests of the children, concluded that
    their best interests would be  served  by  the  children  returning  to
    Pakistan as a family unit and continuing to enjoy a family life in that
    country.

 8. The appeal was heard by the FTT on 11th April 2016.   It  was  accepted
    that the Appellant's husband was granted indefinite leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom on 17th March 2015 and therefore had settled  status
    from that date.  It was also accepted  that  on  25th  March  2016  the
    Appellant's son  was  registered  as  a  British  citizen  (the  actual
    certificate is dated 24th March 2016,  the  accompanying  letter  being
    dated 25th March 2016).

 9. The FTT dismissed the appeal.   The  FTT  found  that  the  Appellant's
    husband was not a  settled  person  at  the  date  of  application  and
    therefore the appeal could not  succeed  under  the  partner  route  of
    Appendix FM.  The FTT found that the documentary  evidence  to  confirm
    that the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules were satisfied
    had to be submitted with the application.

10. The FTT found that the appeal could not succeed under the parent  route
    of Appendix FM as the Appellant did not have  sole  responsibility  for
    her children, although it appears that this was  not  in  fact  pursued
    before the FTT.

11. The FTT declined to consider  EX.1.,  commenting  that  it  was  not  a
    freestanding  provision,  and  the  Appellant  failed   to   meet   the
    eligibility requirements of Appendix FM, and therefore EX.1. could  not
    be considered.

12. The FTT found that the appeal  could  not  succeed  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1) for the reasons given by the Respondent.

13. The FTT recorded that no evidence had been heard from the Appellant  or
    her husband,  although  they  had  submitted  witness  statements,  but
    (paragraph 18) "without subjecting the contents of  that  statement  to
    scrutiny I am unable to attach any weight to them."

14. With reference to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, the FTT  did
    not find any exceptional circumstances which would justify  considering
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

15. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    relying upon five grounds which are summarised below.

16. The first ground was that the FTT erred in law by declining to consider
    the appeal under the partner route because the  application  could  not
    have succeeded at the date that it was made.  It was contended that the
    FTT should have considered the position at the date of hearing.

17. The second ground was that the FTT erred in finding that the  Appellant
    needed to demonstrate that she satisfied  the  financial  requirements.
    It was contended that because the Appellant was relying upon R-LTRP(a),
    (b) and (d) there was no  need  to  satisfy  either  the  financial  or
    English language requirements.

18. The third ground was that the FTT erred in failing to consider EX.1.

19. The fourth ground was that the FTT erred by failing to consider Article
    8 outside the Immigration  Rules,  and  failed  to  take  into  account
    sections 117A - D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    (the 2002 Act).

20. The fifth ground was that the  FTT  had  erred  by  way  of  procedural
    unfairness and irrationality.  The FTT declined to give any  weight  to
    the evidence of the Appellant  and  her  husband  contained  in  signed
    witness statements because this had not been subjected to scrutiny.  It
    was contended that both had attended to  give  oral  evidence  and  the
    Presenting Officer indicated that she did  not  wish  to  cross-examine
    them.  It was submitted that the FTT had therefore requested  that  the
    hearing proceed on submissions  only,  and  Miss  Radford  submitted  a
    witness statement confirming this.

21. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Macdonald  in  the
    following terms;

         "The Appellant is a national of Pakistan whose appeal was dismissed
         by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence in a decision promulgated  on
         4th May 2016.  The grounds of application say that  the  judge  was
         wrong  to  conclude  that  the  Appellant  needed   to   meet   the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules at the date  of  application;
         he misdirected himself in law as to the need to meet the  financial
         requirements, he failed to consider the  material  questions  under
         Appendix FM (paragraph EX.1.), failed to apply section 117A - D  of
         the 2002 Act and irrationally declined to give weight o the witness
         statements.

         It seems to me the grounds may have merit.  This was an  in-country
         appeal and therefore it is arguable that the material date was  the
         date of hearing.  The other grounds are also arguable  particularly
         under section 117B(6) of the Act.  It is also very unclear why  the
         judge  declined  to  give  weight  to   the   witness   statements.
         Permission to appeal is granted on all grounds."

22. Permission to appeal was granted on 16th September  2016  and  on  27th
    September 2016 the Respondent lodged a response pursuant to rule 24  of
    The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 contending that  the
    FTT directed itself appropriately.   It  was  submitted  that  the  FTT
    decision disclosed no material errors of law.

23. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

24. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Whitwell indicated  that  he  did
    not rely on the rule 24 response, and accepted that  the  FTT  decision
    contained material errors of law as outlined in the  grounds  contained
    within the application for permission to appeal.

25. I indicated that I therefore did not need to hear from Miss Radford  as
    to error of law, as I found that the decision of the  FTT  did  contain
    material errors of law as outlined in the grounds of application,  read
    together with the grant of permission.  The decision of the FTT was set
    aside.

26. Both representatives agreed that  there  was  no  need  for  a  further
    hearing, and the decision could be re-made by the Upper Tribunal, based
    upon the evidence that had been before the FTT.

27. I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

28. In relation to the Immigration Rules, the burden of  proof  is  on  the
    Appellant, and the standard of proof is a balance of probability.

29. I have taken into account all the documentation  that  was  before  the
    FTT.  I have considered the Respondent's bundle which was  not  indexed
    or paginated, and the Appellant's bundle comprising 127 pages, and  the
    skeleton argument produced on behalf of the Appellant that  was  before
    the FTT.

30. The factual matrix is that the Appellant arrived in the UK on 11th July
    2011 with leave to remain until 30th April 2014 as the dependant of her
    husband, a Tier 4 Migrant.  The couple have two  children,  a  daughter
    born 27th February 2013, and  a  son  born  14th  November  2014.   The
    Appellant made an in time application for further leave to remain.   On
    17th March 2015 the Appellant's husband was granted settled status, and
    on 24th March 2016, her son was granted British citizenship.

31. The appeal firstly has to be considered with regard to  the  provisions
    of section R-LTRP which sets out the requirements for limited leave  to
    remain as a partner and which is set out below:

         R-LTRP.1.1.  The requirements to be met for limited leave to remain
         as a partner are -

         (a)  the applicant and their partner must be in the UK;

         (b)  the applicant must have made a valid application  for  limited
             or indefinite leave to remain as a partner; and either

         (c)  (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under  section  S-
                  LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and

             (ii) the applicant meets all of the requirements of section E-
                  LTRP: Eligibility for leave to remain as a partner; or

         (d)  (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under  section  S-
                  LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and

             (ii) the applicant meets the  requirements  of  paragraphs  E-
                  LTRP.1.2-1.12. and E- LTRP.2.1.; and

             (iii)    paragraph EX.1. applies.

32. The Appellant's application was based upon (a), (b) and (d).

33. The Respondent did not contend that the application  fell  for  refusal
    under the suitability requirements.  The only relationship  requirement
    that was not satisfied when  the  refusal  decision  was  made  was  E-
    LTRP.1.2 which  requires  the  Appellant's  partner  to  be  a  British
    citizen, or a settled person, or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
    humanitarian protection.

34. The error made by the FTT was to conclude that the Appellant's  husband
    had to have settled status at the date of application.  That is not the
    case, and the circumstances can be considered at the date  of  hearing.
    This has now been accepted by the Respondent.

35. Therefore at the date of the FTT hearing, and at the date of the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing, it is accepted that the Appellant and her husband are
    in the UK, she has made a valid application for leave to  remain  as  a
    partner, it does not fall for refusal  under  section  S-LTR,  and  she
    satisfies the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRP.1.2. - 1.12., and 2.1.

36. Therefore EX.1. applies and I set out below EX.1.(a):

         EX.1.  This paragraph applies if


         (a)  (i) the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child who-


                  (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of
                      18 years when the applicant was first  granted  leave
                      on the basis that this paragraph applied;


                  (bb) is in the UK;


                  (cc)  is  a  British  citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                      continuously for at least the seven years immediately
                      preceding the date of application; and


             (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the UK; or

37. It is common ground, and accepted by the Respondent, that the Appellant
    has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with her son who  is
    a British citizen.

38. The issue is therefore whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant's son to leave the UK.  Having  considered  the  Respondent's
    own guidance I find that it would not.  The guidance  is  contained  in
    Appendix FM 1.0 family life (as a partner or parent) and private  life:
    10-Year Routes August 2015.

39. The guidance indicates at 11.2.3 (page 97 of  the  Appellant's  bundle)
    that;

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child.  This reflects the European Court of  Justice  judgment
         in Zambrano."

40. It is further stated that where a decision to  refuse  the  application
    would require a parent or primary carer to return to a country  outside
    the EU, the case must always be assessed on the basis that it would  be
    unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to  leave  the  EU  with
    that parent or primary carer.

41. This is not a case involving criminality, and the  Appellant  does  not
    have a poor immigration history.

42. Therefore, having carefully considered the circumstances of this  case,
    I conclude that EX.1.(a) is  satisfied  and  the  appeal  is  therefore
    allowed.

43. Because of that finding, it is not necessary  to  go  on  and  consider
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  If I had considered Article 8
    outside the rules, I would have  had  to  consider  the  same  question
    pursuant to section 117B(6) which states that in the case of  a  person
    who is not liable to deportation, the public interest does not  require
    that person's removal if  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child (either a British citizen
    or a child with seven years residence) and it would not  be  reasonable
    to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT contained an error of law and was set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.  The appeal is allowed pursuant  to  Appendix
FM of the Immigration Rules.

Anonymity

The FTT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and I see no need to make an  anonymity
order.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             11th October 2016



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been allowed I have  considered  whether  to  make  a  fee
award.  I do not consider it appropriate.  When the decision to  refuse  the
application was made, the Appellant's husband did not have  settled  status,
neither was her son registered as  a  British  citizen.   There  is  no  fee
award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             11th October 2016


