
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12525/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 November 2014                           |On 19 December 2014          |


                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ROBERTSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          MRS CATHERINE ADOM BONSU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant in Person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Wilding, Legal Representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Immigration History

 1. The Appellant in this appeal  was  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing on 8 June 2014. However, for ease  of  reference,  the
    Appellant and Respondent are hereafter referred to as they were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Therefore Mrs Bonsu is  referred  to  as  the
    Appellant and the Secretary of State is referred to as the Respondent.


Appeal history


 2.  The  background  to  this  case  is  set  out  in  the  error  of  law
    determination which was promulgated following a hearing 27 October 2014
    and  for  the  purposes  of  this  determination,  the  error  of   law
    determination is incorporated in full.  The  date  of  the  continuance
    hearing was agreed  with  counsel  for  the  Appellant.  At  the  time,
    although he stated generally that he was 'busy', he made no mention  of
    any specific engagements,. As  the  issues  in  this  appeal  were  not
    complex, I made it clear that if he  were  indeed  busy  there  was  no
    reason why other counsel could not be instructed for  the  purposes  of
    the continuance hearing. The directions issued by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Southern for the purposes of the error of law  decision  had  not  been
    complied with before the hearing and counsel indicated  that  they  did
    wish to file further  evidence  for  the  continuance  hearing.  As  Mr
    Tarlow, who was acting for the Respondent at the error of law  hearing,
    indicated that he was not able to deal with the evidence  presented  in
    relation  to  the  recognition  of  Ghanaian  proxy  marriages  by  the
    Portuguese authorities and in fact wanted the matter  to  be  adjourned
    also, directions were agreed at  the  error  of  law  hearing  and  all
    parties knew  the  timescales  for  complying  with  directions.  These
    directions were also sent out with the error of law decision.


 3. However, the Appellant wrote to the Upper Tribunal on 19 November  2014
    requesting an adjournment on the basis that her Sponsor was on  holiday
    and she would want him to attend with her, that she was in the  process
    of instructing counsel and, at the end of  the  error  of  law  hearing
    (after I had left the hearing room) counsel had told the clerk that  he
    was booked on the 28 November 2014. In any event, there was  no  reason
    why another representative should not have been instructed  if  it  was
    known at the end of the last hearing that Mr Ekeoke was not  available.
    The adjournment request was refused because (i) it was not evident from
    the file that I had directed that the matter be listed to suit counsel,
    (ii) the issues in the appeal were not complex, and (iii) the Appellant
    had failed to establish why her Sponsor was necessary for the  purposes
    of the hearing.


 4. No bundle had been filed by the Appellant for the continuance  hearing,
    at which she again  requested  an  adjournment.  She  stated  that  her
    Sponsor had been on holiday and his employer had refused him  leave  to
    attend the hearing. However, she provided no evidence  either  that  he
    had been travelling or that a request had been made to his employer for
    leave and had been refused.  Furthermore,  her  Sponsor,  who  did  not
    attend on the last occasion, would have  been  well  aware  (given  the
    alleged relationship between him and the Appellant)  that  the  hearing
    had been booked for 28 November 2014. There  is  no  reliable  evidence
    before me to indicate that he had taken any steps  to  ensure  that  he
    could attend a hearing which was potentially of great  significance  to
    the Appellant, who was claiming to be married to him.


 5. The Appellant  stated  that  she  was  pregnant  and  provided  an  NHS
    maternity card to establish this fact. However,  pregnancy  is  not  an
    illness and there was no evidence that the Appellant was unfit to  give
    evidence. In the absence of evidence  to  substantiate  the  assertions
    made by the Appellant as to the lack of availability of the Sponsor, in
    view of the failure to comply with directions (and there is  no  reason
    why a bundle could not have been filed even if an  adjournment  request
    was to be made at the hearing) and the  time  that  the  Appellant  had
    already had to prepare for the hearing (bearing in mind that permission
    was granted on 8 September  2014  and  it  had  been  conceded  by  the
    Respondent that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  law),  and  in
    compliance with the overriding objective set  out  in  Rule  2  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  I   refused   the
    adjournment  request.  I  did,  however,  bear  in  mind  the   request
    throughout the hearing with a  view  to  adjourning  part  heard  if  I
    thought that there was any unfairness to the Appellant but in the event
    found that there was no need to adjourn part heard.


 6. In terms of the evidence before me, I had the bundles submitted for the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing, these being the Respondent's bundle  (RB),
    which is not paginated and which was sent under cover of a letter dated
    14 April 2014, the Appellant's bundle (AB), pp numbered 1 - 63 and  the
    document headed 'Permanent Mission of  Portugal  Geneva'  (the  'child,
    early and forced marriages' document), dated 14 April 2014,  comprising
    11 pages. When asked, the Appellant stated that she had  no  additional
    evidence to submit.


 7. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the grounds of  appeal  were  that  the
    decision resulted in a breach by the UK of the Appellant's rights under
    the European Convention on  Human  Rights  and  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. The two main issues  in  the
    appeal were whether the Ghanaian proxy marriage between  the  Appellant
    and her EEA Sponsor, a Portuguese national, was recognised as  a  valid
    marriage by the Portuguese authorities and if not,  whether  there  was
    sufficient evidence to establish that the  Appellant  and  her  Sponsor
    were in a durable relationship.


 8. In the skeleton argument (SA), to be found within AB, the first limb of
    the appeal under the EEA Regulations was that the  Appellant  satisfied
    the provisions of Regulation 7 because she was a family  member  of  an
    EEA national, a Portuguese  national,  on  the  basis  of  their  proxy
    marriage. It was conceded at the  error  of  law  hearing  that  Kareem
    (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC) established that it was
    necessary for the Appellant to provide evidence that the Ghanaian proxy
    marriage between the Appellant and Sponsor was recognised as  valid  by
    the Portuguese authorities. As there was no additional evidence  before
    me, other than that which was submitted to the First-tier Tribunal  and
    the child, early and forced marriages document (copies  of  the  latter
    were provided to both parties), which  I  had  indicated  at  the  last
    hearing, did not appear to address the question of whether  a  Ghanaian
    proxy marriage was recognised as a valid marriage in Portugal, I  asked
    Mr Wilding to make submissions on this point.


 9.  He submitted that pursuant to Kareem, simply  submitting  extracts  of
    the law of Portugal in relation to proxy marriages would not  establish
    that a Ghanaian proxy marriage would  be  recognised  in  Portugal.  An
    appellant would  need  to  provide  confirmation  from  the  Portuguese
    authorities that the marriage was recognised as valid or provide expert
    opinion to confirm that the marriage would be recognised  in  Portugal.
    The Appellant could have attended the embassy in Portugal  to  ask  for
    confirmation  that  the  marriage  was  recognised  or  provide  expert
    opinion.


10. Turning to the child, early and forced marriages document,  Mr  Wilding
    submitted that I had commented at the error of  law  hearing  that  the
    document did not appear to be overly helpful in establishing  that  the
    Portuguese  authorities  recognised  Ghanaian  proxy   marriages;   the
    document was in fact provided to the Commissioner for Human  Rights  by
    the Permanent Mission of Portugal to  the  United  Nations  Office  and
    other International Organisations, by way of reply  by  the  Portuguese
    Authorities to a questionnaire on child, early  and  forced  marriages.
    The only reference to proxy marriages was  on  page  4,  where  it  was
    stated, "Marriage by proxy is permitted (Article 1620 CC). One  of  the
    intending spouses may delegate authority to an appointed representative
    trough (sic) a proxy document that must contain specific  authority  to
    contract the marriage, name and the other intending spouse and indicate
    how the marriage will take place and the type of marriage."


11. Mr Wilding submitted that these provisions appeared to relate to  proxy
    marriages conducted in Portugal and it must be read as  providing  that
    someone in Portugal can in fact get married by proxy.  The  Appellant's
    marriage was not conducted in Portugal. As it was about proxy marriages
    conducted in Portugal, it did not assist with  answering  the  question
    'Is  the  Appellant's  Ghanaian  proxy  marriage  recognised   by   the
    Portuguese authorities?' Furthermore, even if it  was,  this  provision
    did not recognise a 100% proxy marriage; i.e, only  one  party  to  the
    marriage could be represented by proxy. Neither the Appellant  nor  her
    Sponsor were in Ghana when the marriage took place. Even if the  effect
    of the provisions was  that  a  proxy  marriage  conducted  in  another
    country was recognised by the Portuguese authorities, the inference  of
    the provisions is that only one spouse could be represented by a  proxy
    not both.


12. Mr Wilding submitted that he had seen the document presented  in  other
    cases and the submissions made led to more questions than answers;  and
    that the Appellant had failed to establish that her proxy marriage  was
    recognised by the Portuguese authorities.


13. The Appellant had nothing specific to  say  about  the  proxy  marriage
    provisions referred  to  in  the  child,  early  and  forced  marriages
    document. As to obtaining evidence from  the  Portuguese  embassy,  she
    stated that she and the Sponsor had wanted  to  go  to  the  Portuguese
    embassy to ask if their marriage was recognised in Portugal and  if  he
    had been able to take time off work he would have gone to the embassy.


14. Moving on to the issue of whether or not the Appellant and the  Sponsor
    were  in  a  durable  relationship,  pursuant  to  the  provisions   of
    Regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations, I asked the  Appellant  whether
    there was any reason why a bundle had not been filed as was directed at
    the last hearing.  She  stated  that  there  was  no  reason  and  that
    everything was with her lawyer at the moment. When asked for details of
    her representative, she stated that his name was Thomas and he lived in
    Barking; she did not, however, know his surname,  his  address  or  the
    name or address of the firm.


15. When asked if she would like to give any oral evidence regarding  their
    relationship, she stated that they had been together for  almost  three
    years, that he had been working throughout that  time,  and  that  they
    planned to have a family together. They had been living together at her
    current address the Commonside address) which was recorded on the Upper
    Tribunal file as her address for the last two years. However,  she  had
    no documentary evidence of their living together there.


16. In cross-examination, the Appellant stated that her husband  had  asked
    for time off work but that she did not have any evidence of his request
    or the refusal. When asked again if there was any evidence  to  support
    her assertion that they had been living together throughout  2014,  she
    stated there was evidence because she was pregnant, she had  handed  in
    her NHS card and you  could  tell  by  looking  at  her  that  she  was
    pregnant. When asked how long she had lived at the Commonside  address,
    she said that it was since they got married, which was in  April  2012.
    She was asked why then there was a utility bill addressed  to  her  and
    her Sponsor at an address in Sutton  Court  Road,  London  (the  Sutton
    Court address), dated 31 March 2013.  She  said  that  when  they  were
    living there, the bills came once every three months. She was asked  if
    she was saying that she was not living at the Sutton Court  address  in
    March 2013. She said that she was 'almost living there' and went  there
    every weekend. When asked why her name was on the bill if she  was  not
    living there, she stated that she was trying to support him. It was put
    to her that she had previously stated that they had moved  in  together
    at the Commonside address in 2012, yet the utility  bill  was  in  both
    names for a different address. The Appellant stated that she had  given
    in her NHS maternity card, and asked if they did not live together, how
    could she be pregnant?


17. The only evidence from the Sponsor was the statement he  had  submitted
    for the purposes of the  First-tier  tribunal  hearing.  The  Appellant
    stated that she had not thought to ask him for  an  updating  statement
    because she had come to the hearing to  ask  for  an  adjournment.  She
    stated that they had married on 29  April  2012,  that  they  had  been
    partners for one year prior to that and  that  the  Sponsor  wanted  to
    start a family and she had said that they needed to be  married  before
    they had children. Mr Wilding put to the Appellant that the Sponsor  in
    his statement said that they had started living together in August 2011
    but she had said that it was April 2012. The Appellant stated that they
    were dating then. When asked why the Sponsor would say in his statement
    that they were 'cohabiting' from August 2011 if they were only  dating,
    the Appellant  stated  that  he  sometimes  stayed  with  her  and  she
    sometimes stayed with him and that she was there nearly every weekend.


18. When referred again to the  utility  bill  dated  23  March  2013,  the
    Appellant stated that that was where he lived and she had visited there
    nearly every weekend. When asked again why then her  name  was  on  the
    bill, she said that she was trying to support him. She  was  asked  why
    the utility bill was for Sutton Court  in  2013,  when  they  had  been
    living together at Commonside since April 2012.  She  stated  that  the
    bills came every three months and they had left  the  address  by  that
    date. I asked her to clarify, if bills were  being  sent  3  months  in
    arrears, why the utility bill was issued in March 2013, when she stated
    that they had  moved  elsewhere  in  April  2012.  She  said  that  the
    Sponsor's brother still lived at that address and the  Sponsor  had  to
    help pay his bills; the reason why  they  had  moved  was  because  his
    family lived at the Sutton Court address and they needed a new start.


19. Mr  Wilding  indicated  that  he  had  no  further  questions  for  the
    Appellant.


20. When asked if there was anything else she would like to say in  support
    of her appeal, the Appellant said that there was not. The Appellant was
    notified that Mr Wilding would sum up the case for the Home Office; she
    was asked to listen carefully as she would be given an  opportunity  to
    respond.


21. Mr Wilding submitted that in the letter dated 22 November 2013  setting
    out the reasons for  refusal  of  the  Appellant's  application  for  a
    residence card (the RL),  it  was  noted  that  no  evidence  had  been
    provided to establish that the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  were  in  a
    durable relationship; this was not just evidence  of  residing  at  the
    same address as persons could reside at the same address without  being
    in a relationship. It would be  statements  from  family  and  friends,
    photographs of them together over a  period  of  time  and  at  special
    family events etc. However, even the small amount of evidence submitted
    as  to  living  together  revealed  inconsistencies  as   between   the
    Appellant's evidence and the  Sponsor's  and  between  the  Appellant's
    evidence and the documentary evidence submitted. She stated  that  they
    had been living together since April 2012, he said it was since  August
    2011. It was inconceivable and remarkable that there was a utility bill
    in joint names for a property in which they were not living at the time
    the bill was issued and where she had never resided. He submitted  that
    little weight  should  be  placed  on  the  documentary  evidence.  The
    evidence did not demonstrate that they were in a durable  relationship.
    No documentary evidence at all had been submitted  despite  a  calendar
    month having lapsed since the date of the last hearing. He asked me  to
    dismiss the appeal on all grounds.


22. I asked the Appellant if she would like me  to  take  her  through  the
    points made by Mr Wilding to enable her to respond to  them.  She  said
    that she would not but she would like to ask Mr Wilding  whether,  when
    he was living with his partner, he would  have  been  able  to  provide
    evidence that they were in a relationship. I reminded her that  he  was
    not the appellant and that he had not asked her any questions that were
    inappropriate in the context of her appeal. She stated  that  all  they
    had been asked to provide was  their  marriage  certificate  and  their
    passports and they had provided those. As to  Mr  Wilding's  submission
    that the evidence as to their living  together  was  inconsistent,  the
    Appellant stated that they were living at  the  same  address  and  she
    could have brought a bill or something to prove it. She said  that  she
    could not understand why Mr Wilding  was  saying  that  they  were  not
    living together and that if I were to dismiss  the  appeal,  her  child
    would be without a father. I reminded her that there was no decision to
    remove her, the only consequence of dismissing her appeal, if I were to
    dismiss it, would be that she would have to re-apply providing evidence
    as to her durable relationship with her EEA Sponsor.


Analysis and findings

23. Pursuant to Kareem, I find that there is insufficient  evidence  before
    to me to establish that the Appellant's proxy marriage is recognised as
    valid by the Portuguese authorities.  The  evidence  submitted  by  the
    Appellant in AB relates only to the  validity  of  proxy  marriages  in
    Ghana and whether or not such  marriages  are  recognised  in  the  UK.
    However, Kareem provided  that  the  question  was  not  whether  proxy
    marriages could be validly conducted in Ghana and, if so, whether  such
    marriages were recognised in the UK. The question in EU law was whether
    a Ghanaian proxy marriage was recognised in the state of which the  EEA
    Sponsor was a national, in this case, Portugal.  It  follows  that  the
    evidence previously submitted has no bearing on whether the Appellant's
    marriage  to  the  EEA  Sponsor  was  recognised  by   the   Portuguese
    authorities.


24. The child, early and forced marriages document goes  nowhere  close  to
    establishing that Ghanaian proxy marriages are recognised in  Portugal.
    Not only is the law not cited in full, there is force in  Mr  Wilding's
    submissions that, on the face of it,  the  document  relates  to  proxy
    marriages which took place in Portugal and does not establish that both
    parties can be  represented  by  proxy.  As  further  submitted  by  Mr
    Wilding, if the reference to  proxy  marriages  in  the  document  were
    capable of applying to Ghanaian proxy marriages, the fact that only one
    party can be represented by  proxy  would  necessarily  mean  that  the
    Appellant's marriage would not be recognised because both parties  were
    represented by proxy in Ghana. In so deciding, I bear in mind that  the
    Appellant stated that her Sponsor was intending to go to the Portuguese
    embassy for evidence if he had been able to get time off work, but  the
    fact remains that the Appellant and her Sponsor  have  known  for  some
    time that evidence would  be  required  and  there  was  absolutely  no
    reliable evidence before me that they had taken any steps to obtain any
    evidence to support her assertions. Furthermore, the Appellant had been
    represented throughout the proceedings until she attended on her own to
    request an adjournment; she had had access to legal advice  throughout.
    There was therefore no excuse for a  failure  to  provide  evidence  to
    support assertions made. On the evidence before me, I find that  it  is
    not established that the Appellant is the  family  member  of  her  EEA
    Sponsor under Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations.


25. Is it established that the Appellant and her Sponsor are in  a  durable
    relationship? The only evidence before me was the oral evidence of  the
    Sponsor and  the  documentary  evidence  contained  within  AB.  As  to
    documentary evidence of a durable  relationship,  as  submitted  by  Mr
    Wilding,  there  were  no  statements  from  family  and  friends,   no
    photographs and the scant evidence available as to living together  was
    inconsistent in the following ways:


26. The Sponsor's oral evidence as to when they started living together was
    inconsistent with the evidence contained within the  Sponsor's  witness
    statement; she stated that they had been living  together  since  April
    2012,  when  they  had  got  married.  He  said  that  they  had   been
    'cohabiting' since August 2011. Furthermore, in response  to  questions
    as to why there was a utility bill addressed to  them  both  at  Sutton
    Court address a year after they were supposed to have moved in together
    at Commonside, she stated that it was because she had visited him every
    weekend. However, there would have been no need for her  to  visit  him
    every weekend in 2013 when they had been living  together  since  April
    2012. When it was put her that the utility bill was for a period  after
    she stated that they had moved in  together,  she  initially  tried  to
    explain this by stating that they were billed three months  in  arrears
    but this would not explain why the utility bill was dated approximately
    one year after they had moved to the Commonside address. When this  was
    put to her, the Appellant stated that the Sponsor's brother still lived
    there and they still needed to pay the bills for that property. I  find
    that the Appellant was saying whatever  she  thought  might  provide  a
    reasonable answer to the question and  that  she  was  not  a  reliable
    witness.


    What weight should be given to the Appellant's assertions that she  was
    pregnant and that this confirmed that she and the Sponsor  were  living
    together? Plainly cohabitation is not required  to  achieve  pregnancy.
    Whilst the NHS maternity card bore the Appellant's name, there  was  no
    evidence to confirm that the Sponsor was named as the next  of  kin  on
    any NHS forms. The production of an NHS maternity card  cannot  confirm
    that the Sponsor is the father of the Appellant's child in the  absence
    of any other evidence to support this assertion. I therefore place very
    little weight on the fact of pregnancy to support  the  assertion  that
    the Appellant is in a durable relationship with her Sponsor.


27. On the evidence in the round, I find that it is  not  established  that
    the Appellant and the Sponsor are in a  durable  relationship  for  the
    purposes of Regulation 8 (5) of the EEA Regulations.


28. Article 8 ECHR was also raised in the grounds of  appeal.  However,  in
    the absence of evidence that the parties are married or  in  a  durable
    relationship, it is not established that Article 8 is  engaged  on  the
    basis of family life.


29. In her witness statement (in AB), the Appellant  states  that  she  has
    been in the UK for 8 years. This is insufficient to meet  the  criteria
    set out in the Immigration Rules, paragraph  276ADE,  for  a  grant  of
    leave on the basis of private life. The Appellant was 33 years of  age,
    as at the date of decision, and she had not been in the UK for a period
    of 20 years. There was  nothing  within  the  documentary  evidence  to
    establish ties to the community other than the alleged ties through her
    EEA Sponsor. There was little point in taking oral  evidence  from  the
    Appellant, in the absence of any objective evidence, of ties within the
    community or ties to Ghana, bearing in mind that  I  found  her  to  be
    unreliable witness. There is insufficient evidence  to  establish  that
    Article 8 is engaged on the basis of private life. Even if  I  were  to
    find that it is engaged, the decision is in  accordance  with  the  law
    because the Appellant cannot establish a claim to remain in the  UK  on
    the basis of her relationship with  the  EEA  Sponsor.  The  legitimate
    public aim under  Article  8(2)  is  immigration  control  (FK  and  BK
    (Botswana)[2013] EWCA Civ 238 and AAO [2011] EWCA Civ  840).  There  is
    nothing within the evidence before me from which to conclude  that,  in
    the  proportionality  exercise,  the  rights  of  the   Appellant   are
    sufficient to outweigh the legitimate public  interest  in  immigration
    control under Article 8(2).

Decision

30. The Appellants appeal is dismissed on all grounds.


31. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  No
    application was made for anonymity and pursuant to  the  provisions  of
    Rule 13 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  I  find
    there is no need for anonymity.




Signed        Date 18 December 2014


M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


In light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award
(Rule 9(1) (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
2014 and section 12(4) (a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee Awards in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). As the Respondent's appeal has been
allowed, I make no fee award



Signed        Dated 18 December 2014

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
