
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12462/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 August 2014                             |On 20 August 2014            |
|Decision given orally                         |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               JUNAID BASHARAT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Young, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Shoaib Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyd who, for  reasons  given  in
    his determination dated 16 January  2014,  allowed  the  appeal  by  Mr
    Basharat (whom I shall refer to as the claimant) under the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The background facts are these.  The claimant is a national of Pakistan
    where he was born 15 December 1988.  On 2 November 2012 he applied  for
    a residence card as the family member  of  a  Greek  national,  Tabinda
    Gulfraz, who lives in Glasgow.  It is  the  claimant's  case  that  the
    couple married in a mosque on 16 September 2012 which was registered in
    the district of North Lanarkshire, Bells Hill on 17 September  2012  by
    the Assistant Registrar pursuant to the Registration of Births,  Deaths
    and Marriages (Scotland) Act 1965.

 3. The Secretary of State refused the application for reasons given in her
    letter dated 28 March 2013 which accompanied the decision.   The  first
    was that the claimant had failed  to  provide  sufficient  evidence  to
    demonstrate that his wife was currently a qualified person as a  worker
    as defined in reg. 6.  The second reason related to the marriage. These
    concerns are set out in the decision letter and although the  Secretary
    of State did not specifically say so, the  parties  have  inferred  the
    assertion from her letter that it was a marriage  of  convenience.   It
    appears the Secretary of State's concerns principally  related  to  the
    claimant's explanation that his wife had  been  born  in  Greece.   The
    marriage certificate stated that she is a Pakistani  national  and  was
    born on 12 March 1993 rather than 31 January  1993  as  stated  by  the
    claimant.

 4. Another concern was that when Miss  Gulfraz  had  attended  the  police
    station she confirmed where she had been born, that she had  known  the
    claimant from childhood and that the couple  had  originated  from  the
    same village. Whilst in custody the claimant is  said  to  have  stated
    that he had been introduced to his wife through friends in Glasgow. The
    claimant had stated that they had  married  at  a  registry  office  in
    Glasgow and that there had thereafter been a reception in  the  village
    restaurant. His wife had  stated  they  had  married  in  a  mosque  in
    Govanhill and that the wedding reception was held at the  Curry  Palace
    Restaurant.

 5. The reasons for not accepting that the claimant's wife was a  qualified
    person related to the quality of evidence with regard to her employment
    by Maryhill Traders Limited.  The claimant is said to  have  stated  in
    interview that his wife worked at a grocer shop whereas  the  Secretary
    of State's case is that Maryhill Traders is a warehouse in Maryhill.

 6. The Secretary of State was represented before the First-tier  Tribunal.
    The judge's determination sets out the extent of the  cross-examination
    of the claimant between paragraphs 10 and 14.  Likewise the  claimant's
    wife was cross-examined and the detail of her answers are  set  out  in
    paragraphs 17 and 21.  The judge was satisfied that  the  marriage  was
    genuine and that the claimant's wife was in employment at the  time  of
    application  and  decision  and  thus  exercising  her  treaty   rights
    according to the Regulations.

 7. The challenge by the Secretary of State only relates to the finding  on
    the marriage.  In essence it is that the judge failed to give  adequate
    or  proper  reasoning  for  his  conclusions  in  the   face   of   the
    inconsistencies and discrepancies.  I am grateful to Mr  Young  and  Mr
    Shoaib  for  their  submissions.   Mr  Young  took   me   through   the
    determination in some  detail,  identifying  areas  in  the  concluding
    paragraphs between 24 and 34 which he contended did not  show  adequate
    reasoning by the judge. He  pointed  me  to  the  marriage  certificate
    indicating that the couple had married in Bells Hill rather than  at  a
    mosque in Govan. These locations being some fifteen miles apart.

 8. For his part, Mr Shoaib reminded me  of  the  evidence  that  had  been
    produced to the judge including photographs  of  the  ceremony  in  the
    mosque and at the reception afterwards as well as the couple's  tenancy
    agreement.  Mr Young accepted that the marriage  had  taken  place  but
    maintained his contention that it was  a  sham  marriage  or,  as  more
    accurately described in the regulation., a marriage of convenience.

 9. Specifically,  reg.  2  a  general  interpretation  of  the  regulation
    provides that a spouse does not include-

         "a party to a marriage of convenience".

10. I explained to the parties  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing  that  in
    preparing for this case I had had regard to the decision of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage  of  convenience)  [2012]
    UKUT 38.  Included in his observations, the President at  [34] stated:

         "We agree that the claimant must establish that  she  is  a  family
         member; but in the ordinary case she does  this  by  producing  the
         basic documents set out in the Directive. Where there is no  reason
         to suspect that the claim is fraudulent, or  the  marriage  one  of
         convenience, that is conclusive of the  matter.   Reg.  12  of  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 does  not  in
         terms require the claimant to prove a  negative.   She  must  prove
         that she is married, but the marriage will not avail if it turns to
         be one of convenience."

11. The president made further observations on marriages of convenience  at
    [37]:

         "It is not enough  that  the  ECO  honestly  suspects  there  is  a
         marriage of convenience; the claimant will only be disqualified  if
         it is established that it is.  Adverse inferences may be drawn by a
         claimant's failure to provide data reasonably open to  her  in  the
         course of the investigation or appeal; but  that  cannot  form  the
         sole or decisive reasons for the conclusion."

12. The President referred also to the Guidance of the European  Commission
    issued in respect of the Citizens Directive COM 2009 313 2nd July 2009.
     He describes this as explicitly placing the burden  of  proof  on  the
    state and invites the state to set  out  indicative  criteria  for  and
    against the proposition that the marriage is one of convenience.   That
    material is produced at Appendix A in the decision.

13. I note in particular paragraph 4.2 of the Commission's note

         "Regulation 28 defines marriages of convenience for the purposes of
         the Directive as marriages  contracted  for  the  sole  purpose  of
         enjoying the  right  of  free  movement  and  residence  under  the
         Directive that someone would not have otherwise.  A marriage cannot
         be considered as a marriage of convenience simply because it brings
         an immigration  advantage,  or  indeed  any  other  advantage.  The
         quality of the relationship is immaterial  to  the  application  of
         Article 35."

14. I return to the determination.

15. The marriage is addressed from  [29]  in  which  the  judge  accurately
    observed that the doubt as to the  authenticity  of  the  marriage  was
    substantially based  upon  the  lack  of  knowledge  and  discrepancies
    arising  out  of  the  interview.   He   accepted   there   were   some
    discrepancies between the accounts but noted also that the claimant had
    been interviewed by Immigration Officers without  an  interpreter.   He
    has subsequently given evidence that his English  was  not  very  good.
    The judge directed himself at [30]:

         "Accordingly therefore the appellant being interviewed  in  English
         and not his first language Urdu, I have to be more  circumspect  in
         making any conclusions arising out of the discrepancies."

16. The judge then observed that the claimant and is wife appeared to  come
    across in "quite a credible manner" and in my view correctly approached
    the discrepancies in the light of that positive conclusion as  well  as
    the cautionary aspect that the  claimant  had  been  interviewed  in  a
    language that was not his first language.

17. I conclude it was properly open to him to  observe  there  was  nothing
    material in the discrepancy between whether the couple married  at  the
    mosque or at the registrar's office and I am grateful to Mr Shoaib  for
    explaining to me the procedure.  It was  also  open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude that the dispute regarding where the  wedding  reception  took
    place to be largely irrelevant.  He was entitled to take account of the
    photographs taken at that reception and at the mosque for the  signing.
    The  judge  also  explained  that  the  couple  had  been   "relatively
    consistent"  in  their  evidence  in  relation  to  the  accommodation,
    although with some minor discrepancies.

18. He then turned his mind to the major discrepancy relating to the  wrong
    date of birth given by the claimant  as  to  his  wife  and  the  wrong
    details of her place of birth and nationality.  Mr Young challenged the
    correctness of the judge's approach that he was unsure he  could  place
    great weight upon these discrepancies.  I have no doubt that the  judge
    had those discrepancies in the forefront of his  mind  but  appears  to
    have been persuaded by the oral testimony of the parties.  That  was  a
    course properly open to him.  I should be slow to overturn  a  decision
    of the Tribunal on credibility where it has heard the evidence.

19. It is correct that the judge did not address the  discrepancy  that  Mr
    Young referred to regarding the location of the mosque.

20. Bearing in mind that there is no challenge to  the  lawfulness  of  the
    marriage under Scottish law, I am not persuaded that anything  material
    turns on this. Although the error over the location of the mosque where
    the marriage had taken place remains unexplained I do not  consider  in
    the absence to any challenge to the fact of  the  marriage,  that  this
    aspect is material. In my view the judge correctly approached the  task
    before him which was to  evaluate  all  the  evidence  and  come  to  a
    conclusion on the credibility of the parties  regarding  the  marriage.
    The determination is adequately reasoned,  the  findings  are  evidence
    based and without legal error.  Accordingly the appeal by the Secretary
    of State is dismissed.





Signed                                       Date 20 August 2014

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


