
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13567/2014
                                                               IA/13568/2014
                                                               ia/13577/2014
                                                               ia/13578/2014
                                                               ia/13579/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4 September 2014                             |On 10 September 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                       FAHEEM IKRAM (First Appellant)
                      MUHAMMAD YAQUB (second Appellant)
                  MEHNAZ UD DIN CHOUDHARY (third Appellant)
                     MEHAK CHAUDHARY (fourth Appellant)
                     MAPARA CHAUDHARY (fifth Appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr C Mannan
For the Respondent:    Mr N Brammall

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The lead Appellants, Faheem Ikram and Muhammad Yaqub born  respectively
    on 17 July 1983 and 11 August 1976 are a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  migrant
    team.  They and the other Appellants are  citizens  of  Pakistan.   The
    remaining three Appellants are the wife born 12 January  1979  and  two
    children born in 2009 and 2011 of Muhammad Iqbal, the second Appellant.

 2. Both lead Appellants came to the United Kingdom as students.  The first
    Appellant's leave was extended and subsequently  varied  to  a  Tier  1
    (Post-Study Work) Migrant and the leave of  the  second  Appellant  was
    varied firstly to leave under the  International  Graduate  Scheme  and
    then as a Tier 4 (General) Student migrant and lastly as a Tier 1 (Post-
    Study Work) migrant.  They each sought in time further leave under  the
    Points-Based System as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) team which  applications
    were refused by the Respondent on 27 February 2014  together  with  the
    dependent applications of Mr Yaqub's family.  In respect of all of them
    the Respondent decided to make removal directions under Section  47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

The Decisions and Original Appeal

 3. The lead Appellants' applications as Tier 1 (Entrepreneurs)  under  the
    Points-Based System were refused on similar  grounds.   The  Respondent
    was not satisfied their proposed business plan was viable and that they
    had sufficient experience.  She then went on to award nil points  under
    Appendix A in respect of access to the requisite funds. She  considered
    that such funds as were claimed were not held in financial institutions
    subject to the requisite regulation regime.

 4. On 18 March all the Appellants lodged notices of appeal  under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 5. By a determination promulgated on 16 June 2014 Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Pirotta dismissed the appeals of the lead  Appellants  because
    she found at paragraph 17 of her determination that they:-

         have very little idea of the fundamental issues in  establishing  a
         business, preparing for setting up a business, carrying out  market
         research or learning about the competition, alternative  strategies
         for the target businesses and dealing with the public by  providing
         information and advice.... and have not shown that they had carried
         out any but the most cursory investigation into the area into which
         they purport to be offering their services.

    She noted the absence of any explanation for the fact  that  the  first
    Appellant was contributing less capital than the second  Appellant  but
    they were to take equal shareholdings.  She did not accept  the  claims
    made by both lead Appellants as  to  the  availability  of  funds:  see
    paragraphs 19 and 20 of the determination.  The appeals  of  the  other
    Appellants as dependants of the second Appellant were dismissed.

 6. The Appellants sought permission to appeal.   The  grounds  assert  the
    Judge's findings were vague and not warranted; that the Judge had  made
    no findings in respect of any claim under Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention and had not considered the interests of the minor Appellants
    under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009.
    Additionally the Judge had failed to make  findings  on  the  decisions
    under Section 47 of the 2006 Act.  At paragraph 19 of the grounds there
    is a claim the Judge applied  a  higher  standard  of  proof  than  was
    requisite.  Other paragraphs detail specific areas where the Appellants
    disagreed with the Judge's determination.

 7. On 14 July 2014 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  De  Haney  granted
    permission to appeal.  He commented that the six pages of  the  grounds
    for appeal were for the main part simply a disagreement with the  Judge
    but nevertheless the Judge had failed to deal with the Article 8 issues
    and so granted permission to appeal.

Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. Mr Mannan opened  by  submitting  that  the  tests  for  assessing  the
    viability and credibility  of  a  business  referred  to  in  paragraph
    245DD(iii) of the Immigration Rules were not  known  (CHECK  REFERENCE)
    and without identified tests the decision maker had no place from which
    to start an assessment.

 9. The fact that the team members were  contributing  capital  in  unequal
    proportions but had equal shareholdings was not a matter which went  to
    the viability or credibility of their proposed business.

10. The Judge at paragraphs 21  and  22  of  her  determination  considered
    various elements of the lead Appellants' market research  and  business
    plan without reference to any established criteria  and  therefore  her
    conclusions in these two paragraphs were not sustainable.

11. The second Appellant had raised the matter of respect for  his  private
    and family life in his witness statement and in the grounds  of  appeal
    and the Judge had erred in failing to give any  consideration  to  such
    claim.  I looked  through  the  Tribunal  file  and  found  the  second
    Appellant's application referred to the presence of his family and when
    interviewed he had raised the issue of his wife and children.

12. In response Mr Brammall for the Respondent argued that whether  or  not
    there  were  established  tests  or  criteria  at  this  stage  in  the
    proceedings was not the issue.  What had to be  addressed  was  whether
    and, if so, where the Judge had made an error of law.  Looking  at  the
    determination her findings were adequate on all aspects raised  by  the
    appeals.  There was no explanation offered by the lead  Appellants  for
    the imbalance for the shareholding arrangements which did  not  reflect
    their respective capital contributions  or  the  means  by  which  such
    contributions  were  being  raised.  Paragraphs  21  and  22   of   the
    determination  contained  adequate  reasons  to  support  the   Judge's
    findings.

13. Turning to the ground for appeal relying on Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention, even if the Judge had erred in not specifically  addressing
    the claim under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention,  the  question
    still needed to be asked whether  such  an  error  was  material.   The
    second Appellant needed to show what  evidence  there  was  before  the
    Judge about his private and family life  in  the  United  Kingdom  upon
    which the Judge could and should have made findings.  No  evidence  had
    been before the Judge and none had  subsequently  been  submitted,  not
    even in the Appellants' bundle filed in readiness for  the  hearing  in
    the Upper Tribunal.  The conclusion should be that  such  a  claim  had
    little, if any, merit and therefore if  the  Judge  had  erred  in  not
    addressing the claim it would have made no difference to the outcome.

14.  In response Mr Mannan submitted that  nevertheless  the  Judge  should
    have dealt with the claim under Article 8 and regretted that he had  no
    copy of any record made for the Appellant of  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

15. I referred to the Judge's Record of Proceedings in  the  Tribunal  file
    noting that the evidence before the Judge was  simply  that  the  first
    Appellant had a Lithuanian girl-friend in Northampton  and  his  mother
    and two siblings in Pakistan and that the second Appellant's  wife  and
    children and a sibling were in the United Kingdom and that his  parents
    and another sibling were in Pakistan.  The record showed  it  had  been
    submitted for the Respondent that the lead Appellants had always  known
    their leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  was  temporary.
    There was a reference to the judgment in Patel and Others v SSHD [2013]
    UKSC 72 paragraph 59 noting that if  limited  status  derived  entirely
    from the Rules would not be sufficient to add weight to a  claim  under
    Article 8 for favourable treatment outside the Rules.

16. The recorded submissions for the Appellants do not contain any material
    reference to any evidence to support the Article 8 claim.

Findings and Consideration

17. I noted that other than described there was no evidence in the Tribunal
    file of the private and family lives of  the  lead  Appellants  outside
    their business relationship.  There  was  no  documentary  evidence  to
    explain the position of the second Appellant's dependants, to show  the
    length of time they have been in the United  Kingdom,  what  pre-school
    playgroups or similar they might attend or of any other ties  to  wider
    family or the community.  The statements made for the  hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal referred simply to the presence of  dependants  and  the
    length of time the lead Appellants have been in the United Kingdom.

18. Following a discussion with both representatives about the best way  to
    proceed,  I  decided  and  announced  in  the  hearing  room  that  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  in
    that the Judge had failed expressly and specifically, even if  briefly,
    to address the claim raised under Article 8 by  the  second  Appellant.
    However there was no evidence of any substance to  support  that  claim
    before the Judge or before the Upper Tribunal notwithstanding the Upper
    Tribunal's second direction of 18 July 2014 that:-

          The party shall prepare for the forthcoming hearing on  the  basis
          that, if the Upper Tribunal decides to set aside the determination
          of  First-tier   Tribunal,   any   further   evidence,   including
          supplementary oral evidence, that the Upper Tribunal may  need  to
          consider if  it  decides  to  re-make  the  decision,  can  be  so
          considered at that hearing.

19. I also announced my decision that such error of law was not material on
    the basis of the evidence before the Judge  and  further  the  lack  of
    evidence from the Appellants showed that even if it had  been  material
    the appeal under Article 8 was bound to fail in the Upper  Tribunal  at
    the hearing before me.

20. I should add the Judge gave adequate and sustainable  reasons  for  her
    findings on the viability  and  credibility  of  the  lead  Appellants'
    business plan.  There is no need for detailed criteria or tests  to  be
    established.  A Judge will be entitled to and indeed expected to  apply
    common sense and a minimum level of appreciation of commercial reality.
     The Appellants had failed to show that  on  the  evidence  before  the
    Judge she had  not  given  adequate  or  sustainable  reasons  for  her
    conclusions.

21. The consequences that the First-tier  Tribunal  determination  did  not
    contain an error of law in  respect  of  which  any  other  differently
    constituted Tribunal might have come to a different conclusion  and  so
    it is not an error of law such that it should be set aside.  Therefore,
    the First-tier Tribunal's determination shall stand.

    Anonymity

23.  There was no request for an anonymity direction  or  order  and  having
    considered the appeal I find there is no need for such.

    DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error
    of law such that it should be set aside. Accordingly, it shall stand to
    the effect that:-

    The appeal of each of the Appellants is dismissed.

Signed/Official Crest                                                   Date
09. ix. 2014



Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



