
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13349/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 July 2013                                |On 12 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                             Mr Md joynal abedin

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hasan, a Legal Representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This case has a slightly problematic history which is  best  approached
    by a chronological analysis.

    (i)  The respondent whom I shall refer  to  as  the  claimant  was  the
         appellant before the F-tT.  He is a national of Bangladesh, born 14
         July 1983 and made application dated 15  August  2011  for  further
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 student.

    (ii) On 16 May 2012 that application was refused with the  SSHD  making
         two decisions.  The first was a refusal to vary leave.  The  second
         was a decision to remove the claimant.  In essence the  application
         was refused because the SSHD considered the claimant had  submitted
         a false document in support of his claim and  relied  on  paragraph
         322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.

    (iii)    In a determination dated 12 November 2012 First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Thanki allowed the appeal to  the  limited  extent  that  the
         matter be remitted to the SSHD for a lawful decision  to  be  made.
         This was on the basis that the  s.47  notice  incorporated  in  the
         decision letter was not lawful.  The  judge  also  found  that  the
         decision by the  SSHD  under  paragraph  322(1A)  was  correct  and
         furthermore that as a consequence the appellant did  not  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 245ZX of the Immigration Rules.

    (iv) On 27 November 2012 a Designated Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
         (DFtTJ French) granted permission to appeal  to  the  Secretary  of
         State who had complained that the judge had failed to determine the
         variation decision under appeal.

    (v)  On 5 December 2012 I issued directions observing  that  there  had
         been  no  challenge  to  the  findings  by  the  judge  under   the
         Immigration Rules.  My provisional view was that there was no basis
         on which the appeal could be allowed against the decision  refusing
         variation of leave.  In the absence of any proposal to the contrary
         being received by 12 December I indicated that the decision of  the
         First-tier Tribunal would be set aside without the need for an oral
         hearing and the appeal against the  variation  decision  should  be
         dismissed with  the  appeal  against  the  removal  decision  being
         allowed on the basis it was not in accordance with the law.

    (vi) On 11 December 2012 the solicitors for the claimant applied to the
         First-tier Tribunal for permission to  appeal  explaining  why  the
         application had been made late with reference to my directions of 5
         December.

    (vii)    Unaware of this application which had not been linked  to  the
         file, on 20 December 2012 I proceeded to determine  the  appeal  in
         accordance with the above directions.

    (viii)   On 17 January 2013 the claimant's solicitors  applied  to  the
         Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal that decision to the  Court
         of Appeal.  This was on the basis that the decision of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal had been challenged on 12 December 2012.

    (ix) Having regard to the procedural issue arising, on 22 April 2013  I
         set aside my determination of 20 December 2012 pursuant to Rule  43
         of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and  directed
         that the appeal by the Secretary of State  be  listed  for  hearing
         before me.

 2. At that hearing Mr Jarvis was without papers.  My decision of 22  April
    indicated that I proposed to treat the application by the  claimant  in
    the letter dated 11 December 2011 as a  reply  under  Rule  24  of  the
    Procedure Rules.  This was in accordance with the decision in EG  &  NG
    (UT Rule 17: withdrawal; Rule  24:  scope)  Ethiopia  [2013]  UKUT  143
    (IAC).  Mr Hasan was unaware of this decision and I ensured he  had  an
    opportunity of reading it  which  also  gave  time  for  Mr  Jarvis  to
    familiarise himself with the case.  Mr Hasan also provided  a  copy  of
    the  letter  of  11  December  2011  and  its  accompanying  notice  of
    application.

 3. Putting aside  the  jurisdictional  issues,  it  is  evident  from  the
    determination that the judge reached no conclusions on  the  Article  8
    grounds which were relied on.  It may be that he  considered  this  was
    unnecessary in the light of the appeal having been allowed against  the
    decision to remove.

 4. As to the judge's findings on the grounds under the Immigration  Rules,
    it is argued in the grounds of application dated 11 December 2012 that:

    (i)  the Secretary of State had not followed the procedure set  out  in
         her own guidance  with  regard  to  false  documents  -  paragraphs
         322(1A) and (2); standard of proof.  It is asserted that  the  SSHD
         did  not  receive  any  written  confirmation  as  to   the   TOEIC
         certificate.

    (ii) The Secretary of State had not discharged her duty properly  under
         the principle of common  law  fairness  in  verifying  the  alleged
         forgery with reference to R (Q v SSHD) EWCA Civ 364 and  RP  (proof
         of forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086  and  OA  (alleged  forgery;
         Section 108 Procedure) Nigeria [2007] UKIAT 00096.

 5. Mr Hasan explained that there was no written evidence from the  college
    and that the e-mails had not been produced.  Furthermore,  this  was  a
    matter that he had raised with the judge.   Mr  Jarvis  was  unable  to
    throw any light on the matter at not having the  Secretary  of  State's
    file.  Certainly the respondent's bundle does not contain copies of any
    e-mails passing between the Secretary of State and the college.  It  is
    unclear where the judge got the text of the e-mail from as recorded  in
    the determination, however the Record of  Proceedings  clearly  records
    this text:

         "RFR - rely on it.

         322(1A) mandatory

         Rely on e-mail

         Bottom of e-mail = correctly identifies A plus all particulars."

 6. The record of proceedings relating to  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant does reveal that the judge was directed to  policy  guidelines
    and that confirmation in writing  was  required.   If  the  e-mail  was
    produced, it is difficult to see why those submissions were made.

 7. It is unarguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in failing to
    determine the variation decision and Mr Jarvis and Mr Hasan  considered
    the best course would be for the case to be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that decision to be made.  The question is whether that re-
    making should be confined to Article 8 grounds or whether it  would  be
    open to the claimant to re-argue this case under the Immigration Rules.
     It is clear from the record of proceedings that  the  issue  that  the
    Secretary of State had not acted in accordance with her own policy  was
    raised in submissions.

 8. The claimant has been poorly served by his solicitors in that they  did
    not seek to challenge the decision  within  the  time  limited  by  the
    Rules.  However with the Secretary of State accepting that in the light
    of the error of law having been made by the judge failing to  determine
    the variation decision, I consider it would be unfair  to  exclude  the
    claimant from further argument on the grounds on  which  he  sought  to
    challenge the immigration decision under  appeal.   Mr  Jarvis  and  Mr
    Hasan accepted that in the circumstances it would  be  appropriate  for
    the case to be remitted to a First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 9. I therefore find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  and  remit
    the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing in accordance
    with paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statements for the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal pursuant to s.12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
    Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007.   In  the   particular
    circumstances of this case none of the findings of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Thanki is preserved.




Signed
                                                               Date 11  July
    2013
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


