
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13668/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 October 2016                   |On 3 November 2016                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Miss Saranya Dhanabalan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Mannan, Counsel, instructed by Westbrook Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against a decision made by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth
    on 24 April 2016, in which he allowed the appeal by Miss Dhanabalan, to
    whom I shall refer as the Claimant.

 2. The short history is that in 2011 the Claimant  was  granted  leave  to
    remain under Tier 1 as an Entrepreneur. This was  an  application  made
    both in respect of her own application and also that  of  her  business
    partner, Miss [G].  The Claimant was given leave  until  January  2015.
    She then applied to extend her leave to remain and in a decision  dated
    23 March 2015 that application was refused.

 3. The reasons given by the Respondent for refusing were essentially four:
    that there were documents missing, in particular audited accounts; that
    there was no acceptable evidence to show that the Claimant and Miss [G]
    are business partners and have an equal share of the funds or  business
    as specified under Appendix  A;  that  the  accounts  and  accountants'
    letter, business bank statements and bank letter do not show  that  the
    Claimant and Miss [G] have both invested  in  the  company  trading  as
    Vermats & Co nor that they had both invested in the business being  run
    by Miss [G].

 4. Judge Hollingworth, having considered the evidence, made clear findings
    as follows:  at [11], that the Secretary  of  State  has  proceeded  to
    decide Miss [G]'s case on  the  basis  of  information  which  she  had
    provided without an audit being carried out.  In respect of Miss [G]  a
    positive decision was made on 17 March 2015 to grant her extension  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur). Reference was also made  by
    Judge Hollingworth at [11] to the GCID case notes for Miss [G] from her
    Home Office file, which make specific reference to the fact  that  Miss
    [G] was part of an entrepreneurial team and the other  entrepreneur  is
    named and the name that appears is that of the Claimant.

 5. At [13]-[15] the Judge held:

         "13. I find that sufficient indicia  were  present  on  the  papers
             submitted by this Appellant in naming Miss [G] to  enable  the
             Respondent  to  correlate  the  information  which  had   been
             provided and the facts which had already been  established  in
             relation to Miss [G].  Pursuant to  paragraph  245AA  where  a
             document does not contain all the  specified  information  the
             Respondent may contact the applicant and request  the  correct
             documents.

         14.  In the particular circumstances of this case, I find  that  it
             would have been abundantly clear to the  Respondent  that  the
             application in respect of Miss [G] had been granted  and  that
             the application made by this Appellant  referred  to  that  of
             Miss [G].   Given  the  interdependency  between  the  factual
             matrix forming the foundation for  the  grant  of  Miss  [G]'s
             application  and  that  forming   the   foundation   of   this
             Appellant's application, I find that the  material  identified
             by Mr Khan  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  demonstrated  the
             availability of the specified evidence  relied  upon  by  this
             Appellant but which had not been provided.

         15.  The existence of the missing information was  verifiable  from
             the records already possessed by the Respondent in relation to
             Miss [G], given that Miss [G] and  this  Appellant  formed  an
             entrepreneurial team and given that  the  requisite  level  of
             funds and the accessibility on the part of both Miss  [G]  and
             the Appellant in this case to those funds,  had  already  been
             demonstrated and further given that those funds had  now  been
             invested in businesses namely Arkwright's in Cornwall and in a
             petrol station in Norfolk."

 6. The judge went on to find at [16] to [18] that the discretion vested in
    the  Respondent  should  have  been   exercised   to   pursue   further
    documentation from the Claimant  in  relation  to  specified  evidence.
    Bearing in mind the minutes from Miss [G]'s file, at [16] he says:

         "I find that the Respondent's discretion to make further  enquiries
         of this  Appellant  in  relation  to  specified  evidence,  assumed
         greater significance and  would  act  in  the  ordinary  course  of
         affairs as an inducement to the Respondent to  exercise  discretion
         to make further enquiry of this Appellant.  I find that this  would
         constitute an aspect of  the  public  duty  of  the  Respondent  in
         ensuring that the Immigration Rules were being upheld."

 7. At [18] the Judge concluded by finding:

         "In these circumstances I allow the appeal to  the  limited  extent
         that the decision taken by the Respondent is not in accordance with
         the law and that the Respondent should further consider the  matter
         given the integral nature of this Appellant's  application  for  an
         extension in juxtaposition to that made by Miss [G]."

 8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought  in  time  on  27
    April 2016 on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in
    giving weight to immaterial matters.  It was submitted at paragraph 5:

         "5.   The  Appellant  failed  to  provide  the  required  specified
             documents under the Immigration Rules and does not qualify for
             discretion under paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules.

         6.   It is submitted that the judge erred in law by  remitting  the
             Appellant's  application  back  to  the  Respondent.   It   is
             submitted that the appeal should have been dismissed."

 9. In a decision dated 7 September 2016, Designated Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Appleyard granted permission to appeal on the basis that:

         "3.  The grounds seeking permission to appeal argue that the  judge
             has given weight to immaterial matters  and  that  the  appeal
             should have been dismissed as the Appellant failed to  provide
             the required specified documents under the  Immigration  Rules
             and does not qualify for discretion under paragraph  245AA  of
             the  Immigration  Rules.    By   remitting   the   Appellant's
             application back to the Respondent the judge has erred  as  he
             should have dismissed the appeal outright.

         4.   These grounds are arguable."

    Hearing

10. At the hearing before me Mr Tarlow essentially sought to  rely  on  the
    grounds of appeal.  He said it was a short point.  It was necessary for
    the Claimant to provide specified evidence with reference  to  Appendix
    FM-SE.  If  that  evidence  is  not  available  or  supplied  with  the
    application, then quite simply it was for the Judge  to  simply  reject
    the appeal rather than send it back  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    reconsideration.   He  submitted  that  nothing  in  the  documentation
    required the discretion vested in paragraph 245AA  and  the  Judge  had
    made a material error in remitting the appeal back to the Secretary  of
    State.

11. In his submission, Mr Mannan submitted that  the  difficulty  with  the
    Home Office position is that the Judge took into account all aspects of
    the application and considered the documents that were submitted by the
    Claimant's business partner and found that this was the fair course  of
    action.  Mr Mannan also helpfully clarified that some of the  documents
    that the Judge asserted had not been handed in or sent in at [6] of his
    decision had in  fact  been  sent  in  and  he  drew  my  attention  in
    particular to E1 of the Respondent's bundle, which contained  a  letter
    from Param & Company Chartered Certified Accountants dated 15  December
    2014, which was written  specifically  in  respect  of  this  Claimant.
    However,  this  document  was  considered  as  part   of   Miss   [G]'s
    application, which was submitted at the same time  of  this  Claimant's
    application and of course Miss [G]'s application was successful.

12. He submitted that it is clear from the GCID notes on  Miss  [G]'s  file
    that there is reference to this Claimant and it  was  clear  the  Judge
    found that had the Claimant's case been considered in light of all  the
    evidence, including the evidence provided in respect of Miss [G],  that
    her application would have succeeded.  He further  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State should have exercised  discretion  to  make  further
    enquiries, in particular with reference to Miss [G]'s  file  given  the
    clear  interdependency  between  the  two  applications.  Any   missing
    information was clearly verifiable from the records for Miss  [G].  The
    Judge found,  properly,  that  given  the  integral  nature  of  linked
    business affairs, the Respondent's failure to  make  further  enquiries
    assumed greater significance and essentially amounted to an  inducement
    to make further enquiries  regarding  this  Claimant  as  part  of  the
    Respondent's public duty.

13. In his reply,  Mr  Tarlow  reiterated  that  paragraph  245AA  and  the
    discretion vested therein was designed to  deal  with  documents  in  a
    sequence where for example  one  is  missing  but  in  the  absence  of
    documents there was no reason for the Respondent to make any  enquiries
    of the claimant.

    Decision

14. I find no material error of law in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P J M Hollingworth.  In a careful and detailed  analysis  of  the
    evidence and the absence of evidence in  relation  to  this  Claimant's
    Tier 1 Entrepreneur application, the  Judge  gave  clear  and  adequate
    reasons for finding that this was, unusually,  a  case  in  respect  of
    which the  Respondent  should  have  considered  the  exercise  of  her
    discretion under paragraph 245AA and that  this  was  particularly  the
    case given that the application for an extension made by  her  business
    partner, Miss [G], was granted on 17 March 2015, six  days  before  the
    refusal in this Claimant's case.

15. There is clearly an issue of fairness  given  the  interdependence  and
    great similarity between the applications, which were made by  business
    partners.  The issue of fairness clearly arises when one application is
    successful and the other is refused.  I do find that this was a  proper
    decision by the Judge to allow the Claimant's  appeal  to  the  limited
    extent that the Respondent's decision was not in  accordance  with  the
    law and, as the judge concluded at 18: "The Respondent  should  further
    consider the matter given  the  integral  nature  of  this  Appellant's
    application for an extension in juxtaposition  to  that  made  by  Miss
    [G]."

16. For those reasons I uphold the decision of P J M Hollingworth with  the
    effect that the appeal is remitted back to the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department in accordance with  his  direction  at  18  of  his
    decision dated 21 April 2016.



Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

