
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia132812015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th June 2016                             |20th June 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Chesberth Curtbert Myers
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Malhotra of Counsel, Immigration Practitioners


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State for the Home
         Department. She appeals against the decision of Designated Judge of
         the First-tier Tribunal J G  Macdonald  who,  on  8th  April  2016,
         allowed the appeal of Mr Chesberth Curtbert Myers in respect  of  a
         decision to refuse his application for leave to remain on the basis
         of his family and private life, made on 28th January  2015,  and  a
         decision to remove him from the UK. The decisions appealed  against
         were made on 23rd March 2015.  I shall refer to  Mr  Myers  as  the
         claimant in this decision.


   Background


      2. The claimant is a citizen of St Vincent and the Grenadines. He  met
         his partner eight years ago in St Vincent. He  entered  the  United
         Kingdom in 2010 with the intention of joining the British army. The
         process however was slower than he anticipated and he  returned  in
         the same year to St Vincent. On his return his partner,  who  is  a
         British citizen, fell pregnant. In  February  2013  the  claimant's
         partner moved to the United Kingdom. She gave birth to their  child
         on 8th May 2013. The child  is  a  British  citizen.  The  claimant
         returned to the United Kingdom in March 2013 and  was  present  for
         the birth of his  child.  He  entered  the  UK  at  a  visitor  and
         subsequently returned to St Vincent in accordance with the terms of
         his entry clearance.


      3. In July 2014 he again entered the United Kingdom as a visitor.   On
         this occasion however he overstayed and  made  an  application  for
         leave to remain on the basis of his relationship with  his  partner
         and his daughter on 28th January 2015.  The  SSHD  did  not  accept
         that the claimant was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with
         his partner because there was said to be no evidence that they  had
         lived together for a period of two years.  This  is  a  requirement
         under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. There was said to be no
         exceptional circumstances outside of the Immigration  Rules  which,
         consistent with the right to respect for private  and  family  life
         under Article 8, would warrant a grant of leave to  remain  to  the
         claimant under Article 8. It was not accepted that the claimant had
         a genuine relationship with the child's mother  and  therefore  not
         accepted that he could have a relationship with his child.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      4. In his determination Judge Macdonald found that  the  claimant  and
         his partner did have a genuine relationship. This finding  has  not
         been challenged on appeal. The judge however was of the  view  that
         the claimant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules  because
         it could not be shown that there were no  insurmountable  obstacles
         to  the  family's  return  to  St  Vincent.  This  is  because  the
         claimant's partner had lived in St Vincent for much of her life and
         would be familiar  with  the  country.  The  core  of  the  judge's
         reasoning can be found from paragraph 36 onwards.  At paragraph  36
         the judge said:

             "However the high point of the appellant's  case  is  what  is
             said in paragraph 117B(6) which sets out that in the case of a
             person who is not liable to deportation  (this  is  a  removal
             case) the  public  interest  does  not  require  the  person's
             removal where (a) the person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,  and  (b)  it
             would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK."


         The  reference  to  paragraph  117B  relates  to  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as incorporated by the Immigration
         Act 2014.

      5. At paragraph 38 the judge stated:

             "In terms of 117B(2) the  appellant  does  speak  English  and
             given his academic qualifications it is unlikely that he would
             be a burden on tax payers and better able  to  integrate  into
             society. His relationship with a qualifying partner  has  been
             established at a time when he was here lawfully although he is
             now an overstayer."

         At paragraph 39 the judge stated:

             "However 117B(6) seems to me to stand on its own.  It  is  the
             final part of  117B  and  reading  that  Section  as  a  whole
             Parliament is setting out the terms of the  factors  that  are
             relevant to the application of Article  8  and  is  making  it
             clear what should happen in circumstances such as  this  case.
             It is not qualified in its terms - if it was  intended  to  be
             subject to qualification then presumably Parliament would have
             said so in clear language. The first part  of  it  is  readily
             satisfied as the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental
             relationship with a  qualifying  child.  This  is  defined  in
             Section 117D of the Act namely  a  person  who  is  a  British
             citizen who is under the age of 18."

         Then at paragraph 40 the judge says this:

             "The remaining criterion to be satisfied in terms of Article 8
             is whether or not it would be reasonable to expect  the  child
             to leave the United Kingdom. The key point here  is  that  the
             child is a British citizen. It has long been held  that  there
             is intrinsic value in being a British citizen for  example  in
             terms of education and health and it  seems  to  me  that  for
             those reasons it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
             to leave the United Kingdom. It might  be  added  that,  as  a
             British citizen, the child  cannot  be  forced  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom and neither can her mother."

         Finally at paragraph 41 the judge stated:


             "It therefore seems to me that in terms of Section 117B(6) the
             fact that  the  appellant  qualifies  under  this  Section  is
             determinative of the appeal under Article 8 as it would not be
             proportionate to return  him  to  St  Vincent  given  that  he
             qualifies under this Section."

         The judge consequently allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.
    The grounds of appeal


      6. The grounds of appeal as originally drafted  took  issue  with  the
         judge's approach to Section 117B(6). The Secretary of State was  of
         the view that Section 117B(6) did not stand on its own and  had  to
         be  considered  holistically  together  with  the   other   factors
         contained in Section 117B.  To the extent that the judge's approach
         followed that set out by the president of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         Treebhawon and Others (Section 117B(6) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC),  it
         was submitted that Treebhawon was wrongly decided.


      7. Headnote (i) of Treebhawon reads:


             "Section 117B(6) is a  reflection  of  the  distinction  which
             Parliament has chosen to make between persons who are, and who
             are  not,  liable  to  deportation.  In  any  case  where  the
             conditions enshrined in Section 117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  are  satisfied,  the  Section
             117B(6) public interest prevails  over  the  public  interests
             identified in Sections 117B(1) to 117B(3)."


         Headnote (ii) reads:


             "Section 117B(4) and (5) are not  parliamentary  prescriptions
             of the public interest. Rather, they operate  as  instructions
             to courts and Tribunals to  be  applied  in  cases  where  the
             balancing exercise is being conducted in  order  to  determine
             proportionality under Article 8 ECHR, in cases where either of
             the factors in which they identified arises."


      8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge who granted permission to  appeal  to
         the Upper Tribunal was not impressed with the settled grounds. Even
         though Treebhawon will be considered by the Court of Appeal in  the
         future it remains good law and the judge was unarguably entitled to
         rely on it. The judge did however find that  the  First-tier  judge
         had arguably given insufficient reasons why he found  it  would  be
         unreasonable to expect the couple's child, who was aged 3, to leave
         the UK. The grant of permission stated that nationality appeared to
         be the only reason given by the First-tier Tribunal for the finding
         that it would not be reasonable for the child to leave the UK,  but
         that of itself was said not to be a trump card.


    The Upper Tribunal hearing


      9. At the commencement of the hearing I gave both parties a copy of an
         extract  from  the  Immigration  Directorate   Instruction   Family
         Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b, entitled 'Family  Life  (as  a
         Partner or Parent) and Private Life:  10-Year  Routes'  (the  IDI).
         This was published in August 2015 and was current at  the  date  of
         decision. It remained current at the  date  of  the  error  of  law
         hearing.  There  had  been  some  initial  discussion  between  the
         representatives and a preliminary agreement had been  reached  that
         the decision did contain an error of law  on  the  basis  that  the
         judge gave insufficient reasons for his conclusion. I informed both
         parties  that  that  decision  had   been   reached   without   any
         consideration to the Secretary of State's own guidance and  I  gave
         the representatives an opportunity to consider  the  IDI  and  make
         submissions based on that Instruction. Having heard and  considered
         the submissions from both representatives I indicated that,  in  my
         judgment, the First-tier Tribunal had not materially erred  in  law
         in its conclusion that it would be unreasonable to expect the child
         to leave the United Kingdom.

Discussion

     10. The issue of reasonableness in the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal has to be considered in the context of the instruction and
         guidance  issued  by  the  Secretary  of  State  as  such  guidance
         identifies the Secretary of State's own  view  of  what  action  is
         reasonable.  It  is  therefore  relevant  to  the   assessment   of
         proportionality under Article 8 and whether the First-tier Tribunal
         judge took full  account  of  all  relevant  circumstances  in  his
         assessment of reasonableness and whether, for the reasons given, he
         was entitled to allow the appeal.  Nationality is not a trump  card
         but it remains a significant factor. In Secretary  of  State  v  SS
         (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 the Court of Appeal,  at  33  indicated
         that compelling  circumstances  would  need  to  be  identified  to
         support a claim for a grant of leave  to  remain  outside  the  new
         Rules in Appendix FM. It is  for  this  reason  that  the  guidance
         offered in the IDI is of paramount significance in determining what
         is reasonable and whether compelling  circumstances  exist  in  any
         given case.


     11.  In  her  guidance  the  Secretary  of  State  has  considered  the
         circumstances in which the parent of a British citizen child  could
         be reasonably required to leave the United Kingdom.  The  Secretary
         of  State's  stated  position  is  relevant  to  the  judge's   own
         proportionality  assessment  because  the  Secretary  of  State  is
         custodian of the public interest and her identification of what  is
         reasonable in the public interest must be a very relevant factor in
         determining whether the judge's conclusion was within the range  of
         reasonable decisions open to him.  The relevant Section of the  IDI
         is 11.2.3 under the heading "Would it be unreasonable to  expect  a
         British citizen child to leave the UK?"  The paragraph first  makes
         reference to the CJEU Judgment in Zambrano (Case-34/09  Zambrano  v
         Office national de l'emploi [2012] QB 265).  It then states:


             "Where a decision to refuse the application  would  require  a
             parent or primary carer to return to a country outside the EU,
             the case must always be assessed on the basis that it would be
             unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU
             with that parent or primary carer.


             In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to
             the parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain  in  the
             UK  with  the  child,  provided  that  there  is  satisfactory
             evidence of a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.


             It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where
             the conduct of the parent  or  primary  carer  gives  rise  to
             considerations of such weight as to justify separation, if the
             child could otherwise stay with another parent or  alternative
             primary carer in the UK or in the EU.


             The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:


                . criminality  falling  below  the  thresholds  set  out  in
                  paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules;
                . a very poor immigration history, such as where the  person
                  has repeatedly and deliberately breached  the  Immigration
                  Rules.


             In considering whether refusal may be appropriate the decision
             maker must consider the impact on the child of any separation.
             If the decision maker is minded to  refuse,  in  circumstances
             where separation would be the  result,  this  decision  should
             normally be discussed with  a  senior  caseworker  and,  where
             appropriate, advice may be  sought  from  the  Office  of  the
             Children's Champion or on the implications for the welfare  of
             the child, in order to inform the decision."

     12. Ms Ahmed drew my attention to  the  first  paragraph  under  11.2.3
         which makes reference to Zambrano and to  where  the  effect  of  a
         decision would be to force  the  British  child  to  leave  the  EU
         regardless of the age of that child. She submitted  that  this  IDI
         was only relevant to instances in which EU law was relevant.


     13. I reject that  submission.  The  wording  of  the  extract  I  have
         provided is absolutely clear. There is nothing to indicate that  it
         is restricted to instances in which EU law  is  triggered.  In  the
         absence of any degree  of  criminality  or  very  poor  immigration
         history the Secretary of State  has  concluded  that  it  would  be
         unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with
         a parent or primary carer. This was the conclusion reached  by  the
         First-tier Tribunal.  Although the First-tier Judge  did  not  make
         reference to the IDI I am entitled to consider the IDI,  extant  as
         it was at the  date  of  the  decision,  in  determining  with  his
         decision is vitiated by a material error of law. I am not satisfied
         that the judge's focus on the nationality  of  the  child  and  the
         consequent finding that it would be unreasonable  for  the  British
         national child to have to leave the UK is one that is open to legal
         criticism. I reach this conclusion in  light  of  the  presidential
         decision in Treebhawon which  is  currently  good  law.  For  these
         reasons I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error of law.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]                               17 June 2016
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

