
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13784/2014
                                                               IA/13785/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham, Sheldon Court              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th September 2014                          |On 22nd September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                             (1) mr Dinesh Kumar
                                (2) mrs Rivka
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ghaffar promulgated on 10th June 2014, following the  hearing  at
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 3rd June 2013.  In the determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeals of Mr Dinesh  Kumar  and  Mrs  Rivka.   The
    Appellants subsequently applied for, and were  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are husband and wife.  Both are citizens of India.   The
    first Appellant, the husband, was  born  on  6th  December  1975.   The
    second Appellant, the wife, was born on 2nd February 1981.   The  first
    Appellant entered the UK as a Tier 4 (Student) Migrant  and  thereafter
    applied for an  extension  of  leave.   The  second  Appellant  is  his
    dependant.  On 28th November 2013,  the  Respondent  refused  to  grant
    further leave to remain.

The Judge's Findings

 3. At the hearing before the judge on 3rd June 2013, those  instructed  by
    the Appellants, wrote to the court to advise  that  they  were  without
    instructions.  The Appellants themselves did not  attend  the  hearing,
    despite  this  having  been  a  oral  hearing.   Nor,  was  there   any
    explanation  tendered.   The  judge  had  regard  to  the   Appellants'
    arguments.  These were  that  although  the  first  Appellant  did  not
    provide a valid Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies  (CAS)  document
    which  would  have  been   issued   by   his   sponsoring   educational
    establishment, and despite this having been  a  mandatory  requirement,
    the Respondent also requested further information.

 4. The judge, however, held that, not only was there no  CAS  document  in
    the papers before him,  but  that  "no  CAS  document  has  since  been
    submitted" (paragraph 9)  so  that  the  Appellants  could  simply  not
    succeed in their appeals.  No consideration was directly given  to  the
    application of Article 8.

Grounds of Application

 5. The Grounds of Appeal continue to argue that the Respondent should have
    requested further information, namely, the Confirmation  of  Acceptance
    for Studies.  However, the grounds also state that the judge failed  to
    give any consideration to Article 8 of the European Convention of Human
    Rights.

 6. In June 2014, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  limited  basis
    (but the permission having been granted the  other  grounds  were  also
    then deemed arguable) that, whatever the evidence before the judge, the
    matter should have been considered under Article 8 case law as well.

 7. On 4th July 2014, a Rule 24 response  was  entered  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State on the basis that "the appeal  had  no  prospect  of
    being successful under Article 8 of the ECHR even if the judge had been
    obliged to consider it".

Submissions

 8. At the  hearing  before  me  there  was  again  no  attendance  by  the
    Appellants.  Nor  was  there  any  explanation  given  for  their  non-
    attendance.

 9. For his part, Mr Mills,  who  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, submitted  that  this  appeal  could  not  possibly
    succeed for the following reasons.  First, in the original  Grounds  of
    Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, all that is said  is  that
    the Secretary of State had failed to give consideration to  Article  8.
    It was not explained what was meant by this.   It  was  not  said  that
    Article 8 was an arguable point because the Appellants had been in  the
    UK for any number of years.  It was not said that there  were  children
    that engaged Article 8 considerations.  It was not said that  they  had
    been working or enhancing their Article 8 rights in any particular way.



10. There is simply a bland statement, which is  often  routinely  put  in,
    that no consideration has been given to Article 8, when there were none
    put forward for consideration.

11. Second, if one were to give consideration to Article  8,  it  is  clear
    that the Appellants only entered in February 2013 so that any  argument
    on the basis  of  Article  8  was  bound  to  fail  unless  there  were
    countervailing considerations that could be raised, which have not been
    raised.

12. Finally, the judge would not even have been able to  read  anything  by
    way of Article 8 on the basis of the papers before him.   There  simply
    was nothing upon which Article 8 could latch on.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside this decision.  This appeal  is
    hopeless.  The Appellants, who have been shown every  consideration  by
    the appellate process, have signally failed to attend on each and every
    occasions, as well as having failed to put anything forward by way of a
    Article 8 argument, that  could  be  realistically  considered.   There
    simply is nothing there once one accepts that an argument that  further
    enquiries should have been made  of  the  Appellants,  after  they  had
    failed to provide a CAS, falls away.  It is for the Appellant  to  make
    out an arguable case.  That can only be made  out  by  a  assertion  of
    alleged facts.  No such assertion is made.  All that was submitted  was
    that the decision was not compliant with Article  8.   It  plainly  was
    compliant with Article 8 because the judge determined the  issue  under
    the Immigration Rules and held that the Appellants could  not  succeed.
    The first Appellant was in  this  country  as  a  student.  The  second
    Appellant was here as his dependant.  Both were expected to return back
    to India after the end of the first appellant's  studies.  Reliance  on
    human rights grounds is simply a ruse. There is no error  of  law  here
    whatsoever.

Decision

14. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.   The
    determination stands.

15. No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th September 2014
