
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13051/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th May 2016                              |On 15th September 2016        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   mr V m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O R Williams, promulgated on 29th July 2015, following a  hearing
    at Stoke-on-Trent on 9th July 2015.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Jamaica, who  was  born  on  17th
    September 1982.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 13th April 2015, maintaining the decisions  dated  14th  November
    2014 and 25th November 2014, to make a deportation against him  on  the
    basis of crimes committed in this country and a  sentence  subsequently
    served of imprisonment thereafter.  The Appellant's claim  is  that  he
    should not be removed to Jamaica on account of his family life  rights,
    which he enjoys with his three children and his partner in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. At the hearing before me on 12th May  2016,  there  was  a  preliminary
    application made by Mr Mills, on behalf of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State.  Mr Mills submitted that the Appellant had no right  of  appeal,
    with respect to the  Respondent's  decision  of  13th  April  2014,  as
    regards the decisions taken on 14th November 2014.   This  was  despite
    the fact that a duty judge in July 2015 had confirmed that there was  a
    right of appeal.  However, the Court of Appeal decision in Virk  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 652 suggests that  the  issue  of  jurisdiction  remains  open
    before the courts throughout the proceedings, so that even if there had
    been a decision to the contrary by  two  previous  Immigration  Judges,
    which was the case, such an application could  be  renewed  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, and if that were so, then a successful  application  by
    the Secretary of State would result in there being no right  of  appeal
    today.  Accordingly, it was accepted that the point about  jurisdiction
    remains in the Upper Tribunal whether or not it has been  taken  before
    in the First-tier Tribunal (paragraph 11), and the court  had  made  it
    clear that "whether taken or not below" (see paragraph  20)  the  issue
    remains open.  This is because a right of appeal can only be created by
    statute and it cannot be created by a waiver or by agreement, and there
    was no statutory right of appeal here.

 4. For his part, Mr Mackenzie  submitted  that  such  a  claim  could  not
    succeed for the following reasons.  First, the  letter  of  17th  April
    2015 makes it clear that a Tribunal below had decided that there was  a
    right of appeal.  This letter written  to  the  Appellant's  solicitors
    confirms that, "an Immigration Judge has reviewed this appeal  and  has
    deemed it as having a right of appeal".  Second, that decision was  not
    appealed by way of judicial review.  In Virk  itself  it  was  accepted
    that, even if a decision is precarious, "it will become less precarious
    once the time for applying for permission to appeal has  expired"  (see
    paragraph 22).  It now ill-behoved the Respondent to raise this  matter
    on an appeal on which permission had been given  from  the  Appellant's
    side.  Third, the Secretary of State has sat on this for a  whole  year
    before raising it today before the Tribunal.  Fourth, there was no Rule
    24 response from the  Secretary  of  State  taking  the  jurisdictional
    point.  Fifth, the case of Virk was very different because there Patten
    LJ made it clear that "no point was taken about the jurisdiction of the
    FTT to entertain the appeal", whereas in the instant case the point had
    previously been taken on two occasions and on both occasions decided in
    favour of the Appellant, so that there was  a  right  of  appeal.   The
    matter was confirmed again (at paragraphs 20 to 22).  Accordingly,  the
    proper challenge has not been made  and  this  preliminary  application
    should be rejected.

 5. I have decided that there is a valid right of appeal before me.  If the
    decisions taken by the Immigration  Judges  below  were  improper,  the
    proper course of action was to raise a jurisdictional matter by way  of
    a judicial review  action  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  in  the
    timeliest manner, rather than being raised before this Upper  Tribunal,
    which  is  not  exercising  a  judicial  review  function  for  present
    purposes.  Accordingly, this Tribunal must hear the appeal on the  part
    of the Appellant.

 6. Mr Mackenzie began by stating that there were three Grounds of  Appeal.
    The background was that the Appellant had committed  offences  and  had
    served a maximum sentence of one year.  He had three British  children,
    one of whom was a stepchild of his.  A deportation order was  made  and
    the Appellant appealed that order, but failed to turn up at the hearing
    and his appeal was  dismissed.   The  issue  before  this  Tribunal  is
    whether under paragraph 399 of the  Immigration  Rules  it  was  unduly
    harsh for the children to either go  to  Jamaica  with  the  Appellant,
    their father, or to remain here alone,  without  him,  with  his  being
    deported.  The judge had accepted the likely adverse effects  upon  the
    children, on the basis of the evidence of the independent social worker
    (see paragraph 12), "or separation from the  Appellant".   However,  he
    had then held that "it would not be unduly harsh for  the  children  to
    live in Jamaica" (paragraph 14).  There were two difficulties with this
    conclusion.  First, a previous judge had already decided that the  best
    interests of the children would not be served by their being removed to
    Jamaica, and this determination by Judge Pooler, was actually  set  out
    at length in the body of the  determination  by  Judge  O  R  Williams.
    Indeed, it was a feature of this appeal  that  Judge  Pooler  had  even
    recorded that, "the Respondent concedes that it would not be reasonable
    to expect any of the children to leave  the  United  Kingdom"  and  she
    further concedes "the existence of genuine and subsisting relationships
    with each child" (see paragraph  30  of  Judge  Pooler's  determination
    recited at paragraph 11 of Judge Williams' determination).  Second, the
    effect of the decision by Judge Williams was that three British citizen
    children were being removed from the jurisdiction in a  way  which  was
    contrary to EEA law.  The position was set out in a series of judgments
    by the English courts.

 7. First, taking the point in relation to the position under EEA law,  the
    case of Sanade [2012] UKUT 00048 had long established that it  was  not
    reasonable to expect British citizen children to relocate  abroad  (see
    paragraphs 93 to 95).  This was followed in Izuazu  [2013]  UKUT  00045
    where the judgment in Sanade was affirmed (at paragraph  29).   In  the
    Court of Appeal thereafter in AQ (Nigeria) [2015] EWCA Civ 250 the Home
    Office itself conceded that

         "For the vast  majority  of  deportation  cases  the  Secretary  of
         State's position remains as it was  in  Sanade:  where  the  non-EU
         carer of a British child is subject to deportation  but  would  not
         compel the child to leave  the  EU,  it  would  'not  logically  be
         possible' to determine the deportation issue on Article  8  grounds
         by proposing that the family should relocate as a unit outside  the
         EU" (see paragraph 62).

    At this stage, Mr Mackenzie made reference to the case of Rendon  Marin
    (C-165/14) where the Court of Justice was considering the issue whether
    this would be right in every single case every time, and  Mr  Mackenzie
    helpfully indicated that the advocate general had given an  opinion  on
    this issue, suggesting that this would not be the case in every  single
    case every time, but a judgment was still awaited  from  the  Court  of
    Justice itself.  Mr Mackenzie then thereafter handed up a copy later in
    the afternoon of the opinion  of  Advocate  General  Szpunar  (case  C-
    165/14) for the assistance of the Tribunal and details were also  given
    to Mr Mills for his purposes.

 8. In short, submitted Mr Mackenzie, these three British  children  cannot
    be required to go to Jamaica with the Appellant, especially where there
    is no assessment of the  children's  position,  such  that  it  is  not
    reasonable for the Secretary of State and for  the  judge  to  conclude
    that relocation to Jamaica is appropriate.

 9. Given that the judge had specifically considered the question  "whether
    it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the  UK  without
    the person who is to be deported",  and  then  concluded  that,  "I  am
    satisfied  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh,  having  regard  to  the
    independent psychiatric and social work evidence, and in particular the
    children's mental health and behavioural issues, which were worse  when
    they were separated  from  the  Appellant"  (paragraph  22),  the  only
    possible conclusion  open  to  the  judge  was  to  conclude  that  the
    deportation of the Appellant could not be lawfully undertaken.

10. Second, the decision was also  irrational  given  that  the  judge  had
    regard to the case of Devaseelan [2002]  UKUT  00702,  in  relation  to
    Judge Pooler's decision on 6th June 2014.  In that case, the judge  had
    dismissed the appeal  of  the  Appellant  on  separate  grounds,  after
    concluding that the children could not reasonably be expected,  in  the
    light of their best interests, to leave the United Kingdom  and  go  to
    Jamaica.

11. Moreover, there had been a concession to this effect by the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, on which the judge  had  therefore  relied.   Since
    this was the case, a  failure  to  adopt  this  assessment,  previously
    undertaken on the evidence before Judge Pooler, was irrational.

12. Third, Mr Mackenzie also had additional grounds, which  I  stopped  him
    from developing any further, preferring at this stage to hear  from  Mr
    Mills before I proceeded, and this dealt with the unlawful findings  on
    public interest reached by the judge, where the  judge  had  failed  to
    take into account the fact that these were "qualified  children"  under
    Section 117B(vi), such that the public interest did not  require  their
    removal.

13. For his part, Mr Mills, addressing the  first  two  Grounds  of  Appeal
    raised by Mr Mackenzie stated that whereas it was true that  in  Sanade
    and Izuazu a concession had been made, this was  not  ever  a  "blanket
    concession",  and  each  case  would   depend   on   their   particular
    circumstances.  This was  such  a  case.   The  judge  here  had  given
    adequate reasons to demonstrate why on the facts here the appeal should
    be dismissed.

14. Second, although Mr Mackenzie had submitted that the case of Marin  had
    led to an opinion from the advocate general that  consideration  should
    be given where there are imperative  grounds  on  public  security,  it
    would not necessarily be the case that the Court of Justice would  take
    the same view.  In a skilful submission before me, Mr  Mills  submitted
    that, after all, in Section 117B, where the  Tribunal  is  enjoined  to
    look at the "public interests" considerations, a person's character can
    militate against them, and this is not  even  in  a  deportation  case.
    Therefore, it is quite conceivable that  the  law  could  move  in  the
    direction of saying that there could  be  circumstances  where  British
    children could be required to be removed with the deported carer.  This
    would not contravene any legal principle.  It was not unreasonable  for
    the children to accompany their father as a single family unit.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision
    (see Section 12(2) of TCEA 2007).  My reasons are as follows.   Without
    going into all the grounds that have been raised by Mr Mackenzie in his
    grounds of application, I  conclude  that  the  Appellant  succeeds  in
    demonstrating there to be an error of law in relation to the first  two
    grounds raised.

16. First, a series of cases after Sanade has confirmed that a carer cannot
    be removed back to his country where there are British citizen children
    who are going to suffer to such an  extent  that  the  British  citizen
    child or children  would  also  have  to  leave.   This  would  not  be
    logically possible.  It is not  logically  possible  here  because  the
    judge accepted that "it would be unduly harsh,  having  regard  to  the
    independent psychiatric  report  and  social  worker  evidence  and  in
    particular the children's mental health and  behavioural  issues  which
    would worsen if separated from  the  Appellant"  (paragraph  21).   The
    children could not stay in the UK if the Appellant was deported.  Their
    condition would worsen.  This was accepted by the  judge.   They  would
    have to accompany the Appellant back to Jamaica.  That  would  infringe
    the rights of British citizen  children  and  violate  the  fundamental
    precepts of EU law.

17. Second,  in  this  particular  case,  a  concession  was  made  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State that it would not be reasonable to expect
    any of the children here to leave the  United  Kingdom.   It  was  also
    conceded  that  there  is   in   existence   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationships with each  child  that  the  Appellant  himself  enjoyed.
    Judge Pooler had in his decision on 6th June  2014  concluded  that  it
    would not be in the best interests of the children were they not to  be
    in the care of both parents in the United Kingdom (see paragraph 30).

Remaking the Decision

18. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, and the evidence that was before him, and the submissions that I
    have heard today.  I am allowing this appeal for  the  reasons  that  I
    have given above.

19. Since no new evidence is required for this Tribunal to fully  determine
    the issues in  relation  to  the  two  matters  that  I  have  made  my
    observations clear on, it is unnecessary to remit this  matter  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (which may have been the case  were  the  remaining
    Grounds of Appeal to have been in issue) and it  suffices  for  present
    purposes to simply state that this appeal is allowed  for  the  reasons
    that I have given above.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th September 2016



