
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/13989/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20th May 2016                         |  On 6th June 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                              mrs sarsa taurah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMET

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Subbarayan
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Mauritius whose date of birth is recorded
    as 8th October 1956.  She arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  11th  May
    2003 with leave to remain  as  a  visitor  until  10th  November  2003.
    Thereafter various applications were  made  to  vary  her  leave  until
    eventually she was granted discretionary leave until 31st March 2015 on
    the basis of marriage.  On 3rd March 2015 an  application  for  further
    leave to remain was made on the basis of private and family life  which
    application was refused on 31st March 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and her appeal was heard on 16th October 2015 by
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Obhi,  sitting  at  Sheldon  Court,
    Birmingham. Judge Obhi considered the appeal having regard to  Appendix
    FM and paragraph 276ADE but it was conceded that the  only  basis  upon
    which the appeal could succeed, if it was to succeed  at  all,  was  by
    reference to the wider application of Article 8.

 3.  Judge  Obhi  considered  the  background  and  the   nature   of   any
    relationships which the Appellant might still have in her home  country
    and in that regard she did not find the  Appellant  a  wholly  reliable
    witness.  Judge Obhi records that it was only  a  private  life  appeal
    under Article  8  that  was  pursued  and  she  considered  the  appeal
    therefore on that basis.  She came to  the  view  that  there  were  no
    unusual or compelling circumstances which  would  put  the  balance  of
    interests in the Appellant's favour  of  being  allowed  to  remain  as
    opposed to  the  factors  which  were  to  be  taken  into  account  in
    considering the public interest though Judge  Obhi  was  only  able  to
    point, at paragraph 20, to paragraph 117B(1) as the factor pointing  to
    there being  a  public  interest  i.e.  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls.

 4. Not content with the decision to dismiss the appeal,  by  Notice  dated
    8th November 2015 the Appellant  made  application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Various grounds were  relied  upon;  the
    grounds run to some ten paragraphs.  The application was considered  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison. She limited the basis
    upon which the matter could be brought before the Upper Tribunal to two
    issues. Firstly, whether the judge had erred in failing  to  take  into
    account the fact that on the Appellant's case she had four  sisters  in
    the United Kingdom and secondly, and more importantly, for the  purpose
    of the matter which is now before me, failing to consider  Section  117
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  I am grateful  to
    Mr Bramble for reminding me that the consideration of Section  117  was
    not confined only to Section (B) but in fact to  consideration  of  the
    whole of that section.

 5. Under cover of a letter of 25 April 2016, the Secretary of State  filed
    a response pursuant to Rule 24 of the 2008 Procedure Rules.  I  do  not
    need to deal with the issue in relation to  the  four  sisters  because
    that was not a matter which was pursued  before  me.   The  appeal  was
    confined to Section 117.  As to Section  117  the  Secretary  of  State
    relied on the guidance in the case of Dube (Sections 117A-117D)  [2015]
    UKUT 00090 (IAC) and on the basis that the judge found that there  were
    no compelling circumstances which would outweigh  the  public  interest
    with little weight being attached to private life at the time when  her
    immigration status was precarious; it is contended that the judge  made
    the right decision.

 6. Although perhaps straining at the grant because the issue  in  relation
    to ten years was excluded specifically by Judge  Grant-Hutchison  I  am
    persuaded that by reference to Section 117A the point which was put  on
    behalf of the Appellant is one which comes before me and  one  which  I
    ought properly to consider because it goes  to  the  issue  of  whether
    there was sufficient consideration given all relevant  factors  in  the
    article 8 ECHR assessment.

 7. The original application made to the Secretary of State was made  under
    cover of a letter of 3rd March 2015. It makes clear that  part  of  the
    application was based upon the Appellant having  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom, lawfully, since 2004 and would like, it was said, "to continue
    to live with her family here in the United Kingdom".

 8. It  is  common  ground  that  were  the  application  made  purely  for
    indefinite leave following  ten  years'  continuous  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom she could not succeed under the Rules. That was  because
    she did not demonstrate sufficient knowledge  of  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom, as required by rule 276B(iv).

 9. The application was considered by the  Respondent  and  in  a  decision
    dated 31st March 2015 she looked at paragraph 276ADE and  then  to  the
    wider application of Article 8 ECHR but  focusing  on  the  family  and
    private life refused the application.

10. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. At  paragraph  3  of
    her grounds the Appellant stated:

         "The Appellant also satisfies paragraph 276A(1) of the  Immigration
         Rules; she entered the United Kingdom since 2004  legally  and  has
         since been renewing her visa in time."

    The Secretary of State was therefore on notice, as was  the  judge,  of
    the issues which were for consideration.

11. Paragraph 276A(1)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  deals  with  an
    extension of stay, rather than indefinite leave, provides:

         "The requirement to be met by a person seeking an extension of stay
         on the ground of long residence in the United Kingdom is  that  the
         applicant meets each of the requirements in  paragraph  276B(i)  to
         (ii) and (v)".

12. Paragraph 276A(2) provides:

         "An extension of stay on the ground of long residence in the United
         Kingdom may be  granted  for  a  period  not  exceeding  two  years
         provided  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
         requirement in paragraph 276A(1) is met and the person granted such
         an extension of stay following an application made before 9th  July
         2012 will remain subject to the Rules in force on 8th July 2012."

13. Rule 276A(2) clearly provides a discretion for the Secretary of  State.
    It is the Secretary of State who is to  be  satisfied  and  if  she  is
    satisfied she then may grant an extension of  stay  not  exceeding  two
    years.  When one looks at the Immigration Rules the purpose,  it  would
    seem, is to provide time, in the Respondent's discretion, for the  very
    test which the Appellant did not have.

14. The issue for me is whether the judge made a material error of law.  In
    my judgment, the judge failed adequately to have  regard  to  the  case
    being advanced.

15. I have to be careful in approaching this appeal to remind  myself  that
    the wider application of Article 8 ECHR is  not  a  general  dispensing
    power.  There are Immigration Rules which meet various mischiefs and it
    is only where there is a sufficient gap between the  Immigration  Rules
    and the wider application of Article 8 that it is appropriate  to  look
    outside.  In my judgment given the opportunity given to  the  Secretary
    of State to consider whether or not there had been  ten  years'  lawful
    residence, which opportunity was not taken by the  Secretary  of  State
    notwithstanding the fact that she was, I find, put on clear notice that
    the point was being taken and therefore the judge also failed  to  have
    regard  to  that.   There  was   a   significant   oversight   in   the
    proportionality balancing exercise to which Section 117 relates.

16. Article 8 was engaged and no one has sought to suggest to  me  that  it
    was not.  Where a person meets the requirements of an Immigration  Rule
    that is a significant factor to be taken into account  in  weighing  up
    the public interest considerations  against  the  competing  interests.
    The only factor in this case which the judge was able to point  to  was
    the maintenance of effective immigration control being  in  the  public
    interest.  The  other  factors  of  117B  all  weighed  either  in  the
    Appellant's favour or more particularly did not count against  her.   I
    exclude from that any consideration of Section 117B(6).

17. There was therefore in my judgment a material  error  of  law.  Whether
    that error is identified as a failure by the judge to recognise in  the
    proportionality assessment that the Respondent had failed to  turn  her
    mind to her discretion, or that it would be disproportionate to require
    the Appellant to leave the United Kingdom whilst the Respondent decided
    whether or not to exercise her  discretion,  matters  not  because  the
    result is the same.

18. I am assisted in my approach to this matter by the guidance in the case
    of Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307(IAC):



      1.  If a decision maker in the  purported  exercise  of  a  discretion
         vested in him noted his function and what was required to  be  done
         when fulfilling it and then proceeded to reach a decision  on  that
         basis, the decision  is  a  lawful  one  and  the  Tribunal  cannot
         intervene in the absence of a statutory power to  decide  that  the
         discretion should have been exercised differently (see  s  86(3)(b)
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).


      2.  Where the decision maker  has  failed  to  exercise  a  discretion
         vested in him, the Tribunal's jurisdiction on appeal is limited  to
         a decision that the failure renders the decision 'not in accordance
         with the law' (s 86(3)(a)). Because the discretion is vested in the
         Executive, the appropriate course  will  be  for  the  Tribunal  to
         require the decision maker to  complete  his  task  by  reaching  a
         lawful decision on the outstanding application, along the lines set
         out in SSHD v Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148. In such a case, it  makes  no
         difference whether there is such a statutory power as is  mentioned
         in paragraph 1 above.


      3.  If the decision maker has lawfully exercised  his  discretion  and
         the Tribunal has such a statutory power, the Tribunal  must  either
         (i) uphold the  decision  maker's  decision  (if  the  Tribunal  is
         unpersuaded that the decision maker's discretion should  have  been
         exercised differently); or (ii) reach a different decision  in  the
         exercise of its own discretion.

19. The second paragraph the headnote is apposite. It is important to  note
    the date of the decision in this appeal, being before the  coming  into
    force of the "new regime".

20. I set aside the decision and re-make it.  In re-making the  decision  I
    put into the mix the fact that there is a discretion in  the  Secretary
    of State to give to the Appellant a limited period of  leave  in  order
    that she might take the test.  In this case it appears the Secretary of
    State has not considered that possibility and in my judgment  it  would
    be disproportionate to  require  the  Appellant  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom until the Secretary of  State  has  considered  her  discretion
    which she retains.

21. It follows that I allow the appeal on the basis that  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State was unlawful.

22. Though I indicated to the parties at the hearing what my decision would
    be, I also informed them that it  may  be  that  I  might  revisit  the
    reasoning on the basis that it might have been better expressed. I have
    done that but the effect of this decision is the same as  indicated  to
    the parties.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The  Decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is remade  such  that  the  appeal  is  allowed  to  the
limited extent that the decision was not in accordance with the law  and  is
to be remitted to the Respondent.



Signed                              Date 6th June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
