








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13626/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 29 January 2015                  |On: 4 March2015                      |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                               Mr Momith Ahmed
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T Islam, counsel (instructed by Citylink
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pacey  dismissing  the  appellant's  claim
    against the refusal by  the  respondent  dated  3  March  2014  of  the
    appellant's application for leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    student migrant under the immigration rules. The appellant is a citizen
    of Bangladesh.

 2. She found that the appellant did not have leave to study at London East
    End College - LEEC - and had without good reason failed to  notify  the
    Home Office of the change. He must therefore "be deemed to have  chosen
    to study without leave." [17]

 3. The appellant's contention that Universal Professional  and  Vocational
    College - UBVC - was the same as LEEC had not  been  supported  by  any
    independent evidence that they are the same college. Nor was  it  clear
    why a single college would choose to use two different names.

 4. She also dismissed his appeal on human rights grounds.

 5. On 18 November 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge Southern stated  in  granting
    the appellant permission to appeal that it ought not to be difficult to
    establish whether there  was  in  fact  a  condition  attached  to  the
    appellant's leave which his course of studies, following the closure of
    the initial college, placed him in breach. If the respondent were  able
    to establish that there was indeed a condition that was breached by the
    appellant when he moved to a different college, such evidence could  be
    submitted. On that basis, permission was granted.

 6. Judge Southern stated that given the failure of the appellant to inform
    the respondent of his change of college, the fairness point  raised  in
    the grounds "is hopeless", as was the ground founded upon Article 8  of
    the Human Rights Convention. Although not limiting  the  scope  of  the
    grant of permission, there is nothing  more  to  be  said  about  those
    grounds and the appellant can expect them to be rejected summarily.

 7. Mr Islam submitted that on proper analysis  of  s.50  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, a condition  restricting  studies
    may  be  imposed,  signifying   that   no   mandatory   condition   was
    automatically imposed.

 8. He further submitted that the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Bhimani
    (Student: Switching institution: Requirements) [2014] UKUT 00516  (IAC)
    "was clearly wrongly decided". That was because the Immigration  (Leave
    to Enter and Remain) Order 2000 makes it plain that a condition must be
    expressly endorsed. The rules are not an  express  endorsement  of  the
    condition on the entry clearance "vignette". There was  accordingly  no
    condition restricting studies.

 9. Mr Islam accepted that the reported decision in Bhimani was binding.

10. He also submitted that the respondent ought to have given the appellant
    the 60 days following the revocation of his  Tier  4  sponsor  licence.
    Accordingly,  the  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the   law,
    irrespective of whether he may have breached a condition at some  other
    point.

11. Finally, the appellant did not breach any  condition  or  circumstances
    where he studied at a "sister" or "partner" organisation of the initial
    sponsor college. He relied on paragraph  245ZW  (7)  (iv)  (1)  of  the
    Immigration Rules where it is provided that there is  no  study  except
    study at the institution that the Confirmation of Acceptance of Studies
    Checking Service records as the migrant's sponsor, or where the migrant
    was awarded points for a visa letter, unless the migrant is studying at
    an institution which is a partner institution of the migrant's sponsor.

12. Further, or alternatively, he relied on information  from  his  current
    sponsor college which had been licensed  by  the  UKBA.  If  he  "truly
    needed to make a new  application"  then  surely  his  current  sponsor
    college ought to have requested and required him to make one. The blame
    ultimately lies with the college and  the  respondent  who  issued  the
    sponsor licence to the college.

13. He also submitted that the respondent has not considered  or  exercised
    discretion under paragraph 322(3) of the rules. Accordingly, the appeal
    should in any event  be  remitted  to  the  respondent,  and  that  the
    appellant awaits a lawful decision relating to  the  exercise  of  that
    discretion.

14. He submitted at paragraph 22 of his skeleton argument that the issue of
    fairness and the respondent's failure to grant the  60  days  following
    the revocation of the appellant's initial sponsor has an important part
    to play in terms of the exercise of discretion.

15. Mr Melvin on behalf of the respondent relied on the reasons for refusal
    and submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made no errors of law.
    The respondent  noted  that  the  appellant  had  provided  documentary
    evidence showing that he had been studying with sponsors 'of  which  he
    did not have permission to attend', and the institutes did not meet the
    exception of being highly trusted sponsors at  the  time  when  he  was
    subject to s.50 by virtue of extant leave of the secretary of state.

16. It is common ground that the appellant accepted that he had transferred
    to two separate colleges and they were not colleges for  which  he  was
    granted leave to enter. Furthermore,  he  had  not  informed  the  Home
    Office or made any other applications  for  leave  to  study  at  those
    colleges.

17. He referred to the grant of  permission  to  the  effect  that  if  the
    respondent was able to establish that there was indeed a condition that
    was breached by the appellant when he moved  to  a  different  college,
    evidence in that regard could be submitted.

18. He submitted that it  is  clear  that  the  legislation  underpins  the
    immigration rules restricting studies in  the  UK.  As  an  intelligent
    person the appellant should have been aware of the conditions  attached
    to his leave, set out in  the  rules  and  underlying  legislation.  If
    unclear, he should have taken advice at the relevant time.




    Assessment

19. I have had regard to the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Bhimani,
    supra. In an extensive analysis, Upper Tribunal Judge Allen noted  that
    it was clear from s.3(1)(c) of the Immigration Act 1971 that  a  person
    given limited leave to enter or remain in the  UK  may  be  given  that
    leave subject to conditions which include  the  provision  inserted  by
    s.50 of the 2009 Act, namely a condition restricting his studies in the
    UK.

20. He referred to s.3(2) of  the  1971  Act  which  establishes  that  the
    Secretary of State shall  from  time  to  time  lay  before  Parliament
    statements of the rules or changes in the rules laid down by her as  to
    the practice to be followed in the administration of the Act for, inter
    alia, regulating the entry into and stay in the UK of persons  required
    by the Act to have leave to enter, including any rules as to the period
    for which leave is to be given and the conditions  to  be  attached  in
    different circumstances [22].

21. It is in this light that paragraph 245ZW (c)(iv)(1)  has  to  be  seen.
    That is a clear example of a provision made in accordance with s.3  (2)
    of the 1971 Act [24].

22. Although s.4 (1) of the Act requires that powers under the  Act  giving
    or refusing leave to enter the UK are to  be  exercised  by  notice  in
    writing given to the person, the sub-section goes on to make  it  clear
    that the requirement of notice in writing  operates  "unless  otherwise
    allowed by or under this Act," which entails, inter alia, that s.4 must
    be read in conjunction with s.3 (2), itself enabling provisions such as
    paragraph 245ZW(c)(iv)(1).

23. Accordingly, where a student chooses to study  at  another  institution
    holding a different sponsor licence number from that of the institution
    where he was granted leave to remain to study, he is required to make a
    fresh application for leave to remain.

24. I do not regard the  decision  and  the  reasoning  in  Bhimani  to  be
    "clearly wrong" as asserted by Mr Islam. I respectfully find  that  the
    reasoning is persuasive and that the decision is correct.

25. I find that the appellant has not produced  any  evidence  that  he  is
    studying at an institution  which  is  a  partner  institution  of  his
    sponsor. That submission was considered by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pacey. The appellant provided no independent evidence that UPVC was the
    same as LEEC. Nor has any evidence been subsequently provided  to  that
    effect. The only evidence  before  the  Tribunal  was  the  appellant's
    assertion that UVPC was the same as LEEC [10].

26. The appellant came to the UK as a  student  with  leave  valid  from  3
    January  2010  to  14  October  2013.  The  sponsor  was   Bedfordshire
    Educational Academy and he planned to study for a diploma in Management
    from March 2014 to February 2015.

27. The respondent noted that he had last been granted leave to study  with
    Crown International College (CIC). The documents submitted  in  support
    of his current application showed that he had studied LEEC between June
    2012  and  June  2013.  He  had  also  submitted  certificates  showing
    attendance at UPVC, dated 14 June 2013.

28. As he had provided documentary evidence that he had been studying  with
    the sponsor colleges, at which he did not have permission to attend and
    neither institution had Highly  Trusted  Sponsor  status,  he  had  not
    satisfied the relevant requirements.

29. Mr Islam also sought to contend that the Home Office  made  changes  to
    the sponsor licence requirements on 21 April 2011.  That  introduced  a
    requirement for all Tier 4 sponsors to become Highly Trusted  Sponsors.
    If the sponsors had a licence that was granted under the guidance  that
    was in place before 21 April 2011 and  they  were  not  highly  trusted
    sponsors or did not meet new  educational  oversight  requirements,  or
    both, they were allowed to stay on the Tier 4 sponsor register, but the
    Home Office limited the number of CASs they could assign.

30. However, Mr Melvin submitted that the relevant changes  relied  on  had
    not been produced. Only the Tier 4 policy guidance version at July 2011
    was produced. Nor had the facts relating to paragraph 20  of  the  July
    guidance been established.

31. Insofar as the ground relating to unfairness is concerned, Judge  Pacey
    dealt with the appellant's contentions from paragraph 6 to  10  of  the
    determination. He claimed that CIC told him that their licence had been
    suspended and that he would transfer to a college in London. He had not
    informed the Home Office that he had transferred to a different college
    as he said he was "new here" and did not know everything, and had  been
    asked to go to LEEC by his previous college.

32. When asked why, after he went  to  that  college,  he  did  not  submit
    another application, he said he waited for the Home Office. When it was
    pointed out that the Home Office could not contact  him  if  they  were
    unaware that he had moved  colleges,  he  said  that  it  was  not  his
    responsibility to do so.

33. Judge Pacey rejected his contention that  he  was  not  aware  that  he
    needed to tell the Home Office if he changed college. The documentation
    he was given would have made this clear as would the  guidance  on  the
    Home Office website. As an intelligent person,  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect him to have realised that he had been granted leave to study  at
    a particular college and therefore when he was no longer able to do so,
    he should make enquiries as to what he should then do  in  relation  to
    his immigration status.

34. The remaining issue on the appeal is the exercise of  discretion  under
    paragraph 322(3). Both representatives accept that this was  not  done.
    Accordingly there has been a failure by the  respondent  to  appreciate
    that she had a discretion to exercise which she had failed to exercise.
    It is evident from the refusal decision dated 3  March  2014  that  the
    respondent had failed to exercise discretion.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  is  set  aside  to  the
    limited extent that it remains with the respondent  to  make  a  lawful
    decision under paragraph 322(3) of the Immigration Rules, HC395.

    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed        Dated: 2/3/2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
