
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13330/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2015                           | On 9 February 2015           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           MS AFOLAKE KABIRAT YISA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Spio-Aidoo, R Spio and Co Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Ms Yisa, the Respondent to this appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  a
    national of Nigeria. Her date of birth is recorded as 27 May 1982.

 2. Ms Yisa claimed to have entered the United Kingdom on 17 May 2001.   On
    12 August 2009 application was made for an EEA Residence Card based  on
    her marriage to a German national.  On 3 September 2010 a decision  was
    made to refuse that application because the German identification  card
    was said previously to have been reported lost or stolen.   On  6  July
    2012  Ms  Yisa  made  application  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on
    compassionate grounds.  That application was refused on 24 July 2013 on
    the basis that she did  not  meet  the  Immigration  Rules.   That  was
    followed by application for judicial review.  That was refused.  On  21
    January 2014 Ms Yisa was served with the Form IS151A.  On  5  May  2014
    her representative submitted  a  request  to  the  Secretary  of  State
    inviting consideration pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.   On 7 March 2014  a
    decision was made to refuse the application and to give directions  for
    removal pursuant to Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.
    Ms Yisa appealed.  Her appeal was heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Phillips sitting at Taylor House on 8 October 2014.

 3. Ms Yisa advanced a case based on a fear of her family in  Nigeria.   It
    was her case that she had fled  because  she  was  at  risk  of  female
    genital mutilation ("FGM").  It was also her case that her family  were
    intent, at one time, on her marrying an elderly man and consequent upon
    the decision that she made to leave Nigeria, would now would be at risk
    were she to be return.  It was still further her  case  that  when  she
    arrived in the United Kingdom she did so with the help of an agent  who
    was desirous of her turning to prostitution.  Ms Yisa did not,  at  any
    time claim refugee status; she was in fear of being returned  were  she
    not believed.  The application  made  in  2009  on  the  basis  of  her
    marriage to a German national was one in which, on her case her husband
    deserted her about three months after the marriage but now she was in a
    relationship which began in  July  2010.   Her  current  partner  is  a
    British citizen who has lived in the United  Kingdom  for  twenty  four
    years.  He hales from Nigeria and has  returned  for  visits  on  three
    occasions.  It was part of her case, in addition to those other factors
    mentioned, that she could not return to  Nigeria  because  her  husband
    would be at risk because  of  his  own  family  problems  concerning  a
    Kingship dispute.

 4. Having heard submissions from both parties, Judge Phillips allowed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

 5. Not content with that decision, by Notice dated 12  November  2014  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 6. The  Secretary  of  State  submitted  that  there  were  no  sufficient
    insurmountable obstacles to family life between Ms Yisa and her partner
    continuing in Nigeria noting that Ms Yisa's  partner  had  returned  to
    Nigeria on at least three occasions  when  he  had  been  able  to  re-
    establish contact with his mother and brother.  In those  circumstances
    the Secretary of State submitted that it was not open to Judge Phillips
    to find any continuing risk.

 7. As to Article 8 generally, the Secretary of State pointed alternatively
    to those factors which, by Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, Judge Phillips was to  have  regard  and  entirely
    reasonable to expect Ms Yisa to return to Nigeria and make  application
    to return to the United Kingdom from there.

 8. On 16 December 2014, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cruthers  granted
    permission.  The  basis  upon  which  permission  was  granted  was  as
    follows:

           "The grounds on which the Respondent [Secretary of State]  seeks
           permission to appeal complaint primarily that the finding as  to
           there being  insurmountable  obstacles  to  [Ms  Yisa]  and  her
           partner continuing their family life  in  Nigeria  is  a  flawed
           finding.   Bound  up  with  the  complaint  just  referred   to,
           [Secretary of State] asserts that for Article 8 purposes  it  is
           reasonable to expect [Ms Yisa] and her partner to continue their
           family life in her country of nationality [Nigeria] - especially
           given the immigration history of [Ms Yisa]..."

 9. Ms Everett took a very realistic approach to this appeal.   It  was  of
    note that Judge Phillips  accepted  the  evidence  with  which  he  was
    presented and indeed to a very high standard since he used  terms  such
    as, "I do not have any reason to doubt the evidence...". Still  further
    it is of note at paragraph 37 that Judge Phillips said:

           "I note that the credibility of [Ms Yisa] and  her  partner  was
           not challenged..."

10. Ms Everett questioned whether it was correct to say that there were  no
    credibility issues but she quite properly accepted that that was not  a
    matter that had been raised  in  the  grounds.   Further  and  of  some
    significance in considering the merits of the appeal before me, was the
    fact that the Secretary of State had relied in the grounds on the  fact
    that Ms Yisa's partner had  returned  to  Nigeria  on  three  occasions
    without any apparent consequence.  That was relied upon in  support  of
    the assertion that there was no impediment to Ms Yisa and  her  partner
    returning to Nigeria.  What appears to have been overlooked however was
    that at paragraph 20 of the  Decision  and  Reasons  was  reference  to
    evidence given by Mr Odukoya that when he had returned  to  Nigeria  he
    had done so in disguise.  As I have already said, credibility  is  said
    not to have been challenged and that statement  by  the  judge  is  not
    something which is now challenged in the grounds  bringing  the  matter
    before me.  Ms Everett accepted in the course of  submissions  that  it
    may well be that the author of the grounds had overlooked what was said
    at paragraph 20 but in any event on the issue of credibility, given the
    standard of proof which the judge applied, Ms  Everett  again  accepted
    that there was little that she would have been able to say with respect
    to the positive findings made.

11. Once it was accepted that there was a finding that Ms Yisa would be  at
    danger were she to return to Nigeria and that the same was true of  her
    partner, the eventual findings  of  Judge  Phillips,  in  my  judgment,
    become unimpeachable.  Mr Odukoya is a British citizen who is in  work.
    It is not suggested that Ms Yisa was in anyway a burden on the state.

12. Judge Phillips reminded himself of the guidance in the case of  Shahzad
    (Article 8: Legitimate Aim [2014] UK  UT00085;  Nagre  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720; Gulshan (Article 8 - New
    Rules - Correct Approach) [2013] UK UT640; Huang  [2007]  UK  HL11;  SS
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWHC Civ 550; Beoku-Betts [2008] UK HL39 and Chikwamba
    [2008] UKHL 40

13. In my judgment reading the Statement of Reasons, there is no basis  for
    saying that Judge Phillips did not direct  himself  appropriately.   He
    made a finding that the established family life  of  Ms  Yisa  and  her
    partner could not reasonably be expected  to  be  enjoyed  outside  the
    United Kingdom given that Nigeria was not an option.  He accepted there
    was the remaining risk and went further to say that  although  Ms  Yisa
    had not claimed asylum, he nevertheless came close to finding that  she
    was a refugee.

14. The evidence which was given before the First-tier  Tribunal  came  not
    only from Ms Yisa and her  partner  but  also  from  the  uncle  of  Mr
    Odukoya.  The judge had regard to  all  the  material  facts  including
    those which were adverse  to  a  positive  finding  such  as  the  poor
    immigration history but still having carried out the balancing exercise
    as he was required to do made  a  finding  which  in  my  judgment  was
    entirely open to him.  The finding was neither irrational nor perverse.

15. For the avoidance of  doubt  therefore  the  finding  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside  the  United
    Kingdom was a finding that was entirely open to the judge so  that  the
    finding that the appeal succeeded under the Immigration Rules was  open
    to the judge. Even if there had been suitability requirements, not  met
    under the rules, any error would not have been material because it  was
    open to the judge, on the facts of this case, to look to  the  position
    outside of the Immigration Rules having regard to the wider application
    of Article 8 given the significant findings that were made with respect
    to the risks to both Ms Yisa and her partner.

16. Ms Everett again conceded that on  the  facts  of  this  case,  without
    conceding the appeal itself, that this was a case in  which  the  judge
    was entitled to look to the wider application of Article 8  though  she
    still invited me to allow the appeal.  As it was I detect no  error  of
    law in the approach taken and  in  reality  the  grounds  amount  to  a
    disagreement with the findings of fact.

Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal is affirmed.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



