
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13695/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 July 2016                                |On 12 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR MUHAMMAD SHOAIB
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tony Melvin (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Chuckooa (Just & Brown Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, a national of Pakistan born on 2 December 1988,  as
    the appellant herein.  He arrived in this country on 11 April 2011 with
    leave to remain as a student.  This leave  was  extended  to  20  March
    2015.  On 16 February 2015 he applied for leave to remain  as  a  carer
    for his grandmother relying on the principle  established  in  Zambrano
    [2011] EUECJ C-34/09 as incorporated into UK law by Regulations 15A and
    18A in the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

2.   The appellant's application was refused on 23 March 2015.

3.   The appeal came before a First-tier Judge on  11  November  2015.   The
    judge summarised  the  material  points  of  the  appellant's  case  as
    follows:

         "10. He lived with his grandmother upon entering  the  UK  and  has
             lived there since that time both  as  a  student  and  as  her
             carer.


         11.  Mrs Asghar is a British citizen who has been in the UK  for  a
             long number of years.


         12.  The appellant pursued his studies as well as taking some  care
             of his grandmother until toward the end of 2014 as he puts  it
             or, as for the past two or three years as his grandmother puts
             it, he has become increasingly her full-time carer.


         13.  Evidence of Mrs Asghar's doctor is contained in the bundle  at
             pages 6 to 7.  They give a picture of a lady who is in a  very
             dependent state and this was confirmed by Mrs  Asghar  herself
             when she came with the assistance of the  appellant  into  the
             courtroom to give evidence.


         14.  She is described in the medical report as  being  an  elderly,
             illiterate and frail lady of 70 years of age.


         15.  She has multiple pains in the joints of her hands, back, knees
             and neck due to  widespread  osteoarthritis.   She  is  having
             recurrent falls, at present as the doctor reports getting  two
             or three falls per  week.   Social  Services  have  done  home
             adaptations such as bed railing and raised bath seats.  Due to
             her chronic disabilities she is described as being  unable  to
             perform normal day-to-day activities of daily living.


         16.  The appellant is described by  the  doctor  as  her  full-time
             carer.  He does her shopping, cooking, washing, house cleaning
             and taking her  to  hospital  and  surgery  appointments.   He
             reminds her about her medication and makes telephone calls  on
             her behalf due to her inability  to  communicate  properly  in
             English.


         17.  She is dependent upon the appellant for her personal care  day
             and night and for emotional support.  There is then a  summary
             of her physical problems and a  list  of  fifteen  medications
             which she has to take.


         18.  The appellant described the assistance which he has to give to
             his grandmother.  Because of the problems with her  hands  she
             cannot hold things properly and he has therefore to  help  her
             with almost every activity in the house.


         19.  He takes her to appointments with her doctor.  He has to  take
             her to the bathroom and take her from  the  bathroom  although
             she is able at present to cope with dealing with  use  of  the
             lavatory on her own once she has been taken to the bathroom.


         20.  He helps her with bathing by getting her into the bath and  as
             he puts it washing her head whilst she washes the rest of  her
             body.


         21.  At night time his presence is important because she  tends  to
             get into an agitated state  if  she  wakes  up  and  sometimes
             chokes in the night and he has to be within call to  help  her
             with these difficulties.


         22.  She would not be able to take her medication without his  help
             with regard to giving it to her physically and  reminding  her
             of what needs to be taken and when.


         23.  He undertakes her clothes washing and her shopping and has  to
             deal with communications by people who telephone.  If he  goes
             out he has to leave her in the care of a friend  or  neighbour
             as she cannot safely be left on her own.


         24.  Both the appellant and Mrs Asghar said that if  the  appellant
             had to leave the UK she, Mrs Asghar, would  then  have  to  go
             back to Pakistan where she has three daughters  including  the
             appellant's mother.  She does not however wish to do  that  if
             it  can  be  avoided   because   she   finds   that   physical
             circumstances and in particular food in Pakistan do not  agree
             with her.  In addition to that it could be  added  that  as  a
             British citizen she has understandably a desire to live in the
             UK.


         25.  Mrs Asghar has a brother and sister living  in  the  UK.   The
             brother lives near Heathrow Airport, the sister near  Gatwick.
             She sees them very seldom.  In the case of the  brother  about
             once per year at the time of Eid.  She has not seen the sister
             for a period of some two years.  There is however some monthly
             contact by way of telephone with the brother.  Neither of them
             would wish to be involved with  the  care  of  the  appellant.
             They each have families of their own.


         26.  In addition to that, it is stated by the appellant,  and  this
             is echoed by the doctor in his  report,  that  Mrs  Asghar  is
             dependent upon him for emotional  care  and  without  him  she
             would effectively be alone in the UK with her disabilities and
             her difficulty of communicating in English.


         27.  The respondent's case was presented very competently and in an
             appropriate manner by the respondent's Presenting Officer  who
             relied on the contents of the refusal letter and  pointed  out
             that no evidence has been adduced  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
             appellant as to the availability of care for  his  grandmother
             in the  UK  through  agencies  such  as  the  National  Health
             Service, the Social Services or by enquires about for  example
             the possibility of her being accommodated in a care home.


         28.  The respondent, although of course not under any duty to do so
             because the burden of proof  is  on  the  appellant,  did  not
             adduce any evidence of the availability of Social Services  or
             other help for the care of Mrs Asghar".

4.   The judge  then  made  findings  and  concluded  his  determination  as
    follows:

         "30. I find that the appellant is a truthful  witness  because  his
             evidence was consistent and because I am satisfied having made
             enquiries into the matter that he was a genuine student in the
             UK before finding himself in the position of being a carer for
             his grandmother.


         31.  I find that Mrs Asghar's state of health is such as  that  she
             needs a full-time carer and this is amply borne out  not  only
             by the appellant's evidence but also by the  evidence  of  the
             doctor referred to above.


         32.  I am satisfied that Mrs Asghar has no family  in  the  UK  who
             could assist her apart from the appellant.


         33.  I take account of the fact that as  well  as  purely  physical
             care, even if that were available from the Social Services  or
             otherwise, she does need, particularly at her age and with her
             vulnerability,  emotional  care  and  only  the  appellant  is
             available to provide it to her.


         34.  I therefore consider the requirements of Regulation  15A(4)(a)
             and it is clear to me that the appellant is the primary  carer
             of a British citizen, that the  relevant  British  citizen  is
             residing in the UK and that the remaining question is  whether
             Mrs Asghar would be unable to reside in the UK or  in  another
             EEA state if the appellant were required to leave the UK.


         35.  I find that the word 'unable' reflects not  simply  the  legal
             ability or lack of ability  to  remain  in  the  UK  but  also
             physical and practical ability or lack of it.


         36.  I find that she would be unable to obtain the sort of 24  hour
             per day care including emotional care which is provided by the
             appellant from any other agency.


         37.  I therefore find bearing in mind that she said  she  would  be
             forced to go back to Pakistan if the appellant were  to  leave
             this country that she would be unable to reside in the  UK  on
             her own without the appellant".


5.   The judge  accordingly  concluded  that  the  appellant  satisfied  the
    provisions of Regulation 15A.

6.   The Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal.   Permission
    to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal.  The application  was
    renewed and Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Keki?  granted  permission  in  the
    following terms:

         "It is argued that the judge misinterpreted Regulation  15(4A)  and
         applied his own legally unsustainable interpretation of 'unable' in
         paragraph 35 of the determination.  The respondent relies on Ayinde
         and Thinjom (Carers - Reg.15A - Zambrano) [2015] UKUT  00560  (IAC)
         and argues that the issue before the judge was not whether the  EEA
         national would obtain the same kind of physical and emotional  care
         from someone else but whether she would be forced to leave the  EEA
         if the appellant was removed.  It is further argued that the  judge
         was required to critically analyse the reality of  any  claim  that
         the EEA national would have to leave and  that  his  assessment  in
         that respect was deficient".

7.   Mr Melvin relied on the  grounds  and  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    focused solely on the evidence given  at  the  hearing.   The  critical
    question was whether the EEA national would be forced to leave the EEA.
     It was essential that the claim was analysed critically as established
    in Ayinde.  It was said that  the  appellant's  grandmother  could  not
    function without 24 hour care.  However the appellant had been a  full-
    time student before.  There was no evidence from Social Services and it
    was acknowledged by the judge in paragraph 28 of his decision that  the
    respondent was under no duty to remedy that deficiency.

8.   The  critical  findings  made  in  the  determination  were  scant  and
    unsustainable.  The determination was  materially  flawed  in  law  and
    there had been no further evidence supplied  and  no  response  to  the
    grounds or a skeleton argument.  The only evidence that  had  been  put
    forward was a GP's letter and there was nothing from  Social  Services.
    There was no evidence of any efforts being made to ascertain  the  care
    that could be provided  for  the  appellant's  grandmother  by  council
    services.

9.   Mr Chuckooa submitted that  the  judge  had  referred  to  the  medical
    evidence in paragraphs 13 to 15 of the determination.  Mrs  Asghar  was
    frail and had had multiple falls.  There had  been  adaptation  to  the
    home by Social Services.  The  appellant  had  been  described  by  the
    doctor as his grandmother's full-time carer.

10.  If the appellant were removed she would be looked  after  by  different
    staff and would not receive the same care as she had received  for  the
    previous four years.  If, for example, she needed water she  could  not
    communicate in English.  The appellant also provided emotional support.
     His grandmother was comfortable with the care she  was  receiving  and
    would be prejudiced by the appellant's removal.  Care would not  be  on
    the same basis if she had to  leave.   She  might  catch  illnesses  in
    Pakistan.  There was a rota system in Social Services support  and  she
    would not be in the same situation as she was at  present  and  it  was
    inappropriate to reverse the First-tier Judge's decision.

11.  In reply Mr Melvin relied on the points that he  had  made.   The  test
    was one of inability rather than what was the most beneficial  outcome.
    The grandmother would not be  forced  to  return  to  Pakistan  in  the
    absence of the appellant.  The  determination  had  not  been  properly
    reasoned.

12.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I can  of
    course only interfere with the judge's decision if  it  was  materially
    flawed in law.

13.  Regulation 15A provides  so  far  as  is  material  that  a  person  is
    entitled to a derivative right to reside in the United Kingdom  for  so
    long as he satisfies the relevant criteria.  The criterion at issue  in
    this case is set out in paragraph (4A)(iii).  As Mr Melvin  submits  in
    the circumstances  of  this  case  it  must  be  established  that  the
    appellant's grandmother "would be unable to reside  in  the  UK  or  in
    another EEA state" if the appellant were required to leave.

14.  In the case of Ayinde the Tribunal state as follows  in  the  following
    extract from the head note:

         "(iii)   The requirement is not  met  by  an  assumption  that  the
             citizen will leave and does not  involve  a  consideration  of
             whether it would be reasonable for  the  carer  to  leave  the
             United  Kingdom.   A  comparison  of  the  British   citizen's
             standard of living or care if the appellant remains or departs
             is material only in the context of whether the British citizen
             will leave the United Kingdom.


         (iv) The Tribunal is required to examine critically a claim that  a
             British citizen will  leave  the  Union  if  the  benefits  he
             currently receives by remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
             unlikely to be matched in the country in which  he  claims  he
             will be forced to settle".


    In paragraph 50 of the decision the Upper Tribunal  Judge  stated  that
    there was no justification for the decision of the First-tier Judge  to
    exclude from consideration Social Services support.  The  Secretary  of
    State had properly argued in the refusal letter in that  case  that  if
    the appellant were not present in the United Kingdom to  care  for  his
    mother "she could procure assistance from other sources with  the  help
    of Social Services.  Her ability to do this was a  vital  consideration
    in the appeal".  In paragraph 55 the Tribunal states  as  follows  "the
    differential in the care provided by a family member  acting  as  carer
    and the standard of care provided by Social Services, care agencies  or
    the NHS does not engage the Zambrano principle ..."


         In paragraph 57 of its decision the Tribunal states as follows:


             "The Tribunal is entitled to look critically at a claim that a
             person will be forced to leave the EU because of a refusal  by
             the national authorities to grant his carer leave  to  remain.
             The reason for such a  critical  look  is  because  the  claim
             advanced will be the very opposite: it will be  a  claim  that
             the carer be permitted to remain and the British citizen  will
             not be required to move.  Mr Knafler himself referred to  this
             in the course of argument as a paradoxical claim".


         In paragraph 58 the Tribunal refers to the fact that there will  be
         "a significant evidential hurdle in attempting to make out  a  case
         that the British citizen will, as  a  matter  of  fact,  leave  the
         United Kingdom".  If the care available in the UK is not  available
         in the country to which the UK citizen would be compelled  to  move
         to, the likelihood of that citizen in fact moving was remote.   The
         Tribunal comment "a bare assertion that the British citizen will be
         forced to leave the United Kingdom is unlikely  to  be  sufficient;
         all the more so if this has been his only home for many years".


15.  The judge in this case did not have material from  Social  Services  to
    support his findings.  There was simply a GP's letter.  In paragraph 26
    the finding that Mrs Asghar "would be unable to obtain the sort  of  24
    hour per day care including emotional care which  is  provided  by  the
    appellant from any other agency" was reached  without  having  evidence
    from Social  Services.   Moreover  the  fact  that  there  might  be  a
    qualitative difference in  the  care  provided  does  not  justify  the
    conclusion reached in the  following  paragraph  that  the  appellant's
    grandmother would be forced to go back to Pakistan.  The  determination
    suffers from the lack of critical analysis which is required.  This  is
    particularly so given the complete absence of any evidence from  Social
    Services as to the care that Mrs Asghar would be  given.   In  granting
    permission, Judge Keki? referred to paragraph 59 of Ayinde and the care
    required before reaching a conclusion that a British citizen  would  be
    at risk of a forced departure from the UK:

         "... it is not enough that the British citizen  would  prefer  that
         his carer is permitted leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
         There is nothing intrinsically lacking in human  dignity  in  being
         offered the professional help of care workers or being placed  into
         residential accommodation with a sliding scale of  support  ranging
         from  a  home  adapted  to  the  individual's  needs,  through   to
         accommodation with a warden, through to a residential home; through
         to full nursing care.  It would be plainly incorrect to say that it
         is a violation of an individual's rights to  human  dignity  to  be
         placed into care or to receive help from professional  health  care
         workers".


16.  As Mr Melvin points out, there has been no response  to  the  grant  of
    permission and no further material has been  put  in  and  no  skeleton
    argument provided.

17.  I accept the challenge made by the Secretary of State to  the  findings
    in this case.  The determination is materially flawed in  law  for  the
    reasons I have given.  I substitute a fresh decision: the appeal  under
    the EEA Regulations is dismissed.

Anonymity Direction

18.  Anonymity direction not made.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.






Signed                                  Date 11 July 2016


G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

