
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13287/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4th April 2017                          |On 5th May 2017                  |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              mr Saif Jahangir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Faryl (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Colyer, promulgated on 15th August 2016, following a  hearing  at
    Nottingham Justice Centre on 11th July 2016.  In the determination, the
    judge dismissed the  appeal  of  Mr  Saif  Jahangir,  who  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  12th
    December 1981.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  to
    refuse him leave to remain in the UK in a  decision  dated  20th  March
    2015 on the basis of his marriage to a  same  sex  person,  namely,  Mr
    Mohammed Naqeeb Ali.  The relevant facts and documentary  material  are
    set out in the determination under appeal.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge heard evidence  from  the  Appellant,  and  his  partner,  Mr
    Mohammed Naqeeb Ali, and heard about the expressed fears in relation to
    the backlash in Pakistan because both of them had married against their
    religion.  They said they feared the local community, the  majority  of
    whom are Muslim (see paragraph 7).  The  witness  also  confirmed  that
    there are threats from his father who has disowned  him  and  his  life
    would be at risk (paragraph 8).

 4. The judge went on to say that he found the  Appellant  "to  be  a  very
    credible witness" and accepted his evidence (see paragraph  18).   This
    was that the Appellant was a wholesaler of  LPG  gas  in  Pakistan  and
    supplied oil products and lubricants for all types of engines.  He  was
    also a partner in a gym which was run by his sister.   In  Pakistan  he
    lived with his parents and brother in the family home.  (See  paragraph
    19).  The Appellant then came to the UK in August 2014 with his sister,
    to promote the sister's beauty products and to research the gym  market
    in the UK.  It was then that he was introduced to  Naqeeb,  who  was  a
    close friend and a colleague of the  Appellant's  brother,  Awais,  who
    worked at Kerry Foods (see paragraph  20).   The  judge  accepted  that
    subsequently the Appellant and his partner lived together  and  married
    on 23rd December 2014 (see paragraphs 22 to 24).

 5. There was evidence before  the  judge  in  the  form  of  the  "Country
    Information  and  Guidance  Pakistan:  Sexual  Orientation  and  Gender
    Identity", which confirmed that "same sex sexual acts  are  illegal  in
    Pakistan" (see paragraph 2.3.3) and the judge set this provision out in
    full (see paragraph 41).  He went on to conclude that "in view  of  the
    significant restrictions and persecution  of  homosexuals  in  Pakistan
    there are insurmountable obstacles to the  Appellant  and  his  husband
    enjoying  married  life  in  Pakistan"  such  that  it  would  be  most
    unreasonable to expect the Appellant's husband to relocate to  Pakistan
    to live with him there (see paragraph 42).

 6. Nevertheless, the judge went on to say that "there  is  an  alternative
    and that is for the Appellant to return to Pakistan alone and to  apply
    for entry from his country of nationality and origin"  (paragraph  43).
    Since the Appellant's husband did not wish to relocate to  Pakistan  it
    was open to him to remain in the UK  from  where  he  can  support  his
    application to rejoin him.

 7. In  considering  Article  8,  the  judge  concluded  that  because  the
    Appellant had spent his formative years outside the UK in  Pakistan  it
    was not unreasonable to expect him to be able to readjust  to  life  in
    Pakistan.  In particular, "as it is the intention of the  Appellant  to
    apply for re-entry to the UK there relocation to Pakistan may  only  be
    for a relatively short period" (paragraph 59).

 8. Finally, regard was had to the public interest considerations  and  the
    judge held that these ultimately fell against the Appellant because his
    status in the UK was "always precarious" (paragraph 69).

 9. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  failed  properly  to
    apply the guidance in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 and LM [2010]  UKUT  379
    and EB Kosovo [2008] UKHL 41 and VW Uganda  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  9.   The
    grounds state that in concluding that it would be  proportionate  under
    Article 8 for the Appellant to return and apply  for  entry  clearance,
    the judge did not take into account evidence that the  Appellant  would
    incriminate himself in a criminal offence and would be at risk from his
    family and wider community on account of his sexuality.

11. On 8th February 2017, permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that the judge failed to take into account the  evidence  mentioned  in
    paragraphs 45 to 74 of the witness statements which  went  directly  to
    the issue of proportionality.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 14th April 2017, Miss Faryl,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, relied upon the grounds of  application  dated
    30th August 2016.  These ran into nineteen paragraphs.  She also relied
    upon the grant of permission dated 8th February 2017.  She  emphasised
    that the Appellant and his partner both were strongly of the view  that
    they could not live in Pakistan because of fears.  The judge found  the
    Appellant "to be a very credible witness" (paragraph  59).   The  judge
    took the view that requiring the Appellant to  return  to  Pakistan  to
    make an application  to  enter  as  a  spouse  would  be  "only  for  a
    relatively short period" but this  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    jurisprudence  in  Chikwamba  (at  paragraph  61).   Furthermore,   the
    Appellant would be committing a criminal offence if he were  to  return
    back as a gay person who had married.

13. For his part, Mr Bates  opposed  the  appeal.   He  submitted  that  in
    Chikwamba children were involved and that was a  very  different  case.
    Moreover, the only reason why switching from one category to the  other
    was not allowed was because people were able to return  back  to  their
    country and reapply and he referred to the case of R v Chen.  Mr  Bates
    submitted that in any case involving spouses, one has  to  comply  with
    the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant is not at risk of returning.   He
    has not been gay in Pakistan before.  There was  absolutely  no  reason
    why he would tell the authorities there what he was going to  tell  the
    Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  a  private  interview  when  making   an
    application to return back to the UK as the spouse of a person  settled
    in the UK.

14. In reply Miss Faryl submitted that the Appellant's sexuality had to  be
    considered in any event.  It was not relevant  to  the  matter  of  his
    return.  He was, after all, breaking the law in Pakistan as  a  married
    gay person.  Moreover, he also fears his family.   She  submitted  that
    there would be no new evidence and that if this Tribunal were to make a
    finding of an error of law it could proceed to remake the decision.  On
    the other hand, Mr Bates submitted that if there was a  finding  of  an
    error of law the Respondent would need new evidence to consider  as  to
    why the Appellant's return to Pakistan was impractical.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons  are
    as follows.

16. This is a case where the judge, notwithstanding the fact that there was
    no evidence before the Tribunal below of the Appellant having been  gay
    in Pakistan, or of ever having "come out" in any  manner  in  Pakistan,
    concluded that the Appellant had offered very credible  evidence  about
    his gay relationship with Mr Mohammed Naqeeb Ali.  The judge also  went
    on  to  find  that  the  Appellant  had  not  satisfied  the   specific
    requirement of Immigration Rules at the date of application relating to
    the English language test (paragraph 25).  Nevertheless, the  Appellant
    did not make a protection application.

17. What he made was a  spouse's  application  to  remain  here.   In  that
    regard, the  judge  was  quite  clear  that  although  there  would  be
    "significant restrictions" on homosexuals in  Pakistan  (see  paragraph
    42) the Appellant and his partner were not together required to  return
    back as practising gay homosexuals.  It was open to  the  Appellant  to
    return back to Pakistan and make an application  himself  which,  in  a
    matter of weeks, would be resolved through an interview with the  Entry
    Clearance Officer (see paragraph 43).

18. That, concluded  the  judge,  did  not  amount  to  the  imposition  of
    insurmountable obstacles  upon  the  Appellant's  right  to  Article  8
    rights, and nor did it infringe his Article 8 rights in general.

19. That was the conclusion which was entirely open to the judge.  Mr Bates
    is wholly right in submitting that spousal appeals must comply with the
    Immigration Rules.  If what the Appellant claims  is  correct,  namely,
    that because of his gay relationship in the UK, he cannot  return  back
    to his own country to make a visa application,  then  every  such  case
    would be able to undermine the Immigration Rules, and  there  would  be
    need to comply with the spouse's requirements under  the  Rules.   That
    cannot be right.  Accordingly, there is no error of law.

20. No anonymity direction is made.

21. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 3rd May 2017
