
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13000/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2015                            |On 6 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Fatmata Unis Kamara
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr E Akohene, Solicitor, Afrifa and
Partners


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal  against  the
    decision by the Secretary of State  to  refuse  to  issue  her  with  a
    derivative residence card pursuant to Regulation 15A of the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The First-tier Tribunal did
    not make an anonymity  direction,  and  I  do  not  consider  that  the
    claimant should be accorded anonymity  for  these  proceedings  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of  Sierra  Leone.   On  3  March  2014  the
    Secretary of  State  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing  the  claimant's
    application for a derivative residence  card.   In  order  for  her  to
    qualify  for  a  right  to  reside  on  Zambrano  grounds  she  had  to
    demonstrate that:

 a) she was the primary carer of a British citizen;

 b) the relevant British citizen was residing in the United Kingdom; and

     c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in the UK or
        in another EEA state if she was required to leave.

 3. To be regarded as the primary carer, Regulation 15A(7)  stated  that  a
    person P was to be regarded as a primary carer of another person if:

         (a)  P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person; and
         either

             (i)  is the person who has  primary  responsibility  for  that
                  person's care; or

             (ii) shares equally the responsibility for that person's  care
                  with one other person who is not an exempt person.

 4. Exempt persons included a person who has ILR in the United Kingdom.

 5. In support of her application, she had provided birth certificates  for
    her  son  and  daughter,  and  a  passport  for  her  son.   The  birth
    certificates confirmed the parentage of her son and daughter.   But  to
    be considered as the primary carer they would  expect  her  to  provide
    evidence to show the child in question lived  with  her  or  spent  the
    majority of time with her, that she made the day to  day  decisions  in
    regard  to  the  child's  health,  education  etc.  and  that  she  was
    financially responsible for the child.  From the evidence provided,  it
    had not been  possible  to  conclude  definitively  that  she  was  the
    children's primary carer.  She had also failed to provide  evidence  as
    to whether or why her son's father, Unisa Sesay, was not in a  position
    to care for her son.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The claimant's appeal came before Judge L K  Gibbs  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross in the First-tier Tribunal on 14 October 2014.  The claimant  was
    represented by Mr Akohene, and the Secretary of State  was  represented
    by a Presenting Officer.  The judge received  oral  evidence  from  the
    claimant and Mr Sesay.

 7. In her subsequent decision, Judge Gibbs set out the relevant provisions
    of Regulation 15A(4A) as follows:

         4A.  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

             (a)  P is the primary carer of a British citizen (the relevant
         British citizen);

             (b)  the relevant British citizen is residing  in  the  United
         Kingdom; and

             (c)  the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in
                  the UK or in another EEA  state  if  P  were  required  to
                  leave.

 8. The judge found that Mr Sesay worked hard to support his family working
    from 7pm to 3am five nights a week, and additionally attending  college
    from 9.30 to 12.30pm.  Although he was at home between  around  1pm  to
    6pm Monday to Fridays, because he was a night shift  worker,  and  also
    attended college in the morning, he was usually asleep  in  this  time.
    As a result, other than at weekends, he hardly saw  his  children.   So
    the judge was satisfied that the claimant  was  the  primary  carer  of
    their two children.

 9. On the question of whether the children would be able to remain in  the
    UK if the claimant was removed, she  said  the  critical  question  was
    whether the child is dependent on the  parent  being  removed  for  the
    exercise of his union right of residence and  whether  removal  of  the
    parent will deprive the child of the effective exercise of residence in
    the United Kingdom or  elsewhere  in  the  union.   In  answering  this
    question, she said she had taken into account that the interests of the
    children were a primary factor, citing ZH Tanzania v SSHD  [2011]  UKSC
    4.  The children were very young (aged 5 and 1 respectively) and it was
    not contentious to conclude that their best interests  were  served  by
    remaining in the family unit into which they were born.  The 1 year old
    remained at home with her mother whilst her sibling was at school,  and
    the children were wholly dependent  on  their  mother  for  their  care
    during the working week (Monday to Friday).

10. Although the Secretary of State  might  point  to  the  fact  that  the
    children's father had indefinite leave to remain in the  UK  and  could
    care for them if the claimant was required to leave, she found that the
    practical impact of this could not be said to be in the  best  interest
    of the children, or indeed of society.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

11. On 9 December  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal as the judge did not appear  to
    have made detailed reference to, and  consideration  of,  the  relevant
    Regulations.  As argued in the grounds of appeal, it was arguable  that
    the judge had applied an incorrect definition  of  primary  carer;  had
    omitted to consider the issue of whether the claimant and  her  husband
    shared responsibility for their children and whether her husband was an
    exempt person; and that the judge had applied  the  incorrect  test  as
    established in Regulation 15A(4A)(c) in finding that the children would
    not be able to reside in the UK if their mother was removed.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

12. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal Miss Kenny invited me  to  find  a
    material error of law for the reasons identified  as  arguable  in  the
    grant of permission to appeal.  In support of  the  argument  that  the
    judge had applied the incorrect test under  Regulation  15A(4A)(c)  she
    relied on Harrison and Another v the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA  Civ  1736,  and  in  particular  the  following
    passage at paragraph [63]:

         I agree with Mr Beal QC, Counsel for the Secretary of  State,  that
         there really is no basis for asserting that it is arguable  in  the
         light of the authorities that the  Zambrano  principle  extends  to
         cover anything short of a situation where the EU citizen is  forced
         to leave the territory of the EU.  If the EU citizen, be  it  child
         or wife, would not in practice be compelled to leave the country if
         the non-EU family member were to be refused the right of residence,
         there is in my view nothing in these authorities to suggest that EU
         law is engaged.  Article 8 Convention rights  may  then  come  into
         picture to protect family life as the court recognised  in  Dereci,
         but that is an entirely distinct area of protection.

13. Giving the leading judgment of the court, Elias LJ further observed  at
    paragraph [66] as follows:

         Moreover, as the  Upper  Tribunal  noted,  the  actual  results  in
         Mcarthy and Dereci do not sit  happily  with  the  submissions  now
         advanced by the appellants.  In both those cases the removal of the
         husband or partner, who  in  Dereci  was  also  the  father,  would
         inevitably mar the enjoyment of the right of residence of wife  and
         children.  Even if the  non-EU  national  is  not  relied  upon  to
         provide financial support, typically there will be strong emotional
         and psychological ties within the family  and  separation  will  be
         likely significantly to rupture those ties, thereby diminishing the
         enjoyment of life with the family members who remain.   Yet  it  is
         plainly not the case, as Dereci makes clear and Mr Drabble accepts,
         that this  consequence  would  be  sufficient  to  engage  EU  law.
         Furthermore, if Mr Drabble's submission were correct, it would  jar
         with the description of the Zambrano principle as applying only  in
         exceptional situations, as  the  court  in  Dereci  observed.   The
         principle would regularly be engaged.

14. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Akohene submitted there was no  error  of
    law in the judge's decision.   It  was  accepted  that  the  claimant's
    partner was an exempt person.  This did not matter, as the claimant met
    the alternative criteria of being the children's primary carer.

Discussion

15. Neither party produced any authority on the definition of primary carer
    in Regulation 15A(4A)(a).  Mr Akohene submitted that as  there  was  no
    authoritative definition of the term, it was open to the judge to  find
    that the claimant met this criterion on the facts as found by her.

16. However I consider that the meaning  of  primary  carer  in  Regulation
    15A(4A) to be  determined  by  reference  to  Regulation  15A(7).   The
    primary carer is a direct relative or legal guardian of a child who  is
    either the person who has primary responsibility for that child's care,
    or shares equally responsibility for that child's care with  one  other
    person who  is  not  an  exempt  person.   The  key  dichotomy  in  the
    definition is between an applicant who shares  the  responsibility  for
    the child's care with one other person (who is not an  exempt  person),
    and an applicant who has the primary responsibility  for  that  child's
    care.

17. On the facts,  the  claimant  clearly  shares  responsibility  for  the
    children's care with her partner, who is an  exempt  person.   Although
    she is entrusted with the vast majority of  the  children's  day-to-day
    care, as her partner works  long  hours,  she  does  not  have  primary
    responsibility for the children's care.  Both legally and factually the
    responsibility for the care of the children  is  shared  between  them.
    Where a third country national resides under the same roof in a genuine
    and subsisting relationship with an exempt  person  and  the  child  of
    their union, it is  very  difficult  to  see  how  that  third  country
    national could ever be characterised as having  primary  responsibility
    for the child's care. At all events, on the facts found by Judge  Gibbs
    there was only one possible answer: which is that the claimant did not,
    and does not, meet the definition of  a  primary  carer  in  Regulation
    15A(7).   She does not have primary responsibility for  the  children's
    care; and although she shares responsibility for their care,  she  does
    not share it with a non-exempt person.

18. As the claimant does not meet the definition of a  primary  carer,  the
    judge erred in law in not dismissing her appeal under  the  Regulations
    2006.

19. Since the claimant does not satisfy the requirements  of  sub-paragraph
    (a) of Regulation 15A(4A), it  is  not  strictly  necessary  to  decide
    whether the judge also erred in law in finding that the criteria in sub-
    Section (c) of Regulation 15A(4A) were satisfied.  So I will deal  with
    the point succinctly. It is apparent  from  the  passages  in  Harrison
    which I have cited earlier in this decision that the judge was wrong to
    answer this question by reference to considerations of  best  interests
    and proportionality.  While such considerations are highly relevant  to
    an alternative claim under Article 8, they do not properly form part of
    a discussion as to whether the requirements  of  sub-paragraph  (c)  of
    Regulation 15A(4A) are met.

20. Article 8 was not raised  in  the  alternative  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and Mr  Akohene  confirmed  that  he  was  content  with  the
    position taken by the Secretary of State in the refusal decision.   The
    Secretary of State is not proposing to remove  the  claimant,  and  she
    invites the claimant to  make  a  separate  application  on  family  or
    private life grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claimant's appeal against the decision by the Secretary  of
State to refuse to issue her with a derivative residence card  is  dismissed
under the Regulations 2006.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 6 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
