
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13827/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th June 2014                               |On 22nd July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                         mrs Josephine Edith lindsay
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Unigwe (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Carroll, promulgated on 20th March 2014, following a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 11th March  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Josephine Edith Lindsay.  The Appellant applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a national of Sierra Leone, who was born on  4th  July
    1948.  She is 66 years of age.  She has been in the UK since  18  years
    of age.  She appeals against the decision of the Respondent  dated  9th
    April 2013 to refuse to vary her  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of
    Article  8  ECHR  rights  as  a  freestanding  provision,  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant was born in Sierra Leone.   However,  her  father  was  a
    British citizen, having travelled from Sierra Leone,  and  settling  in
    the UK as long ago as 1949, and serving in the British Army.   He  died
    as a British national on 10th January 2003. The Appellant herself  came
    to the UK as a student in 1967.  She lived with an aunt in  Birmingham.
    She then returned to Sierra Leone when her grandmother  died  in  1991.
    She lived in Sierra Leone until 20th January 2003.  She returned to the
    UK following the death of her father.

 4. However, before the Appellant had left the UK, she had met and formed a
    relationship with Mr Daniel Lindsay,  a  British  citizen  of  Jamaican
    origin, whom she married on 8th September 2003.  Her husband,  however,
    unfortunately died on 25th December 2010.  The  Appellant  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain in the UK from 10th  March  2009  to  9th
    March 2012.

 5. On 24th February 2012, the Appellant made an application for  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules, "given the length of time she has
    spent in the UK, her family affiliations and established ties ..." (see
    paragraph 7).

The Judge's Findings

 6. The judge recorded how it was not in dispute that the  Appellant  could
    not succeed under the Immigration Rules, namely, under Appendix FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of HC 395, and the case could  only  be  argued  under
    freestanding Article 8 ECHR rights.  The judge  had  regard  to  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 and considered the relevant  facts  before  him.   These
    were that the Appellant arrived in the UK when she was 18 and  remained
    here for 24 years until 1991.  She was at the time of  the  hearing  65
    years of age.  She has spent a total of 34 years in  the  UK.   However
    she had then lived in Sierra Leone for more than  a  decade,  and  only
    returned back to the UK in January 2003, after the death of her  father
    here.  She now maintained that she had no ties with  Sierra  Leone  and
    these were not credible.

 7. On the other hand, the judge was clear that, "it  is  indisputably  the
    case that she has spent a very substantial period of time in the United
    Kingdom where she has worked and married" (paragraph  12).   The  judge
    then went onto consider the Appellant's claim that she enjoyed "a close
    relationship with her daughter and her grandsons in the United Kingdom"
    (paragraph 13).

 8. He observed that there was, however, "no evidence before  me  from  her
    daughter or from her grandchildren" and there was no evidence from  her
    two sisters living in and near London (paragraph  13).   There  was  no
    evidence from any friends or community  organisations  (paragraph  14).
    Although the Appellant had established a private  life  (paragraph  16)
    she  had  not  been  able  to  demonstrate  that  there  would  be  any
    difficulties in her returning back to Sierra Leone, where she had spent
    a decade living, before returning back to the UK (paragraph  16).   The
    appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application leave much to be desired.  They  simply  set
    out the law in relation to Article 8 and do not in any  way  whatsoever
    refer to the essential  facts,  which  the  judge  had  indicated  were
    missing in the evidence before him.

10. Nevertheless, permission to appeal was granted to the Appellant on  1st
    May 2014 on the basis that,

         "Even in the absence of detailed evidence provided by the Appellant
         about her private and family life  in  the  United  Kingdom...  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge may have made an arguable material  error
         of law by failing to give sufficient weight to the length  of  time
         the  Appellant  has  lived   in   the   United   Kingdom   in   the
         proportionality exercise ..." (at paragraph 5).

11. On 19th May 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect that the
    Appellant had provided insufficient evidence to  demonstrate  that  she
    had a connection to  the  UK  through  family,  friends,  or  community
    organisations.

The Hearing

12. At the hearing before me on 10th June 2014,  Mr  Unigwe,  appearing  as
    Counsel on behalf of the Appellant, emphasised the core facts that were
    in the Appellant's favour.  He submitted that the Appellant  had  lived
    in the UK for 35 years.  She was bound to have  developed  considerable
    private life rights during that time in any event.  Her  father  was  a
    British citizen, her husband was a British citizen.  She had worked all
    her life.  She had a daughter with three children.  She had two sisters
    in the UK.  She had other friends and relatives.

13. The balance  of  proportionality  was  bound  in  these  circumstances,
    submitted Mr Unigwe, to fall in favour of the Appellant, given that she
    had lived an impeccable life in the UK.  The judge had failed  to  give
    due  regard  to  these  factors  because  they  were  set  out  in  the
    Appellant's witness statement and the judge had indicated early in  the
    determination (see paragraph 1) that he had  "taken  into  account  the
    bundles of the Appellant and the Respondent" in which all the essential
    facts were set out.

14. Mr Unigwe also pointed to the fact that  seated  at  the  back  of  the
    courtroom on this occasion, were the  Appellant's  daughter  ("Khama"),
    her sister (Theresa), and the Pastor at  the  church  where  she  went.
    They were ready to give evidence.

15. For his part, Mr  Whitwell,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, submitted that the judge had taken into account all
    the facts, including the facts that Mr Unigwe had now  emphasised,  and
    had concluded that the  balance  of  considerations  fell  against  the
    Appellant.

16. Essentially, what the judge had to do  was  to  undertake  a  balancing
    exercise, after following the principles set out in Razgar and this the
    judge  had  done.   Mr  Whitwell  referred  to  the  latest  Article  8
    determination of  the  Tribunal  in  Nasim  [2014]  UKUT  00025,  which
    enjoined decision-makers, where Article 8 was "to recognise its limited
    utility to an individual where one has moved along the continuum,  from
    that Article's core area of operation towards what might  be  described
    as its fuzzy penumbra" (paragraph 20).

17. In his  reply,  Mr  Unigwe  submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  given
    comprehensive evidence about her Article 8 rights in the UK and she had
    been cross-examined on these matters, and there was no reason  for  the
    judge to make a finding that the balance of considerations fell against
    her.

Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision
    (see Section 12(2) of TCEA 2007).  My reasons are as follows.

19. This is a case where the fundamental facts are  not  in  dispute.   The
    judge has set them out.  The Appellant came to the UK when she  was  18
    years old.  She remained for 24 years  until  1991.   She  returned  to
    Sierra Leone and lived there until 2003.  She came back to the  UK  and
    has been here ever since.  In total, she had lived in  the  UK  for  34
    years.  During that time, the judge has found as a fact that  "she  has
    worked and married" the judge does not give consideration to  the  fact
    that both her husband and her father  were  British  citizens,  in  his
    assessment of the Appellant's case, although, these  are  matters  that
    were earlier set out by the judge in the heading "immigration history".



20. It is a perhaps unfortunate feature of this case that the judge has not
    set out the evidence of the Appellant at the hearing before  him.   The
    judge has simply said that, "the Appellant adopted the contents of  her
    witness statement.  All of the  evidence  given  is  contained  in  the
    Record of Proceedings" (paragraph 9).  In the circumstances, I have had
    to look at the "Record of Proceedings".

21. These are fairly substantial, running into some five pages,  and  these
    do set out the evidence that the Appellant gave orally at  the  hearing
    before the Tribunal Judge.  For example, it is clear,  that  the  judge
    heard evidence from the Appellant that, when asked, "what have you been
    doing in the UK?", she had gone on to say, "working all my  life"  (see
    page 1).  The evidence shows that the Appellant did  work  continuously
    during the time that she was in the UK.

22. It is unfortunate equally, that the skeleton argument, prepared by  the
    solicitors, so I am told, does not in terms grapple with the  essential
    facts that  were  relevant  to  this  case.   The  Appellant's  witness
    statement, which appears at the end of the bundle, does, however, refer
    to the fact that the Appellant has spent more than half her life in the
    UK, that the Appellant had enjoyed a  fruitful  relationship  with  her
    British citizen husband, who died of kidney failure in  December  2010,
    but made provision with his previous employers for  her  to  enjoy  the
    benefits of his pension, before he died (see paragraph 6).

23. This witness statement, however, does  not  refer  to  the  Appellant's
    gainful employment.  This is, on the other hand, clear from the P60 for
    2011 which appears in the Appellant's bundle (see page  67).   What  is
    important, however, is that the Appellant's core relatives are  in  the
    UK.  She makes it clear  in  her  witness  statement,  that,  "my  only
    daughter and her three children were all born in this  country  and  my
    father served this country as a military officer" (paragraph  7).   Her
    two sisters are in this country.  There is no evidence that her nearest
    and dearest relatives are in Sierra Leone.

24. It is true that the daughter and the sisters were not  present  at  the
    hearing to give evidence.  However, that in itself was  no  reason  for
    the judge to disbelieve the existence of these ties.  Indeed, the judge
    does not disbelieve them.  The judge is clear that  the  Appellant  has
    acquired Article 8 rights in the UK.  What the judge was  looking  for,
    however, was evidence from the daughter and  the  near  relatives.   He
    held that, "there is, however, no evidence before me from her  daughter
    or from her grandchildren" (paragraph 13).

25. Having such evidence was no doubt, desirable.   Its  absence,  however,
    did not mean that no credence could be attached to such evidence.   The
    failure to give such evidence  credence  was  an  error  of  law.   The
    failure  to  recognise  that  the   existence   of   a   daughter   and
    grandchildren, together with two sisters, in a life spent substantially
    in this country over 34 years, was an error of law.

Remaking the Decision

26. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions I have heard today.
     I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.  This is  a  case
    where the Appellant arrived in the UK when aged 18.  She  remained  for
    24 years thereafter.  She returned back to Sierra Leone,  only  because
    of the death of a relative.  Both her mother and  father  were  British
    citizens.  She returned back to the UK in 2003.  She has lived  in  the
    UK for a total of 34 years.  During that time, she has worked  in  this
    country.  She gave evidence to say  that  she  has  worked  during  her
    entire life in the UK.

27. Her only daughter lives in  the  UK.   She  has  close  ties  with  her
    daughter.  She has close ties with her grandchildren.  She also has two
    sisters living in the UK.  The Appellant is now in the  twilight  years
    of her life.  She clearly  has  a  substantial  private  life  in  this
    country.  Indeed, insofar as she has a daughter and grandchildren,  she
    also enjoys a family life with them.  The daughter was in court and was
    clearly distraught on behalf of her mother at the hearing.  She has  an
    active church life, and this was evidenced by the fact  that  a  Pastor
    attended the last time and a different  Pastor  attended  again  today.
    She is in receipt of a government pension as well as a widow's pension.
     Ultimately, as the judge found the last time, this  was  a  case  that
    turned upon "proportionality"  after  the  application  of  the  Razgar
    principles.

28. There is clearly an interference by a public authority with her  family
    and private life rights.  The interference  has  consequences  of  such
    gravity as to engage the operation of Article 8.  The  interference  is
    in accordance with the law because the Appellant cannot  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules.  However, it is not necessary  in  a  democratic
    society and it is not an interference  that  is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate public end that is sought to be achieved.

29. This is because the Appellant has had discretionary leave to remain  in
    the UK precisely on  the  basis  of  the  British  nationality  of  her
    husband, and the nationality of her  parents  is  also  a  matter  that
    cannot be ignored, in the evaluation of the balance  of  considerations
    that fall in her favour.

30. It is well-established that Article 8  considerations  must  also  take
    into account the rights of third parties because, as Lady Hale has made
    clear in the Supreme Court, the whole is greater  than  the  individual
    component of rights.  The Appellant's daughter is settled in the UK and
    is a British citizen.  Her children are British citizens.   As  against
    all these facts, the interest of the state in immigration  control  has
    to be weighed in, and I conclude that these balance  of  considerations
    do not  outweigh  the  balance  of  considerations  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant.

31. The Appellant's Article 8 rights cannot be enjoyed in Sierra Leone away
    from her daughter and three grandchildren.  They cannot be enjoyed away
    from her two sisters settled in the UK.  Indeed, the rights to  pension
    and state benefits which she enjoys, on account both of her working  in
    this country over many years and on account of her husband's status  in
    this country, go in her favour.

Decision

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

33. No anonymity order is made.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st July 2014
