

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13620/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 23 December 2014                           |On 19 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            RANSFORD KWASI GYEKYE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Rutherford, instructed by Law Clinic
(Birmingham)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McGinty that was promulgated on 5 June 2014.

 2. Judge McGinty allowed Mr Gyekye's appeal against the EEA decision of  6
    March 2014 refusing to issue residence  documentation  to  him  on  the
    basis that he had not established that he was related  to  a  qualified
    person.  The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are that the  judge
    failed to follow the guidance contained in Karim (Proxy marriages -  EU
    law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC).

 3. At the start of the hearing Ms Rutherford conceded  that  the  decision
    was legally flawed because Judge McGinty had failed to follow Karim and
    had also failed to explain why it did not apply  to  the  case  he  was
    determining.

 4. Ms Rutherford was aware (as was Mr  Smart)  that  I  had  authored  the
    decision in Karim.  I made  it  clear  that  even  though  I  had  been
    involved in that case, I was open to hear any  arguments  that  it  was
    wrong or did not apply in this case.  Ms Rutherford confirmed that  she
    did not have any such arguments.

 5. I decided that Judge McGinty's decision contains an error on a point of
    law and that it has to be set aside.  The error is  that  although  the
    judge found that the appellant had  established  that  he  was  legally
    married  according  to  Gambian  law,  his  marriage  by  proxy   being
    recognised in that jurisdiction, and notwithstanding the fact that  the
    marriage would be recognised according to the law of England and Wales,
    the judge failed to establish that the marriage was recognised  for  EU
    law purposes.  As made clear in Karim, as the appellant was seeking  to
    rely on EU law to secure his right of  residence  in  the  UK,  it  was
    incumbent on him to establish that he had contracted a marriage in that
    context,  which  required  evidence  to  show  that  his  marriage  was
    contracted according to the laws of the Netherlands, being the  country
    of nationality of his claimed spouse.  By failing  to  deal  with  this
    issue, the judge erred in law.

 6. I decided that it was appropriate to remake the decision in  the  Upper
    Tribunal  despite  Ms  Rutherford's  suggestion  that  the  matter   be
    remitted.  I did so  bearing  in  mind  the  overriding  objective  and
    relevant guidance.  The Upper Tribunal notified the  parties  that  the
    appeal might proceed immediately if an error on  a  point  of  law  was
    found and that the parties should ensure that  any  evidence  on  which
    they intended to rely should be submitted two  weeks  in  advance.   Mr
    Gyekye  had  not  submitted  any  additional  evidence  despite   these
    directions and there was no explanation for such failure.

 7. Given the guidance in Karim, the failure of the  appellant  to  provide
    evidence to show that his marriage is recognised according to Dutch law
    means that he has failed to establish that  he  can  benefit  from  the
    right of residence he might otherwise have been able  to  derive.   His
    appeal against the EEA decision of 6 March 2014 must  be  dismissed  on
    this ground.

 8. Ms Rutherford sought to rely  on  the  appellant  being  in  a  durable
    relationship with his Dutch partner.  I pointed out that this  had  not
    been pleaded before the First-tier Tribunal.  Even though the Secretary
    of State had considered whether the appellant might derive a  right  of
    residence as an extended  family  member  as  a  person  in  a  durable
    relationship, this was not raised in the original grounds of appeal  or
    before Judge McGinty.   This  was  not  a  situation  where  the  judge
    overlooked a ground of appeal that had been previously canvassed.

 9. In addition, there was no evidence that the appellant was in a  durable
    relationship.

10. Bearing in mind the history of this appeal,  it  was  not  in  anyone's
    interest to allow the grounds of appeal to be amended or to adjourn for
    further evidence.  In reaching this conclusion I  have  borne  in  mind
    that it is open to the appellant to make a  fresh  application  to  the
    Secretary of State, this being an EEA matter.

11. In light of these considerations, I find that the appellant cannot rely
    on a ground of appeal relating to durable relationship.

12. Bringing these findings together, I conclude that  the  appeal  against
    the EEA decision of 6 March 2014 fails.



Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge McGinty contains  an  error  on  a
point of law and is set aside.

I remake the decision to dismiss the appeal against the EEA  decision  of  6
March 2014.



                               Signed   Date 23 December 2014


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
