
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA133462015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 June 2016                       |On 9 June 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                               CHARANJIT SINGH
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chhotu of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The respondent refused  the  appellant's  application  for  an  EEA
         Residence Card on 23 March 2015. His appeal was dismissed by First-
         tier  Tribunal   Judge   Farrelly   ("the   Judge")   following   a
         consideration of the papers on 23 July 2015.



The grant of permission

      2. Upper Tribunal Judge Blum granted permission to  appeal  (29  April
         2016) stating that:

             "1. The core of the renewed grounds criticise  the  First-tier
             Tribunal for misapplying the burden of  proof  established  in
             Papajorgji (EEA spouses  -  marriage  of  convenience)  Greece
             [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) ("Papajorgji").

             2. It  is  arguable  that,  by  relying  on  IS  (marriage  of
             Convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 00031  (paragraph  9  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal decision) and stating that "the burden  of
             proving that a marriage is not a 'marriage of convenience' for
             the purpose of the EEA Regulations rests  on  the  appellant,"
             the First-tier Tribunal misdirected itself as to  the  correct
             burden of proof (see Rosa v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
             Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14, at paragraph 29).

             3. There was clearly sufficient evidence before the First-tier
             Tribunal to discharge any evidential burden on the  respondent
             (see paragraph 20  of  Papajorgji)  but  it  remains  arguable
             whether the First-tier Tribunal would have inevitably  reached
             the same conclusion had it applied the proper burden of  proof
             and in light of the totality of the evidence."

The Judge's determination

      3. The Judge stated that;

             "9. In IS ... the burden of proving that a marriage is  not  a
             "marriage  of  convenience"  for  the  purpose  of   the   EEA
             regulations rests on the appellant: but he is not required  to
             discharge it in the absence of evidence of  matter  supporting
             suspicion that the marriage is one of convenience (i.e.  there
             is an evidential burden on the respondent ...) Papajorgji  ...
             held that there is no burden at the outset of  an  application
             on a claimant to demonstrate that marriage to an EEA  national
             is not one of convenience.  IS ... establishes only that there
             is an evidential burden on the claimant  to  address  evidence
             justifying reasonable suspicion the marriage is  entered  into
             for the predominant purpose of securing residence rights.

             ...

             17. Given that the issue in the appeal is the  genuineness  of
             the relationship, it was up to the appellant to produce  solid
             evidence to demonstrate an ongoing relationship."

Respondent's position

      4. Mr Walker relied on the Rule 24 notice (17 May 2016)  which  stated
         that the Judge directed himself appropriately, and even if  he  had
         applied the correct burden of proof would  have  reached  the  same
         conclusion given the paucity of the evidence.



Appellant's position

      5. The self-direction regarding the  burden  of  proof  was  wrong  or
         misleading and the Judge plainly decided [17] that "it  was  up  to
         the appellant to produce solid evidence to demonstrate  an  ongoing
         relationship". This amounted to a reversal of the burden of  proof.
         There was evidence of cohabitation and the  finding  of  dishonesty
         was Draconian.

Discussion

      6. I am satisfied that all the Judge was doing at [9] was  summarising
         what IS said and then identifying from Papajorgji  what  it  meant.
         Given the findings he had made  regarding  the  evidence  which  he
         summarised [11  to  16],  it  was  abundantly  clear  that  he  was
         satisfied the respondent was entitled to raise  the  concerns  that
         switched the burden of proof. All the Judge was saying at [17]  was
         that this is what had occurred.

      7. Given the paucity of evidence of the relationship through the  lack
         of a significant female footprint at the appellant's  address,  the
         limited  documentary  trail,  and  the  repeated  failure  by   the
         appellant to engage with the respondent, the Judge was entitled  to
         reach the conclusion that the respondent's concerns were  warranted
         and also that the appellant had failed to discharge the  burden  of
         proof that had switched to him.

      8. I therefore am not satisfied that there was a material error of law
         and do not set the decision aside.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
9 June 2016
