
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)          Appeal Number: IA/13992/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 25 September 2014         On 26 September 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                              Souleymane Ndiaye
                          (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms. P. Glass of Counsel instructed by Okafor  &  Co.,
                       Solicitors.


                   DETERMINATION AND REASONS: ERROR OF LAW

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge De
      Haney promulgated on 2 June 2014, allowing Mr Ndiaye's appeal  against
      the Secretary of State's decision dated 28 October 2013 to  refuse  to
      issue a residence card under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006.


   2. Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  Mr
      Ndiaye  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency   with   the
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to
      Mr Ndiaye  as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
      Respondent.

Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of Senegal born on 20 December 1985. On 15
      June 2013 an application for a residence card  as  confirmation  of  a
      right to reside in the United Kingdom was made  on  his  behalf.   The
      application was based on a marriage by proxy between the Appellant and
      Ms Sabine Musquet, a French national, said  to  have  taken  place  in
      their absence in Senegal on 11 June 2012. The application was  refused
      on 26 October 2013 because it  was  not  accepted  that  the  marriage
      certificate was valid. The Appellant did not  exercise  his  right  of
      appeal in respect of that decision.  On  14  January  2014  a  further
      application for a residence card was made, pleading that the Appellant
      was the unmarried partner of Ms Musquet.



   4. The Appellant's application was refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
      'reasons for refusal' ('RFRL') letter dated 8 March 2014, and a Notice
      of Immigration Decision  was  issued  on  the  same  date  referencing
      Regulations 6 and 8(5) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006.



   5. The RFRL is a matter of record  on  file  and  it  is  unnecessary  to
      reproduce its contents here. It is germane to note three matters:



(i) The Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant  was  in  a  durable
      relationship with Ms Musquet, noting that the supporting documents  by
      way of bills and various letters addressed to each of them at the same
      address did not constitute evidence  of  a  durable  relationship,  it
      being  possible  for  persons  to  cohabit  without  engaging   in   a
      relationship. The RFRL notes that the Appellant had been  informed  of
      this in the earlier refusal where,  in  addition  to  considering  the
      validity of the  marriage  the  Respondent  had  also  considered  the
      Appellant under the category of unmarried partners.



(ii) Further, the Respondent was not satisfied that it had been  shown  that
      Ms Musquet was exercising Treaty Rights.



(iii) The RFRL also makes reference to the  fact  that  where  an  applicant
      meets the criteria to show that they are an 'extended  family  member'
      of  an  EEA  national  "[a]n   extensive   examination   of   personal
      circumstances is then undertaken and a decision made as to whether  it
      would be appropriate to issue  a  residence  card".  (Necessarily,  in
      circumstances where the Respondent had not  been  satisfied  that  the
      Appellant had demonstrated that he was an extended family member of an
      EEA national, such an 'extensive examination' was not undertaken.)



   6. The Appellant appealed  to  the  IAC.  In  his  Notice  of  Appeal  he
      requested that the appeal be decided without an oral hearing  'on  the
      papers'. The Grounds of Appeal incorporated in the  Notice  of  Appeal
      are general and constitute little more than  an  assertion  of  rights
      without descending to any detail or otherwise addressing the substance
      of the RFRL. In support of the appeal, the Appellant filed a bundle on
      7 May 2014. The bundle essentially comprises the  materials  submitted
      in support of  the  Appellant's  application  under  letter  dated  13
      January 2014: the First-Tier Tribunal Judge has listed such  documents
      at paragraph 7 of the determination. There are no evidential materials
      other than those that were already considered by  the  Respondent.  In
      particular, it is striking that there is  no  witness  statement  from
      either the Appellant or Ms Musquet.


   7. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for
      reasons set out in his determination.


   8. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on 15 August 2014 in these terms:

"The grounds complain, justifiably, that the Judge did not allow the  appeal
      on the limited basis that Regulation  8  having  been  made  out,  the
      Respondent should now consider the exercise of  her  discretion  under
      Regulation 17(4). It is therefore arguable that the judge  should  not
      have simply allowed the appeal, because in doing so neither he nor the
      Respondent had considered how the Regulation 17 discretion  should  be
      exercised. The grant of a Residence Card being a  two  stage  process,
      the second stage has therefore not been undertaken.

Moreover it is well arguable that the Judge's  approach  to  the  issues  of
      whether the Appellant  had  established  that  he  enjoyed  a  durable
      relationship to the EEA national sponsor, and that she was a qualified
      person, was flawed."


Error of Law

   9. Even allowing as a premise the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  favourable
      assessment in respect of 'durable relationship', it is  common  ground
      before me that there remained the issue of regulation  17(4),  and  in
      particular regulation 17(4)(b) - "in all the circumstances it  appears
      to the Secretary of State appropriate to issue  the  residence  card".
      The Respondent refers to the assessment in this regard  in  the  RFRL,
      (see paragraph 5(iii) above), where the language  reflects  regulation
      17(5) - "...an extensive examination of the personal circumstances  of
      the applicant...".


  10. I note the observations in Ihemedu (OFMs  -  meaning)  Nigeria [2011]
      UKUT 00340 (IAC): see headnote at (iii): "Regulation 17(4)  makes  the
      issue of a residence card to an OFM/extended family member a matter of
      discretion. Where the Secretary of State has not  yet  exercised  that
      discretion the most an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow
      the appeal as being not in accordance with the law leaving the  matter
      of whether to exercise this discretion in the  appellant's  favour  or
      not to the Secretary of State". See further at paragraph 12:

"Regulation 17(4) of the 2006  Regulations  confers  on  the  decision-maker
      discretion as to whether a person found to be an  OFM/extended  family
      member  is  to  be  granted  a  residence  card.  In  exercising  that
      discretion matters such as whether an applicant  has  entered  the  UK
      lawfully or otherwise are plainly relevant (although  not  necessarily
      determinative:  see  YB  (EEA  reg  17(4)  -  proper  approach)  Ivory
      Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062 and Aladeselu and Others (2006 Regs - reg 8)
      Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00253 (IAC)). But in this case the Secretary  of
      State had not yet exercised that discretion and so the most the IJ was
      entitled to do was allow the appeal as being not  in  accordance  with
      the law leaving the matter  of  whether  to  exercise  the  reg  17(4)
      discretion in his favour to the Secretary of State: see  Yau  Yak  Wah
      [1982] Imm AR 16; MO (reg 17(4) EEA Regs) Iraq [2008] UKAIT 00061."


  11. Ms Glass accepted that the Judge  had  not  turned  his  attention  to
      regulation 17(4) and to that extent his decision to allow  the  appeal
      outright was in error.


  12. Ms Glass, however, was not prepared to make  any  such  concession  in
      respect of the issue of durable relationship.


  13. In this regard the Judge said this at paragraphs 10 and 11:

"The Respondents [sic.] state that although documentation has been  provided
      to show that the couple are cohabiting it does  not  necessarily  mean
      that they are in a relationship akin  to  marriage.  In  stating  this
      however the Respondents appear to have  totally  overlooked  the  fact
      that the couple had earlier submitted an application for the Appellant
      to be accepted as being the French  national's  spouse  on  15th  June
      2013. The Respondents quite properly refused this application  because
      they were not satisfied that the marriage certificate  was  valid  and
      they refused this application  on  28th  October  2013.  However,  the
      Respondents should have taken this application into  consideration  of
      the second application. The  fact  that  the  Appellants  [sic.]  have
      previously applied  for  a  residence  card  on  the  basis  of  their
      "marriage" should have been an indication that  they  would  not  only
      cohabiting as claimed, and  apparently  accepted  by  the  Respondents
      given the documentary evidence provided, but also that they were in  a
      relationship akin to that of marriage; even if the Respondents did not
      accept the validity of that "marriage".

On the basis of the evidence before me it is clear that  the  Appellant  and
      his  EEA  national  partner  are  living   together   in   a   durable
      relationship."


  14. I accept the substance of the Respondent's challenge to the  reasoning
      of the First-tier Tribunal Judge. The fact that an earlier application
      had been made as a spouse does not  in  itself  demonstrate  that  the
      Appellant and Ms Musquet are in a relationship akin to marriage.  More
      particularly, the Judge is in error in stating that the Respondent had
      "totally overlooked" the fact of the earlier application. The  earlier
      application is referenced in the current RFRL. Indeed, a passage  from
      the earlier refusal letter dated 26 October 2013 is quoted and  relied
      upon as part of the Respondent's reasons in respect  of  the  type  of
      materials that might reasonably be expected to be produced as evidence
      of a relationship beyond mere residing together, such as might be  the
      case for persons sharing  a  flat.  In  my  judgement  the  conclusion
      reached by the First-tier Tribunal Judge was not open to  him  on  the
      available evidence, even allowing for a  cumulative  consideration  of
      the fact of the earlier application  and  the  evidence  suggesting  a
      common address.


  15. In the circumstances I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge was flawed for material error  of  law  and  I  set  it
      aside.


  16. The decision in the appeal accordingly needs to be remade.


Re-making the Decision

  17. Although the Appellant had previously requested  that  his  appeal  be
      dealt with 'on the papers', he was in attendance today accompanied  by
      Ms Musquet. For the reasons already alluded to above, were it the case
      that the appeal were to be re-determined today on  the  basis  of  the
      papers, it seems to me inevitable that it would be  dismissed  because
      of a failure to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof  on  a  balance  of
      probabilities  in  respect  of  the  nature  and  durability  of   the
      relationship  enjoyed  between  the  Appellant  and  Ms  Musquet.  The
      Appellant's  attendance  raises  the  possibility  of   hearing   oral
      evidence. However, still to  date  no  witness  statements  have  been
      filed; further both representatives indicated that there would  likely
      be difficulties in dealing with an oral hearing today.


  18. I bear in mind that there has not yet been  an  oral  hearing  in  the
      appeal, and in all of the circumstances it seems to me that  the  most
      appropriate resolution is  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, to be determined following an oral hearing before any  Judge
      other than Judge De Haney, with all issues at large. I issue  a  brief
      Direction consequently.


  19. Notwithstanding the Direction and the caveat  in  respect  of  adverse
      inferences possibly being drawn in the absence of  attendance  at  the
      hearing, the Appellant is at liberty to request that his appeal  again
      be determined 'on the papers'. However, he should take note  that  the
      nature of the issues in the appeal  are  such  that  the  Tribunal  is
      likely to be assisted in reaching a decision by being able to hear the
      Appellant and Ms Musquet give evidence and make  themselves  available
      for questioning by a representative of the Respondent.


Decision

  20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
      error of law and is set aside.


  21. The decision in the appeal is to be remade following an  oral  hearing
      in the First-tier Tribunal before  any  Judge  other  than  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge De Haney.


Consequent Direction

The Appellant is to file  and  serve  at  least  seven  days  prior  to  the
      rehearing date all such further evidence as he wishes to rely upon. In
      particular he is to serve witness statements from both himself and  Ms
      Musquet. In the absence of such statements, and in the absence of  any
      appearance by the Appellant and Ms Musquet, the  Appellant  should  be
      aware that adverse inferences may be drawn.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     25 September 2014
