



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/13568/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Determination Promulgated       |
|On Friday 22 July 2016                    | On Wednesday 27 July 2016       |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                            MR EVANS ANSU ANDREWS

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Akomene, solicitor, Afrifa and Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      Background
    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Row promulgated on 26 October 2015 ("the Decision") dismissing
       his appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse him leave  to
       remain outside the Immigration  Rules.   Permission  to  appeal  the
       Decision was granted on 20 June 2016 by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Bruce
       on the basis that the adverse inferences drawn from the  absence  of
       the section 7 report were either not justifiable or  were  premature
       in circumstances where the Appellant was not on  notice  as  to  the
       relevance of that document.  The matter comes before me to determine
       whether the First-Tier Tribunal Decision involved the  making  of  a
       material error of law and, if I so find, to re-make the decision.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Ghana now aged  nineteen  years.   He
       claims to have arrived in the UK in 2007.  This is disputed  by  the
       Respondent whose earliest record of the Appellant is an  application
       for leave made on 17 June 2010.  There is reference to a letter from
       the Bushey Academy stating that the Appellant attended there from  7
       September 2009 but it is noted by the Judge that this was not before
       him ([8]).


    3. The Respondent granted the  Appellant  leave  until  his  eighteenth
       birthday which was on 15 January 2015.  The Appellant  made  an  in-
       time application for further leave, the refusal of which has led  to
       this appeal.  The basis of the Appellant's claim to remain  is  that
       he has lived in the UK with his foster parent,  Mr  Amoah,  under  a
       family court order, has established his life in the UK  and  has  no
       family to whom he can return in Ghana.   The  Judge  heard  evidence
       from both the Appellant and Mr Amoah.  It is  the  Appellant's  case
       that his father abandoned him in the UK,  that  his  father  is  now
       dead, he does not know the whereabouts of his mother and has no idea
       whether he has any other  family  members  in  Ghana.  He  has  been
       educated in the UK.  He is a keen footballer and would like to  play
       professionally or have a career coaching.   He  has  no  partner  or
       children in the UK.


    4. The Appellant's case is  put  on  the  basis  that  there  are  very
       significant obstacles to his  return  to  Ghana  so  that  paragraph
       276ADE(1)(vi) is met; alternatively, that he can succeed outside the
       Rules on the basis of Article 8 ECHR.


      Submissions

    5. The Appellant's grounds of challenge centre  round  the  Appellant's
       failure to produce the  section  7  report  which  would  have  been
       prepared prior to the placing  of  the  Appellant  with  his  foster
       carer, Mr Amoah.  The Appellant argues that the social services must
       have been satisfied that it was necessary to place the him  with  Mr
       Amoah due to a lack of family members to care for him and  that  the
       Respondent must  also  have  been  satisfied  that  there  were  not
       adequate reception arrangements in Ghana as otherwise she would  not
       have granted him leave to be in the UK as  an  unaccompanied  child.
       The Appellant argues that it was not open to the Judge to go  behind
       those earlier decisions by requiring the production of the section 7
       report and drawing adverse inferences from its non-production.   The
       Appellant argues that those adverse inferences have impacted on  the
       Judge's findings in relation to the obstacles faced by the Appellant
       in Ghana and have led him to speculate as  to  the  availability  of
       family support there.


    6. The second of  the  Appellant's  grounds  focusses  on  the  Judge's
       proportionality assessment.  It is said that the Judge  has  on  the
       one hand accepted that the Appellant should not bear  responsibility
       for being in the UK illegally as he was  brought  here  as  a  minor
       whilst on the other holding that against him in the public interest.




    7. In relation to the first of those grounds,  Mr  Akomene  points  out
       that the Respondent did not dispute that the Appellant did not  have
       family members in Ghana.  He submitted that the  Home  Office  would
       have been privy to the social services' conclusions which led to the
       placing of the Appellant with Mr Amoah and had granted leave on  the
       basis that it was satisfied that the Appellant did  not  have  other
       family members to care for him.  As Mr Wilding pointed out, this  is
       inaccurate.  Generally, documents produced in family proceedings are
       tightly controlled and would not be disclosed  to  the  Home  Office
       unless ordered to be shown to it.  He said that there is nothing  on
       the Home Office file to suggest that the Home Office has  seen  that
       report.  In response, Mr Akomene pointed out that even if  the  Home
       Office did not have knowledge of  the  social  services'  views,  it
       would still be the case that  the  Home  Office  accepted  that  the
       Appellant did not have family in Ghana to whom he could be  returned
       as otherwise leave would not be granted.  As I pointed out,  though,
       the fact that the Home Office accepted that there were  no  adequate
       reception facilities at the time when leave  was  granted  does  not
       necessarily equate to a recognition that the Appellant does not have
       family members in Ghana; simply a recognition that no-one  could  be
       found at that time based on what may well  have  been  only  cursory
       enquiries and would necessarily be based on what the Home Office was
       told by the Appellant and Mr Amoah.


    8. Mr Wilding submitted that  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
       account the failure to produce the section 7 report.  It was for the
       Appellant to make his case.  The Judge was simply noting the absence
       of evidence.  The Judge's findings at [28] to [31] of  the  Decision
       were open to him based on that lack of evidence.  The Respondent had
       not conceded the facts of this case although Mr Wilding  did  accept
       that the decision letter did not directly challenge the  Appellant's
       account of having no family in Ghana.  Mr Wilding also  pointed  out
       that, having now been alerted to the impact of the lack of evidence,
       the Appellant  was  still  not  seeking  to  introduce  any  further
       evidence to demonstrate that he did not have family in Ghana.


    9. Mr Wilding also pointed out that, irrespective of the issue  whether
       the Appellant does have family in Ghana, the Appellant  would  still
       not be entitled to remain in the  UK.   The  Appellant  is  a  young
       single adult.  There is nothing which constitutes a very significant
       obstacle to his reintegration in Ghana.  On his own account  he  was
       aged ten when he came to the UK.

   10. In relation to the second ground, Mr Wilding submitted that there is
       no   contradiction   in   the   Judge's    conclusions    concerning
       proportionality.  The Judge accepted that the Appellant was  not  at
       fault for being here illegally.  However, applying section 117B, the
       Appellant's status has always been precarious.  He was told that  he
       would not be permitted to remain  beyond  his  eighteenth  birthday.
       Furthermore, the  Rules  are  an  indication  of  where  the  public
       interest lies.  If the Appellant is  unable  to  satisfy  the  "very
       significant obstacles" test in paragraph 276ADE, there is  no  basis
       on which he should be able to remain. That was  the  starting  point
       for the Judge's consideration of Article 8.  The balancing  exercise
       was a matter for the Judge and it was for him to give such weight as
       he considered appropriate to the various factors unless his decision
       could be said to be perverse which is not this case.


   11. Both parties accepted that, if I were to find a  material  error  of
       law, I could go on to re-make the decision  based  on  the  evidence
       which  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   Mr   Akomene
       confirmed that the Appellant did not seek to adduce further evidence
       and there was no challenge to the credibility findings other than in
       relation to the Judge's reliance  on  the  failure  to  produce  the
       section 7 report.


    Discussion and conclusions


   12. I begin with the Judge's consideration of the issue surrounding  the
       Appellant's family in Ghana.  I note as a starting  point  that  the
       Respondent has not expressly disputed the Appellant's case  on  this
       issue.  However, I also accept Mr Wilding's submission that  neither
       has she conceded it.  Furthermore, the  basis  for  the  Appellant's
       application for further leave to remain, according to  the  decision
       letter was based not on the lack of  family  members  in  Ghana  and
       therefore  that  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to   the
       Appellant returning there but rather that he had made  his  life  in
       the UK, been made the subject of a family court order in  favour  of
       someone living in the UK,  had  received  education  here  and  been
       granted leave  to  remain.   As  the  Respondent  pointed  out,  the
       Appellant was granted leave outside the Rules and not  discretionary
       leave and the factors on  which  he  relied  were  not  sufficiently
       persuasive.  He could continue his studies or employment  in  Ghana.
       There is no mention of his family circumstances.


   13. The evidence before the Judge was  that  of  the  Appellant  and  Mr
       Amoah, the Appellant's  foster  carer.   Both  provided  very  short
       statements for the hearing.  Mr Amoah's statement says nothing about
       the Appellant's family save that  his  father  abandoned  him.   The
       Appellant's states, as I have noted at [3] above, that his father is
       dead, he does not know the whereabouts of his mother and has no idea
       about his other family members.  He does not expressly say  that  he
       does not have any family in Ghana; he does not know.


   14. I turn then to consider the evidence given to  the  Judge  which  is
       cited at [13] to [19] of the Decision.  The Judge noted the  content
       of the short statements to which I refer above.  He then notes  that
       Mr Amoah gave a very different version in his oral evidence  ([13]).
       It appeared from that evidence that the source  of  the  Appellant's
       information that his father is dead came from Mr Amoah  and  yet  Mr
       Amoah had said nothing  of  this  in  his  written  statement.   The
       Appellant  also  expanded  on  his  evidence  as   to   his   family
       circumstances, stating that he used to  live  with  his  grandmother
       (when he had previously said that he did not have any idea about his
       grandparents).  He also says that he was told that  his  grandmother
       was dead ([19]).  That is the first mention of this.  Mr  Amoah  too
       further elaborated on his evidence by stating as  recorded  at  [19]
       that he had made enquiries on return to Ghana in 2009 and found that
       the Appellant's grandmother was dead and that he had no family. This
       had never been mentioned previously.


   15. The Judge then went on to consider that evidence at [20] to [27]  of
       the Decision.  Whilst it is the case  that  the  family  proceedings
       which led to the Appellant being placed with Mr Amoah  do  form  the
       central focus of that consideration, this is  not  the  only  factor
       which led the Judge not to accept the  Appellant's  and  Mr  Amoah's
       evidence (besides the obvious point that  their  oral  evidence  was
       inconsistent or significantly  elaborated  upon  their  statements).
       The Judge gave the Appellant the benefit of  the  doubt  as  to  the
       inconsistency between his evidence and that of Mr  Amoah  about  the
       date of the  Appellant's  father's  death  due  to  his  young  age.
       However, as I have already  pointed  out,  the  evidence  about  the
       deaths of both the Appellant's father and latterly  his  grandmother
       was evidence which  came  late  in  the  day  and  was  expanded  on
       considerably.  The Judge was  entitled  therefore  to  be  sceptical
       about the truth of those allegations.


   16. As the Judge notes, it is for the Appellant to make  out  his  case.
       That he did not do.  The reference to the  lack  of  the  section  7
       report also has to be read in context.  It is noted  that  Mr  Amoah
       was the person who referred to  that  report  when  giving  evidence
       ([26]).  The Judge was entitled to draw  inferences  from  the  fact
       that, although Mr Amoah raised this in evidence, he did not  produce
       the report.


   17. The Judge also noted other evidence which  could  easily  have  been
       produced, particularly in relation to the death of  the  Appellant's
       father and grandmother.  If they were dead, as the Judge observed at
       [27],  it  would  have  been  an  easy  matter   to   obtain   death
       certificates.


   18. The section at [20] to [27] when read as a whole does  not  indicate
       that the Judge placed great weight on the  failure  to  produce  the
       section 7 report or that the failure to produce it gave rise to  the
       adverse credibility findings on this issue.  What is there noted  is
       the failure to produce any evidence  to  substantiate  the  lack  of
       family in Ghana.  That was a factor dealt with in  evidence  at  the
       hearing and evidence which I have already noted went way beyond what
       was in the written statements for the hearing.  It is also a  factor
       which does not appear to  have  been  raised  with  the  Respondent.
       Given the elaboration of the evidence at the hearing and the failure
       to corroborate it, the Judge was entitled to  reach  the  conclusion
       that the evidence was not credible.

   19. Even if I had been prepared to find that there was an error  in  the
       Judge's reliance on the failure to produce the section 7 report  and
       to accept the Appellant's case at its highest,  that  error  is  not
       material.  That is because what the Appellant has to  show  is  that
       there are very significant obstacles to his reintegration in  Ghana.
       That is what the Judge went on to consider at [32] to  [34]  of  the
       Decision.  Although the Judge makes mention that the  Appellant  has
       "in all likelihood" got family relatives and contacts in Ghana, that
       is only partly based on a finding that his  father  and  grandmother
       may well not be dead.  It is based also on the fact that his  foster
       parent is from Ghana and apparently retains contacts there since  he
       said that he returned in 2009 to look for members of the Appellant's
       family. Even if the Appellant has no family left in Ghana, the  fact
       remains that he has been raised in this country by another  Ghanaian
       national who  retains  contact  with  that  country  and,  it  could
       reasonably be assumed, would make the Appellant  aware  of  Ghanaian
       customs.  That is not speculative.


   20. Further, and in any event, it was not for  the  Judge  to  ascertain
       whether there are very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
       return.  It is for the Appellant to make his case as to  what  those
       obstacles are.  Other than pointing to his education in the  UK  and
       lack of family in Ghana, his evidence does not make out  a  case  of
       very significant obstacles.


   21. Turning then finally to the  Appellant's  second  ground  concerning
       proportionality, that follows on from the Judge's finding that there
       are no very significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's  return  to
       Ghana, a finding which I have already noted as  being  open  to  the
       Judge on the (limited) evidence.  The Judge sets out at [35] to [37]
       the matters giving rise to the Appellant's claim to  a  private  and
       family life.  The Judge accepts that  the  Appellant  has  formed  a
       private and family life, interference with which the Respondent  has
       to justify.


   22. The Judge then goes on to  consider  the  public  interest.   In  so
       doing, the  Judge  correctly  identifies  the  relevant  factors  in
       section 117B Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He notes
       that he can give little weight therefore to the Appellant's  private
       life.  He also notes the fact that the Appellant has  been  educated
       at public expense and is not financially  independent.   Mr  Akomene
       criticised reliance on that factor as being something for which  the
       Appellant is not to blame.  That may well  be  right  but  the  fact
       remains that he has been educated and cared for to  some  extent  at
       least at taxpayer's expense.  That is a factor to  which  the  Judge
       was entitled to and indeed right to refer.


   23. The critical paragraphs in relation to the second of the Appellant's
       grounds are at [43] and [44] as follows:-


            "[43]      The maintenance of effective immigration controls is
           in the public interest.  Although it is not  the  fault  of  the
           appellant it is nonetheless the case that he was brought to  the
           United Kingdom illegally.  He  was  left  here  for  the  United
           Kingdom to take responsibility  for.   This  cannot  be  in  the
           public interest.   Such  conduct  would  leave  the  immigration
           policy of the United Kingdom in chaos.  It would  be  unfair  on
           everyone else who makes a  legal  application  to  come  to  the
           United Kingdom.  It is also criminal activity and puts  at  risk
           those children who are illegally brought into the United Kingdom
           and whose welfare the respondent is obliged by statute  to  have
           regard to.
            [44] All of these matters weigh heavily against  the  appellant
           when considering the  question  of  proportionality.   Whilst  I
           accept that there will be an interference with  the  appellant's
           right to family and private life and that Article 8 is engaged I
           find that the interference is in accordance  with  the  law.   I
           further find that such interference is necessary in a democratic
           society both for the economic well-being of the country and  for
           the protection of the rights and freedoms of others and that the
           interference is proportionate to these legitimate public ends on
           the facts of this appeal. The appellant does not  succeed  under
           article 8"


   24. Although at first blush I was inclined to agree with Mr Akomene that
       there appeared to be an inconsistency between saying  at  [43]  that
       the Appellant should not be held responsible for  being  in  the  UK
       illegally whilst at [44] saying that those matters  weighed  heavily
       against him, on further reflection I do not consider  that  this  is
       what the Judge there intends.  Paragraph [43] is simply a  statement
       of the public interest in immigration  control  which  is  a  factor
       which the Judge was bound to take into account.   I  agree  with  Mr
       Wilding that  the  Judge  has  noted  that  the  Appellant  was  not
       responsible for his illegal entry as he was a child.   However,  the
       fact remains that the public interest requires effective immigration
       control and it is a facet of that public interest that the  bringing
       of children into the UK illegally should be discouraged.  That  does
       not  mean  that  the  Judge  is  holding  the  Appellant  personally
       responsible, merely that the  public  interest  weighs  against  the
       Appellant's case as a result.


   25. For those reasons, I find that there is no error of  law  either  in
       relation to the second of the Appellant's grounds.


   26. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there is no  material
       error of law in the Decision and I uphold it.





DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point  of  law.  I  therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision
promulgated on 26 October 2015 with the  consequence  that  the  Appellant's
appeal is dismissed.

Signed

[pic]

Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Smith
                           Date   27 July 2016
