
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(First Tier Tribunal and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: IA/13392/2014


                        THE FIRST TIER TRIBUNAL ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 November 2014                            |On 11 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                 umar khalil
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr Z Nasim, Counsel
For the Respondent:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination promulgated on 17  July  2014
    by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ferguson) dismissing an appeal by the
    appellant, Mr Khalil, against the refusal of his application for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) under paragraph 322(1A) and  245DD
    of the Immigration Rules.  The facts and the background are set out  in
    some detail in the determination and we need not repeat them here.

 2. Essentially the appeal turns  on  a  single  point  of  law  for  which
    permission was granted by Judge PJM Hollingworth, namely  the  adequacy
    of the description by the Tribunal of the standard of proof in relation
    to the respondent.

 3. In paragraph [7] of the determination  the  Tribunal  referred  to  the
    burden of proof on the respondent to establish any contested  precedent
    fact - here, the alleged  falsity  of  a  document  relied  on  by  the
    appellant.  That paragraph deals with the burden and standard of  proof
    as follows:

    "Because  this  is  a  decision  taken  under  paragraph  322  of   the
    Immigration Rules the burden of proof is first  on  the  respondent  to
    establish any contested precedent fact, here, whether there is evidence
    to establish that the document is likely to be false."

 4. The documents relied on by the appellant included a copy of a  National
    Savings Account statement and a  letter  dated  7  November  2013  that
    purported to emanate from the Government of Pakistan  National  Savings
    Centre in Lahore.  The  respondent's  original  decision  refusing  the
    application  stated  that  the  respondent  was  satisfied  that   this
    documentation was false because "the bank had stated  to  us  that  the
    letters (sic) had not been  issued  by  the  National  Savings  Centre,
    Lahore as stated on your submitted letter": paragraph [2].

 5. At that time the appellant had not received a copy of the  Home  Office
    document verification report ("DVR") relied on by the respondent.  This
    stated:

         "The National Savings Account statement and  letter  was  faxed  to
         SPOC on the fax number [which is then set  out]  to  ascertain  the
         authenticity of the documents.  After checking with  the  concerned
         branch in Lahore the SPOC replied back via fax  that  this  account
         statement and letter have not been issued by the  National  Savings
         Centre in Lahore.  Scanned  copy  of  fax  reply  is  attached  for
         reference.  In light of  above  information  the  National  Savings
         letters submitted by the applicant are not genuine".

 6. In his evidence before the Tribunal, the appellant said there must have
    been a clerical error,  and  that  he  had  called  the  bank  who  had
    confirmed that the documents were original documents and that the money
    in the accounts was a "family investment".  He said that the money  had
    come from his uncle, and he produced more documentation in  support  of
    his application: paragraph [10].

 7. The First-tier Tribunal considered  the  further  documentation,  which
    once again consisted of a letter purporting to come from the Government
    of Pakistan National Savings Centre, Model Town Branch in Lahore. It is
    dated 30 May 2014, and addressed "To whom it may concern".  The  letter
    stated that Mr Khalil (and it gave his  address)  was  "a  genuine  and
    valued customer" and that he had invested a sum of money in  the  Model
    Town Branch on 13 March and 15 March 2012.  It said that "our  investor
    has complained to us that his statement could not be  verified  by  our
    official so he was refused.  Actually, his  statement  is  genuine  but
    there may be a clerical mistake by our staff, that is  the  reason  his
    statement could not  be  verified".  It  was  signed  by  somebody  who
    describes himself as "the Officer in Charge, National  Savings  Centre,
    Model Town Branch, Lahore."

 8. The submission made  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  the  Presenting
    Officer was that this further document was no better than  the  earlier
    documentation submitted by the appellant. He also relied upon the  DVR,
    which was not in the respondent's bundle, but produced  for  the  first
    time at the hearing.  That document indicates that financial  documents
    were submitted by the Home Office to the National  Savings  Directorate
    ("NSD") for verification.  On the  front  page  appears  a  copy  of  a
    scanned attachment of a document described as "National Savings 1 x 1",
    with the request "please verify  the  attached  bank  documents,  thank
    you". On the back of that page details of the inquiries made and  their
    results have been filled in by an Immigration Liaison  Officer  in  the
    Risk and Assessment Overseas Network ("RALON") section of  the  British
    High Commission in Islamabad, Mr Nasir Mehmood. They have already  been
    quoted in paragraph 5 above.

 9. One of the boxes on that page shows the contact details for the  person
    at  the  NSD  to  whom  the  documentation  was   sent   by   fax   for
    authentication, a lady named Mrs Shah Jehan Tahir, who is described  as
    the "Joint Director". Among the details provided to the NSD in the form
    faxed to it were:

           . the certificate holder's name, Mr Umar Khalil;

           . the unit registration numbers (which appear also on the letter
             of 7 November 2013 whose authenticity was being checked); and

           . the name, address and telephone number of the relevant  branch
             of the  bank,  correctly  recorded  as  the  National  Savings
             Centre, Model Town in Lahore.

10. Next, the form requests the following details to  be  provided  by  the
    NSD:

           . The certificate holder's name;

           . The account opening date;

           . The amount of each certificate;

           . The CNIC number of  the  certificate  holder  or  signatories,
             (that is, the person's national identity number);

           . A contact number for the certificate holder; and

           . The present balance and whether the balance  is  matched  with
             the record.

      None of those details was supplied  when  the  form  was  faxed  back.
      Instead the form bears a stamp of the verifying  NSD  official,  whose
      name is also printed out with his  signature,  a  Mr  Maqbool  Hussain
      Qamar. He describes himself as "the Assistant Director HQ, Directorate
      of National Savings, Lahore". Above his name  and  stamp,  written  in
      manuscript, there appears the single word "FAKE".

11. At paragraphs [7] and [8] of the determination the First-tier  Tribunal
    referred to the DVR. It found "the  evidence  sufficient  to  establish
    that the NSD has declared the document to be false" [9].  The  Tribunal
    further found that the name of the signatory of the letter  of  30  May
    2014 relied on by the appellant was indecipherable from  the  signature
    and that the explanation given  in  that  letter  did  not  match  that
    received from the NSD which had found "in plain terms"  that  the  bank
    statement was false [10-11].

12. Although the standard of proof is the civil standard of the balance  of
    probabilities, it is well established that whenever  an  allegation  is
    made that documents  relied  on  by  an  applicant  are  forgeries,  or
    concocted, or otherwise lack authenticity, then because of the  serious
    nature of the allegation, the  respondent  has  to  satisfy  a  "higher
    standard" of proof: see AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA  (Civ)  773  at
    [43]. Although there continues to be some debate as to whether this  is
    accurately described as a higher balance of probabilities,  the  nature
    and quality of the evidence relied upon in support of  that  allegation
    must be of sufficient cogency, it must emanate from a  source  that  is
    credible, and it must be subjected to very careful scrutiny.  Mr  Nasim
    submitted that the DVR fell far short of satisfying the burden  on  the
    respondent in that regard.

13. Whilst it is true that the First-tier Tribunal does not clearly set out
    the standard of proof by making reference to "the  higher  standard  of
    proof," the question we have to ask ourselves is whether that  omission
    amounted to,  or  gave  rise  to,  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination. That involves a consideration of whether or not, if  the
    high  standard  of  proof  had  been   expressly   addressed   in   the
    determination, a different result would (or should) have  been  reached
    from the one that was reached by the Tribunal.

14. The Tribunal, having gone through all of  the  information  before  it,
    including the laconic response in the fax to the requests in  the  DVR,
    and Mr Mehmood's interpretation of it, said this in  paragraph  [9]  of
    the determination:

         "...Given the protocol  for  the  verification  of  documents,  the
         response and the seal from the assistant director, the evidence  is
         sufficient to establish that the National Savings  Directorate  has
         declared the document to be false".

15. It seems to us  that  there  is  grave  difficulty  in  coming  to  the
    conclusion that the word "fake" bears anything other  than  the  normal
    meaning attributed to it by the Home Office and by  the  Tribunal.  The
    NSD, through an  assistant  director,  had  checked  the  position  and
    certified that the document submitted to it for  verification  was  not
    genuine. In other words, the letter dated 7 November 2013 purporting to
    come from the bank verifying the account statement did not emanate from
    the National Savings Centre in Lahore. Mr Nasim was therefore driven to
    submitting that that evidence, in and of itself,  was  insufficient  to
    satisfy any tribunal to the appropriate standard that the document  was
    indeed false, bearing in mind the existence of the other documents that
    were relied on by the appellant, in particular the further letter of 30
    May 2014. However, that letter was said to emanate from the same source
    as the one already declared to be "fake".

16. Mr Nasim pointed  to  the  fact  that  the  DVR  was  produced  by  the
    respondent for the very first time at the hearing.  However,  that  did
    not put the appellant in any apparent difficulty; we note that  he  did
    not seek an adjournment.  Instead the appellant submitted that  it  was
    appropriate  for  the  Home  Office  to  go  through  the  verification
    procedure again, but quite understandably that  idea  did  not  commend
    itself to the Tribunal.

17. It is very difficult to see a basis upon which it  could  seriously  be
    contended that it  was  not  open  to  the  Tribunal  to  come  to  the
    conclusion that it did on the evidence before it. The  meaning  of  the
    word "fake" was clear. It is not apt to  describe  a  genuine  document
    issued by a bank official but without the requisite authority.

18. There is nothing in the point  made  by  Mr  Nasim  that  the  original
    addressee of the inquiry, Mrs Tahir, was not the author of the response
    to it. A person who was plainly in a position of authority  within  the
    NSD, an assistant director, had satisfied himself that the document was
    not a genuine document issued by the National Savings Centre in Lahore.



19. Nor do we consider that there is anything in the point made by Mr Nasim
    that there was insufficient evidence to  prove  what  document(s)  were
    sent for verification. Mr Mehmood refers in the  text  of  the  DVR  to
    sending a National  Savings  account  statement  and  letter.  That  is
    consistent with the name of the attachment on the first  page  and  the
    contents of  the  fax  to  the  NSD  (which  gives  details  which  are
    consistent with the  underlying  bank  documents  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant). We are satisfied that the  documents  that  were  sent  for
    authentication were indeed the same as the documents originally  relied
    on by the appellant and on the basis of which the  decision  to  refuse
    his application was originally made.

20. The clear inference to be drawn from the  NSD's  response  is  that  no
    reliance could be placed on the document said to have emanated from the
    National Savings Centre in Lahore because it  was  not  authentic,  and
    that was directly  contradictory  to  the  suggestion  floated  by  the
    appellant and echoed in the letter of 30 May 2014 that there  may  have
    been a clerical error. The fact that none of the requested  details  in
    the boxes  requesting  specific  information  about  the  account,  the
    certificate numbers and details of the account-holder  were  filled  in
    when the response was returned is also consistent with  the  conclusion
    that the NSD's inquiries had been unable to match the details given  to
    it with an existing account.

21. In all the circumstances, even if  the  Tribunal  did  not  clearly  or
    adequately set out the standard of proof in relation to the respondent,
    we are satisfied that the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    respondent had discharged the burden of proof  to  the  requisite  high
    standard.

22. That being so, despite the valiant attempts of Mr Nasim to persuade  us
    to the contrary, it seems to us that there is  no  basis  on  which  we
    could realistically allow this appeal.

Decision

23. There was no error of law in the determination such that  the  decision
    dismissing the appeal should be set aside.  This  appeal  is  therefore
    dismissed.



Signed                                  Date 10th November 2014
  [pic]
Mrs Justice Andrews

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 10th November 2014
  [pic]
Mrs Justice Andrews
