
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13968/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 September 2015                 |On 11 November 2015                  |
|Prepared 10 September 2015           |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                               Prakash Chhetri
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Bond, of Counsel instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION and DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Thew, who in a determination promulgated on 28  November  2014
    dismissed his appeal against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse to grant him indefinite leave to remain under the provisions  of
    paragraph 276B of HC 395.

2.    The  appellant  had  entered  Britain  on  21  October  2004  and  the
    application for leave to remain was made on 1 October 2013.   That  had
    been varied on 4 February 2014 when it was asserted that he  had  lived
    in Britain for ten years.

3.   The application was refused on the basis that he had had  lawful  leave
    to remain following his arrival in Britain until 27 June 2011  but  had
    not submitted an application for further leave until 12 August 2011 and
    although his leave had been further granted on 3 October 2011 the  time
    between 28 June 2011 and 2 October  2011,  a  period  of  approximately
    three months  and  four  days  was  such  that  his  continuous  lawful
    residence had been broken.  He had remained in Britain in breach of the
    immigration laws in excess of 28 days and therefore could  not  satisfy
    the requirements of paragraph 276B(v).

4.   It was not considered that there were any other  factors  which  should
    mean  that  the  respondent  should  exercise  her  discretion  in  the
    appellant's favour.

5.   Having heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  the  judge  set  out,  in
    paragraph 13,  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  appellant's  immigration
    history in Britain.

6.   She then pointed out that the appellant had not lived  in  Britain  for
    ten years at the time of the second application nor indeed had he  been
    resident in Britain for ten years at the time  the  decision  had  been
    made on 10 March 2014 and therefore at the date of decision he had only
    been in Britain for nine years and five months and  therefore  did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276B.

7.   She noted the assertion that his leave to remain had been  extended  by
    virtue of Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 and that as  this  was
    not a PBS appeal the  Tribunal  was  not  precluded  from  taking  into
    account the appellant's leave to remain extended by Section 3C.

8.   In paragraph  16  of  the  determination  the  judge  referred  to  the
    determination in AQ (Pakistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 833 and contrasted  that
    Court of Appeal judgment with the determination of the  Upper  Tribunal
    in MU ('Statement of Additional Grounds'; long  residence;  discretion)
    Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 442 (IAC).  She stated that the judgment  in  AQ
    (Pakistan) would not permit an argument to  be  put  forward  that  the
    appellant could meet the requirements of the Rules and  that  therefore
    MU must now be regarded as  wrongly  decided.   She  then  went  on  to
    consider the issue of the appellant's rights under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

9.   Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had
    incorrectly stated that MU had been wrongly decided.

10.  When the matter first came before me, sitting with  Lord  Matthews,  Ms
    Bond raised the issue as to whether or not it had been conceded at  the
    time of the first hearing that there were good reasons why  the  period
    when the appellant had not had leave should be discounted - he had been
    given leave in accordance with his CAS  but  it  had  not  covered  the
    period after the end of the course and before the results were  issued.
    This matter had been put to  the  Secretary  of  State,  who  had  then
    maintained the decision to grant leave only  until  shortly  after  the
    appellant's course had ended and not until after the results  had  been
    produced.  She stated that she understood from Mr  Nicholson  that  the
    Presenting Officer at the appeal had conceded that  point.   She  asked
    for an adjournment to enable her to obtain written confirmation of this
    from Mr Nicholson.

11.  The matter then came  back  before  me.   Ms  Bond  did  not  have  any
    confirmation from Mr Nicholson regarding any concession made but stated
    that she was still waiting for Mr Nicholson's written  confirmation  of
    the position.

12.  The appeal was then adjourned further.  When it came back before me  Ms
    Bond stated that she had now heard from Mr Nicholson, who had  made  it
    clear that the facts as to what had happened when the appellant's leave
    had not been extended had been agreed but there  had  been  no  further
    concession.

13.  She and Mr Norton drew my attention  to  the  relevant  IDIs  regarding
    what periods should or should  not  be  ignored  when  considering  the
    continuation of leave to remain leading  to  the  grant  of  indefinite
    leave to remain on long residence grounds.

14.  Mr Norton in reply accepted that the judge had made  no  clear  finding
    on that issue but also accepted that the judge had been wrong to  state
    that the judgment in AQ  (Pakistan)  meant  that  the  decision  in  MU
    (Bangladesh) was no longer valid.

15.  It was therefore agreed that the  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for further consideration - such consideration  now
    taking into account the up-to-date position regarding  the  appellant's
    rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

16.  I consider that  the  requirements  of  the  Senior  President  of  the
    Tribunal's Practice Directions are met and I therefore direct that this
    appeal be remitted to a  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    hearing afresh.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is remitted to a hearing afresh at Taylor House.

Directions

Time estimate two hours.  No interpreter.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

