
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13743/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13th September 2016             |On 27 September 2016               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE S V PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                            Anugrah Bhuvan Singh
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Attendance
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, a Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, Mr Singh, appeals with permission against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bradshaw dismissing his appeal against the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse him a  residence  card  as  the
    spouse of an EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Appellant claims to be  married  to  Ms  Katila  Da  Cruz
    Fernandes, a Portuguese national. The Respondent had claimed  that  the
    marriage was bigamous. The judge  had  considered  the  matter  on  the
    papers as was asked of him by the Appellant with no objection from  the
    Respondent.

The Hearing

2.   Through an abundance of caution we caused enquiries  to  be  made  this
    morning in respect of the non-attendance of Mr Singh  at  this  hearing
    before us.  There was a direct telephone  call  to  Mr  Singh  via  the
    Tribunal's clerk. Mr Singh had said that he had spoken to his solicitor
    and that could not attend as "his wife  is  not  around".   Mr  Singh's
    solicitors, Messrs Maxwell Solicitors, were also telephoned. They  said
    to the Tribunal's clerk they  were  not  attending  the  hearing  today
    because they no longer represent the Appellant  and  indeed  there  had
    been no payment for their services. Having considered Rule  38  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, we are  satisfied  that
    the Appellant and his solicitors were notified by post of  the  hearing
    in good time. We saw no reason not to  proceed  with  the  hearing  and
    considered it was in the interests of justice to do so.  The  Appellant
    clearly knew about the hearing and has opted not to attend.

First-tier Tribunal's decision and permission to appeal

3.   Before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  respondent  maintained  that  the
    appellant's wife was already married to a Mr Naseer  when  she  married
    the appellant and relied on an Immigration Officer's conversation  with
    Mr Naseer which was at Annex F of the respondent's bundle.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal had said at paragraphs  11  and
    12 as follows:

         "11. The appellant argued that the respondent had provided no proof
             that his wife had been previously  married,  no  date  and  no
             details nor that Mr Naseer was still in the UK.  Ms  Fernandez
             denied a previous marriage and the Appellant argued  that  the
             evidence he had produced showed that they were still together.
              He produced  photos,  a  marriage  certificate  and  payslips
             together with bills showing her at his address before the date
             of application.

         12.  The evidence of the marriage visit appears  to  show  that  Ms
             Fernandez had left  Mr  Naseer  and  was  at  the  appellant's
             address at the date of application.  They may  well  still  be
             together.  However, the  respondent  has  provided  sufficient
             evidence that the marriage entered into was bigamous  and  the
             burden is on the appellant to show that the previous  marriage
             had been dissolved and that he has not done that.  It  is  not
             for the  respondent  to  demonstrate  the  whereabouts  of  Mr
             Naseer.  ..."

4.   First Tier Tribunal Judge Colyer had granted permission  to  appeal  in
    this case noting it was arguable that there was insufficient reasoning.





Respondent's Submissions

5.   We have taken into account a Rule 24 reply that the Secretary of  State
    has relied upon.  Before us today Ms Brocklesby-Weller on behalf of the
    Secretary of State has very helpfully told us that she  has  made  some
    preliminary enquiries. She has also attempted to obtain other documents
    and paperwork in respect of the claimed prior marriage of Ms Fernandes.
     She has explained to us that even if  we  put  the  matter  back,  the
    further documentation would not be available today, but that  it  would
    be available in the near future.

Discussion and Reasoning

6.   In discussion this morning, Ms Brocklesby-Weller  conceded  that  there
    was a leap in relation to the judge's findings  that  the  respondent's
    evidence was sufficient to show bigamy. We agree  with  Ms  Brocklesby-
    Weller. The concession was rightly made because  the  evidence  of  the
    Immigration Officer was not, in our view, sufficient to allow the judge
    to accept  the  Respondent's  allegation  that  there  was  a  bigamous
    marriage. The thrust of the interview  with  Mr  Naseer  was  that  his
    relationship with Ms Fernandes, if it had ever existed,  was  over.  It
    did not address whether a legal marriage had  been  entered  into  such
    that Ms Fernandes was not free to  marry  the  Appellant.  It  was  our
    conclusion this leap in reasoning amounted to a  material  error  on  a
    point of law such that the decision had to be set aside.

7.   Having considered the further disposal of this case,  we  come  to  the
    view that the appropriate venue for a rehearing of this matter will  be
    at the First-tier Tribunal.  We  therefore  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision  in  its  entirety.   It  will  be  for  that
    Tribunal to make appropriate directions in due  course,  but  we  would
    expect the Secretary of State at that stage to have  filed  and  served
    the evidence which she seeks to rely upon in relation  to  the  claimed
    bigamy and we expect the Appellant to file and serve replies in respect
    of the evidence which he seeks to rely upon in support of his case.



DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside. None of the previous findings shall stand.

    There shall be a re-hearing at the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood 27 September 2016
