
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13765/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 March 2013                                |On 13 June 2013            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                             arulmani chengamah
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jaufurally
For the Respondent:    Miss Kiss

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Mauritius born  in  1986.   She  appealed
    against a decision of the Respondent on 28 May 2012 to refuse to  issue
    her with a permanent  residence  card  in  accordance  with  regulation
    15(1)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
    (the "EEA Regulations").

 2. She claimed that she had been residing in the UK as the  family  member
    of Dasruth Lutchooman (her stepfather, an Italian  national,  the  "EEA
    national") for a continuous period of five years.  She  was  previously
    issued with a residence card as the family member of the  EEA  national
    on 14 September  2006  valid  to  11  September  2011.   She  had  also
    previously applied for a permanent residence card on the same basis  on
    24 August 2011 which was refused on 24 October 2011.

 3. In the refusal letter dated 24 October 2011 the Respondent  noted  that
    the EEA national had been claiming Jobseeker's  Allowance  since  March
    2006.  A person  who  has  been  unemployed  and  claiming  Jobseeker's
    Allowance for more  than  six  months  can  no  longer  be  classed  as
    exercising Treaty rights as a jobseeker.  However, she failed  to  show
    that the EEA national was exercising Treaty rights after the six months
    in another capacity. Also, as a jobseeker it had not been shown that he
    was genuinely seeking work during his period of unemployment.

 4. In the refusal letter of 28 May 2012 (the decision  under  appeal)  the
    Respondent noted that invoices  had  been  provided  to  show  the  EEA
    national had been self-employed  since  2009.   However  such  did  not
    satisfy the requirement for the qualifying  period  of  2006  to  2008.
    Whilst it  was  accepted  that  an  EEA  national  claiming  Jobseekers
    Allowance is exercising Treaty rights such can only be for a period  of
    no longer than six months. As the EEA national had exceeded that period
    it cannot be  counted  towards  the  qualifying  period  for  permanent
    residence.

 5. The Appellant appealed on the basis that the EEA national  did  satisfy
    the requirements of regulation 6 as a  qualified  person  and  she  had
    resided with him in accordance with these regulations for a  continuous
    period of five years  such  that  she  satisfied  the  requirements  of
    regulation 15(1)(b).  Alternatively she is entitled to a residence card
    as the family member of an EEA  national  currently  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the UK and that the decision would breach Article 8 of ECHR.

 6. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 26 July 2012, Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Jackson dismissed the appeal under  the  EEA  Regulations
    and on human rights grounds.

 7. Her findings are at [30] to [44].  She found  that  the  relevant  five
    year period was from the date the applicant  becomes  a  family  member
    (October 2005) to October 2010.  The first and last part of that period
    was not in dispute.  The EEA national was working from October 2005  to
    March 2006 and from 2009 onwards.  The period in dispute was from March
    2006 to 2009.

 8. The judge at [31] accepted that if the EEA national established that he
    retained his status as a worker between March 2006 and  September  2006
    then his claimed  vocational  training  at  Croydon  College  could  be
    considered in accordance with regulation 6(2)(c)  such  that  he  would
    retain his status as a worker for the period up to 2009.

 9.  However,  the  judge  considered  (at  [37])  that  it  had  not  been
    established that the EEA national was a jobseeker within the meaning of
    regulation 6(1)(a) and 6(4), nor that  he  retained  his  status  as  a
    worker in regulation 6(1)(b) with reference to  regulation  4(1)(a)  by
    also being a jobseeker for the period March  to  September  2006.   She
    took that view because there was  insufficient  evidence  to  establish
    that he was  genuinely  seeking  employment  in  the  period  March  to
    September 2006.  She did not find that the "mere  fact  of  receipt  of
    Jobseeker's Allowance" establishes that a person is  genuinely  seeking
    employment in the absence of any  other  evidence  of  doing  so  in  a
    particular period" [35].

10. Having found that the EEA national ceased to be a  worker  when  sacked
    from his employment in March 2006 and did not retain his  status  as  a
    worker in the intervening period  to  September  2006  as  he  was  not
    working, nor was he a genuine jobseeker during that period, she did not
    find that

         "a person who commences vocational training can  somehow  resurrect
         his status as a worker from his last employment  approximately  six
         months previously and apply that throughout the intervening  period
         when he would not otherwise have met the requirements as  a  worker
         or jobseeker-as-worker" [38].

11. Further, due to inconsistencies in the documentary  and  oral  evidence
    the judge was  not  satisfied  that  the  EEA  national  had  undergone
    vocational training at Croydon College.

12. The judge went on to conclude in dealing with Article 8 that while  the
    Appellant may have established a limited private life any  interference
    would not be disproportionate to the legitimate public aim.

13. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal.   This  was  refused  on  6
    September  2012.   Following  reapplication  to  the   Upper   Tribunal
    permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy who stated:

         "1.    "The grounds of appeal claim that the Judge  of  the  First-
         tier  erred in concluding that the Appellant's stepfather  was  not
         an EEA national exercising Treaty rights  and  that  therefore  the
         Appellant did not qualify for residence.

          2. I note that the Appellant, now aged 26 had  previously  had  a
             residence card, valid until 2011, as the family member of  her
             stepfather who is Italian.

          3.  I  am  concerned  that  the  Respondent  has  read  into  the
             Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  (Regulation   6)   that   the
             Appellant's stepfather  could  only  be  considered  to  be  a
             jobseeker for 6 months whereas that is not a  condition  which
             is set out in the Regulations.

          4. While that may be a narrow point I am also concerned about the
             approach to the other activities of the Appellant's stepfather
             - the courses which he has undertaken and the fact that he may
             now be working - and in these circumstances I grant permission
             to appeal."

14. At the error of law hearing Mr Jaufurally sought essentially to rely on
    the detailed written grounds.  In summary, the judge had been wrong  to
    find that the EEA national  had  ceased  to  be  a  worker-as-jobseeker
    during the period March to September 2006 because it had not been shown
    he was looking for work.  The Respondent in  the  refusal  letters  had
    accepted that Treaty rights were being exercised  during  that  period.
    Also regulation 6(2)(b)(ii) states that worker status is not lost if  a
    person has been unemployed for no more than six months  which  was  the
    EEA national's position.  Even if that status had  not  been  protected
    over that six month period it was reasonable to give him that period to
    go from  being  involuntarily  unemployed  to  finding  and  taking  up
    vocational training (per regulation 6(2)(c)).

15. In reply, Miss Kiss did not appear to demur from  the  submission  that
    the judge erred in concluding that the EEA national had ceased to be  a
    worker, and thus  a  qualified  person,  during  the  period  March  to
    September 2006. That was the only matter at issue. She  also  indicated
    that it was accepted that the EEA national  had  undertaken  vocational
    training at Croydon College as claimed.

16. I was invited, if it was concluded that there had been a material error
    of law to set aside the decision and remake it by allowing it.

17. I reserved my decision.

18. In considering this matter regulation  15  provides  for  a  person  to
    acquire the right to reside  in  the  UK  permanently  subject  to  the
    requirements set out therein. Regulation 15 (1) states: "The  following
    persons shall acquire  the  right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom
    permanently... (b) a family member of  an  EEA   national  who  is  not
    herself an EEA national but who has resided in the United Kingdom  with
    the EEA national in accordance with these Regulations for a  continuous
    period of five years;"

19. A qualified person, such as the EEA national, would need to  reside  in
    accordance with the EEA Regulations for the five year period as set out
    in regulation 6 which states:

         "6(1)    In these Regulations 'qualified person' means a person who
                is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as -

              (a) a jobseeker

              (b) a worker

                  ...

              (2) A person who is no longer working shall not  cease  to  be
                treated as a  worker for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b)  if
                -

                  ...

                (b)    he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after
                    having been employed in  the  United  Kingdom,  provided
                    that he has registered as a jobseeker with the  relevant
                    employment office and -

                    (i)    he was employed  for  one  year  or  more  before
                        becoming unemployed;

                    (ii)   he has been  unemployed  for  no  more  than  six
                        months; or

                    (iii)  he  can  provide  evidence  that  he  is  seeking
                        employment in the United Kingdom and has a  genuine
                        chance of being engaged;

               (c)    he is involuntarily unemployed and  has  embarked  on
                    vocational training;

               ...

         6(4) For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a) 'jobseeker' means a person
                who enters the United Kingdom in order  to  seek  employment
                and can provide evidence that he is seeking  employment  and
                has a genuine chance of being engaged."

20. In this case the judge erred in finding that  having  registered  as  a
    jobseeker the EEA national being in receipt  of  Jobseeker's  Allowance
    had to show that he was genuinely seeking work during the period  March
    to September 2006 and in  failing  to  do  so  had  not  shown  he  was
    exercising Treaty rights. It was enough for the EEA  national  to  have
    been unemployed for no more than six months (regulation 6 (2)(b)(ii)).

21. The Respondent, indeed, in the refusal letters accepted  that  the  EEA
    national had been exercising Treaty rights during that period.

22. Regulation 6(1)(a) includes a provision that a jobseeker is a qualified
    person.  But it is subject to regulation 6(4)  which  requires  such  a
    person to provide evidence that he is seeking work and  has  a  genuine
    chance of being engaged.  Regulation 6(2)(b) requires a person who  has
    previously worked in the UK  but  is  involuntarily  unemployed  to  be
    registered as a jobseeker.  This provision, however, is not subject  to
    regulation 6(4) and here jobseeker has  the  meaning  given  to  it  in
    social security law.

23. In my judgment, it having been established that for the six  months  of
    unemployment (March to September 2006) the EEA national was  exercising
    Treaty rights and that in September 2006, it being undisputed  he  took
    up vocational training at Croydon College, the EEA  national  continued
    to  exercise  Treaty  rights  under  regulation  6(2)(c).  It  is   not
    challenged that he was in  vocational  training  until  July  2009  and
    thereafter was continuing to exercise Treaty rights as a  self-employed
    person and as a worker  until and beyond 2010.

24. I may say that I also find merit in counsel's further  submission  that
    having become involuntarily unemployed  in  March  2006  it  cannot  be
    argued that the EEA  national  is  expected  to  embark  on  vocational
    training (regulation 6 (2)(c)) immediately or otherwise  be  considered
    to no longer be exercising Treaty rights. A reasonable period  must  be
    allowed for a suitable training course to be found. In my judgement the
    six months taken by the EEA national is a reasonable  period  being  in
    line with the period of permitted unemployment stated in  regulation  6
    (2)(b)(ii).

25. I conclude from the evidence  that  the  EEA  national  was  exercising
    Treaty rights over the required continuous period of  five  years  from
    October 2005 to October 2010.

26. The Appellant thus  succeeds  under  regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations having established that she has been residing as the family
    member of an EEA national for a continuous  period  of  five  years  in
    circumstances where the EEA national has throughout that period been  a
    qualified person.  The appeal succeeds.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law.
It is set aside and remade as follows: The appeal is allowed.





Signed                              Date: 13th June 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

