
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13238/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 October 2014                             |On 20 October 2014           |
|Delivered Orally                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Md. Shahinur Alam
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
    Secretary of State) against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Malone who in a determination on the papers at Yarl's Wood on  14  July
    2014 and subsequently promulgated on 24 July 2014 allowed the appeal of
    the Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the claimant), a citizen  of
    Bangladesh born on 12 July 1987 against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State dated 16 March 2014 to refuse the claimant leave to enter  the
    United Kingdom and to cancel his continuing leave.

2.   The basis of that refusal was set out  in  the  notice  of  refusal  as
    follows:

         "You were given notice of leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as
         a Tier 4 (General) Student on 10/09/13  but  I  am  satisfied  that
         false representations were employed  or  material  facts  were  not
         disclosed for the purpose of obtaining the leave, or there has been
         such a change of circumstances in your case  since  the  leave  was
         granted that it should  be  cancelled.   I  therefore  cancel  your
         continuing  leave.   If  your  leave  was  conferred  by  an  entry
         clearance, this will also have the effect of cancelling your  entry
         clearance.


         This is because in order to obtain  your  current  leave  to  study
         Level 6 Diploma in Management and Leadership at  Bradford  Regional
         College you submitted an academic transcript issued by  Whitechapel
         College.  This document is listed in Home Office records  as  being
         among the documents used  to  obtain  the  offer  of  your  current
         course.  However, during interview you have  been  unable  to  give
         details  of  your  previous  studies  at  Whitechapel  College  and
         subsequently  when  asked  about  the   academic   transcript   you
         effectively admitted that you had only studied English.   You  also
         admitted that you did not complete the units on the course and that
         you did not obtain the grades that  were  listed  on  the  academic
         transcript, and you  have  stated  that  at  the  time  Whitechapel
         College's Tier 4 Sponsor licence was revoked the Principal supplied
         you with the academic transcript to  help  you  obtain  entry  into
         another college.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  document  was  false
         because you have admitted  that  it  was  obtained  without  having
         completed the studies detailed therein, as well as  your  inability
         to give any account of such studies.


         For  the  above  reasons  I  am  satisfied  that  you  made   false
         representations in  relation  to  your  application  for  leave  to
         remain.  I am therefore satisfied that you should also  be  refused
         leave to enter the United Kingdom under paragraph  320(7B)  of  the
         Immigration Rules.  Future applications for  leave  to  enter/entry
         clearance will be automatically refused  (unless  it  would  breach
         your rights  under  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  or  the  Refugee
         Convention) for a period of one year staring on the date  on  which
         you are removed from the United Kingdom following this refusal.


         You have  not  sought  entry  under  any  other  provision  of  the
         Immigration Rules.


         I  therefore  refuse  you  leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom/I
         therefore  cancel  your  continuing  leave.   If  your  leave   was
         conferred by an entry clearance, this will also have the effect  of
         cancelling your entry clearance.  The cancellation  of  your  leave
         will be treated for the purposes of the Immigration  Act  1971  and
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as  a  refusal  of
         leave to enter at a time when you were in possession of  a  current
         entry clearance (the Secretary of State's emphasis).


         REMOVAL DIRECTIONS


         I have  given/propose  to  give  directions  for  your  removal  to
         Bangladesh by flight/ship/train."

3.   The claimant appealed that decision and in his  Grounds  of  Appeal  he
    stated at paragraph 10 that he  denied  the  allegations  made  by  the
    Respondent and confirmed that all the certificates and transcripts were
    "absolutely genuine and duly awarded by the issuing authorities".

4.   At paragraph 12 of his grounds the claimant  had  this  inter  alia  to
    say:

         "12. The Respondent having raised an allegation of deception  means
             that the burden rests with  them  and  they  need  to  provide
             evidence of sufficient cogency and strength."

5.   At paragraph 16 of the grounds  the  claimant  submitted  that  he  had
    confirmed that the relevant academic papers or indeed all  papers  were
    "absolutely genuine and issued by the relevant issuing authority".

6.   In concluding his grounds the claimant in summary  contended  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was "Wednesbury unreasonable".

7.   The claimant also placed before the First-tier Tribunal  his  statement
    purportedly signed and dated by him on 16 June 2014.  Of relevance  the
    claimant had this to say over paragraphs 6 to 10 of that  statement  as
    follows:

         "6.  I do not find any valid reason  how  the  Immigration  Officer
             came to conclude that my transcript is not genuine.  This is a
             level 5 course, I did undertake and complete after  coming  to
             the UK.


         7.    I  can  confirm  that  my  transcript  of  HND  in   Business
             Administration issued by  Whitechapel  College  is  absolutely
             genuine.


         8.   I do not know any reason why the Home Office is alleging  that
             my previous transcript issued by Whitechapel College had  been
             proven to be false.


         9.   I never stated that any of my documents was false as stated by
             the relevant Immigration Officer or otherwise  as  all  of  my
             documents are absolutely  genuine  and  have  been  gained  by
             studying properly.


         10.  Despite the fact that I have stated again and again  that  all
             of my documents are genuine, I was forced by  the  Immigration
             Officer to admit that my document was false (my emphasis)."

8.   As I have earlier mentioned this was a determination on the papers  and
    the First-tier Judge explained in his determination that the  documents
    that he  had  before  him  consisted  of  the  Respondent's  Notice  of
    Decision, Notice of  Appeal,  Grounds  of  Appeal  and  the  claimant's
    witness statement of 16  June  2014.   He  went  on  to  say  that  the
    Respondent had failed as  directed  to  provide  a  Rule  13  compliant
    bundle.

9.   The Judge proceeded to take the view that the  relevant  provision  was
    not as stated paragraph 320(7B) of HC 395 (as  amended)  but  paragraph
    321A(1) and (2).

10.  Under subheading  "Findings"  the  First-tier  Judge  at  paragraph  17
    acknowledged the claim made by the claimant  at  paragraph  10  of  his
    witness statement that he was "forced by  the  Immigration  Officer  to
    admit that my document was false".

11.  Having then set out the basis upon which the Respondent  had  cancelled
    the claimant's leave the Judge notably at paragraphs 21 and 22  of  his
    determination had this to say:

         "21. I had no evidence whatsoever from the Respondent.   I  had  no
             interview record and no explanatory statement.  The Notice  of
             Decision is not evidence  to  support  the  claimed  facts  it
             recorded.


         22.  I therefore conclude that there was no evidence at all  before
             me to show that the Appellant had made false  representations,
             had submitted  false  documents  or  had  failed  to  disclose
             material facts in relation to his last application  for  leave
             to remain in the United Kingdom.  There had been no change  in
             the Appellant's circumstances since he had  been  granted  his
             leave to remain such that his leave should  be  cancelled  (my
             emphasis)."

12.  The Judge then proceeded in consequence to find that the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was not in accordance with the law and the Immigration
    Rules and to allow the claimant's appeal.

The Proceedings

13.  Thus the appeal came before me on 7 October 2014  when  my  first  task
    was to determine whether or not the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge disclosed an error or errors on a point of law  such  as
    may have materially affected the outcome of the appeal.  In that regard
    I was aware at 12.30pm when  this  particular  hearing  commenced  that
    there was no appearance by the claimant or by his recorded  solicitors.
    My clerk made appropriate enquiries on the telephone and  was  informed
    that on 2 or 3 October 2014 the claimant's solicitors had  written  and
    informed  the  Tribunal  that  they  were  no  longer   acting.    Such
    notification was, it was claimed, sent to the Tribunal by fax  and  the
    firm had in their possession a confirmed  transmission  receipt.   They
    explained to my clerk that they had been  unable  to  maintain  contact
    with  the  claimant  and  thus  were  no  longer  in  receipt  of   his
    instructions.

14.  That fax is not on the court file but I understand that the  firm  have
    now been asked to file a further copy.

15.  There was no appearance before me by the claimant.  I  was  invited  in
    such circumstances to proceed with the appeal under the  provisions  of
    Rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  In that
    regard I was satisfied as to service of  notice  of  hearing.   It  was
    apparent that no application had been made by the claimant  seeking  an
    adjournment.  In such circumstances I was persuaded that it was in  the
    interests of justice to proceed with the hearing.

16.  It would be as well at this stage were I to set  out  below  the  basis
    upon which the Secretary of State  successfully  sought  permission  to
    appeal the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  The Secretary of State  was
    clear that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  had  made  a  material
    error of law in his determination and it was put in this way:

         "At paragraph 22 the Judge concludes that 'there was no evidence at
         all  before  me  to  show  that  the  Appellant  had   made   false
         representations, had submitted false documents  or  had  failed  to
         disclose material facts in relation to  his  last  application  for
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom'.


         However  the  notice  of  decision  contains  the  evidence  of  an
         Immigration Officer [see paragraph 19] of the  determination.   The
         evidence of the Immigration Officer sets out numerous admissions of
         fact said to be made by the Appellant as well as observations of an
         Immigration Officer:


         1.   That the Appellant admitted he did not complete the  units  on
             the course and so did not complete the studies detailed on the
             academic transcript.


         2.   That the Appellant admitted he  was  supplied  with  the  same
             academic transcript (not having completed the studies detailed
             therein) to help him obtain entry into  another  college  when
             Whitechapel College's Sponsor licence was revoked.


         3.   That the Appellant was unable to  give  details  of  study  at
             Whitechapel College.


         Therefore there was evidence before the Judge to  establish,  prima
         facie, grounds that the Appellant dishonestly used a false document
         (a document containing false information) in order to obtain  leave
         (to study at Bradford Regional College).


         The Judge has made a material error in law by failing to  make  any
         findings upon the evidence before him.


         The Appellant does not dispute in his  witness  statement  that  an
         admission was made  by  him  that  'my  document  was  false'  (see
         paragraph 7) so there is  an  amount  of  consistency  between  the
         Notice of Decision and the Appellant's witness statement.


         However the Appellant disputes the propriety of the  account  given
         by  the  Immigration  Officer  in  the  Notice  of  Decision.   The
         Appellant contends that 'I was forced by the Immigration Officer to
         admit that my document was false' (see paragraph 7).


         The Appellant's contention in his witness  statement  that  he  was
         forced to admit that a document was false by an Immigration Officer
         raises issues of plausibility, particularly when  compared  to  the
         numerous connected admissions of fact as recorded in the notice  of
         decision.


         The Appellant does not add plausibility by failing to  explain  why
         he made an admission that he now claims was not accurate or how  he
         alleges he was forced into an admission.


         By failing to make any finding or expressing any view upon evidence
         within the two conflicting written  accounts  before  him  and  the
         plausibility of the Appellant's account the Judge makes a  material
         error of law.


         The Judge has made a material error of law by failing to  have  due
         regard to guidance within case law if he was  in  doubt  about  the
         Appellant's (or Respondent's)  story.   See  Shen  (Paper  appeals;
         proving dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 236 (IAC) at paragraph 27.


         It is requested  that  the  matter  be  remitted  and  reheard  and
         appropriate findings be made in accordance with the guidance within
         Shen."

17.  Mr Bramble not  surprisingly  relied  upon  the  grounds  of  challenge
    (above).

Assessment

18.  I am entirely satisfied that the clear error of law in  this  case  was
    to disregard relevant evidence.

19.  At paragraph 21 of his determination  the  First-tier  Judge  concluded
    that there was no evidence whatsoever from the Respondent.  In that  he
    was clearly mistaken.  There  was  a  signed  notice  of  refusal  that
    asserted  that  the  admissions  of  the  Appellant  (above)   in   the
    Appellant's witness statement  he  admitted  to  the  same.   Thus  the
    Secretary of State had in my view overcome the  evidential  hurdle,  in
    that evidence existed to support her contention that the  claimant  had
    admitted to an Immigration Officer that he did not complete  the  units
    on the course at Whitechapel College; did not  complete  the  study  as
    detailed on the academic transcript; that he was supplied with the same
    academic transcript to help him obtain entry into another college  when
    Whitechapel College's Sponsor licence was revoked.

20.  All such evidence  was  there  before  the  Judge  prima  facie  to  be
    determined.

21.  It follows that the Judge materially erred in law by  failing  to  make
    any findings upon this evidence.

22.  It was the claimant's account that he was  forced  to  admit  that  the
    document was false by the Immigration Officer but  as  the  grounds  of
    challenge  rightly   state   that   raised   issues   of   plausibility
    "particularly when compared to the  numerous  connected  admissions  of
    fact as recorded in the Notice of Decision".

23.  As the grounds state at that point, the First-tier  Judge  should  have
    proceeded to consider and deal with the plausibility/credibility of the
    claimant's claim that he was forced to  make  that  admission,  but  he
    failed to do so.

24.  As was recently held in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014]  UKUT
    00341 (IAC) it is necessary for Judges  to  identify  and  resolve  key
    conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and  brief  terms  their
    reasons so that the parties can understand why they have won  or  lost.
    I find that in the present case and for  the  above  reasons  that  the
    First-tier Judge  simply  failed  to  identify  and  resolve  what  was
    arguably the key conflict in the evidence and thus failed to explain or
    reason his conclusions in that regard.  Having  failed  to  do  so  the
    Secretary of State was entitled to challenge his determination  on  the
    basis that it had not been satisfactorily explained to her  as  to  why
    she lost.

Conclusions

25.  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

26.  I set aside the decision.

27.  That of course is not the end of the matter because  the  Secretary  of
    State's grounds reaffirmed by Mr  Bramble  before  me,  were  that  the
    interests of justice required that the matter be remitted to be reheard
    and appropriate findings made.

28.  Despite the regrettable absence of the claimant at the  hearing  before
    me, I agreed with Mr Bramble's request having regard to the  errors  of
    law found that there were  highly  compelling  reasons  falling  within
    paragraph 7.2(b) of the Senior President's Practice Statement as to why
    the fresh decision should not be remade by the Upper Tribunal.   I  was
    satisfied that it was clearly in the  interests  of  justice  that  the
    appeal of the claimant be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

29.  For the reasons I have given above and in agreement with the  Secretary
    of State I conclude therefore that the appeal should be remitted  to  a
    First-tier  Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Malone  to
    determine the appeal afresh at Hatton Cross hearing centre on the first
    available date.  There is no indication before me that for this purpose
    an interpreter would be required.  The suggested time  estimate  should
    be one and a half hours.  It follows that none of the findings of First-
    tier Judge Malone are to be preserved.

Decision

30.  I remit the making of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  at  Hatton
    Cross before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Malone.


Signed                                  Date 20 October 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
