

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13714/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1st October 2014                           |On 10th October 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                MR RAHAT KHAN
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Gore ( Counsel instructed by Staines &
Campbell)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller ( Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the determination by the First-Tier
    Tribunal (Judge Mayall) promulgated on 16th June  2014.   The  Tribunal
    dismissed the appeal on immigration and human rights grounds.


Background


    2.    The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and his date of birth is
    16.2.1974.

    3.    The respondent refused  his  application  for  further  leave  to
    remain on a discretionary basis.  His  claimed  to  be  the  victim  of
    domestic violence which had led to the break up of his  marriage.   The
    respondent considered the application under Appendix FM on the basis of
    family life and  private  life  under  Paragraph  276ADE.  Further  the
    respondent considered if there were exceptional circumstances to engage
    Article 8 ECHR and found none.

    4.     In a determination the Tribunal found that the  marriage  was  a
    "stormy affair" [31] but that it did not break down because of domestic
    violence [36].  The Tribunal heard evidence from the appellant and took
    into account a witness statement, a crime report and reference  number,
    a witness statement of the appellant taken by the police, two victim of
    crime letters and a personal statement to employers [6].

    5.   The Tribunal referred [27] to the Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as
    amended) at paragraph 289A, notwithstanding that  the  application  was
    neither formally  made  nor  considered  under  those  provisions.  The
    Tribunal found that the appellant did not meet the  requirements  under
    (i) & (iv)[28-29].

    6.    The Tribunal considered family and private life  and  found  that
    the appellant failed to meet  those  rules.   It  then  considered  the
    application in light of Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA  CIV  588  [39-48]  and
    Nasim[2014] UKUT 00025  and found nothing  in  the  way  of  compelling
    circumstances which  would  justify  going  outside  of  the  rules  to
    consider Article 8 ECHR.

Grounds of appeal

    7. Ground 1 - The appellant maintained  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
    apply paragraph 289A     correctly.   The breakdown took  place  during
    the applicable timeframe.

    8. Ground 2 - The Tribunal failed to consider the evidence of  domestic
    violence in the round and /or the evidence in support of  the  incident
    on 8th October 2011 including the appellant's own witness statement.

    9.  Ground 3 - The Tribunal, in assessing private life under Article 8,
    was  wrong  not  to  regard   domestic   violence   as   a   compelling
    circumstances.

    10.  Ground 4 - The Tribunal  failed  to  carry  out  a  full  "Razgar"
    assessment and failed take into account relevant factors.

Permission to appeal granted 21.8.2014

    11.  First-tier Judge Hollingsworth found an arguable error of  law  in
    the determination.  He reasoned that the Judge had been unclear  as  to
    how he had applied  the  law  referred  to  at  [27-29].  Although  the
    Tribunal was not satisfied that the marriage broke down as a result  of
    violence, it was not clear on the  extent  of  the  available  evidence
    whether the appellant had been a victim of domestic violence.  At  [34]
    the Judge found that he was not satisfied that violence was used in the
    September incident.  Other incidents had been related during the course
    of the case.

Hearing

    12.  For the error of law hearing the appellant's solicitors David Tang
    & co   produced a bundle amounting  to  25  pages.   Ms  Gore  who  was
    instructed  by  the  appellant's  new  solicitors  Staines  &  Campbell
    produced the Immigration guidance notes on domestic violence.

    13.  At the outset it was conceded that the first ground of appeal  was
    not sustainable.    There  was  an  error  of  law  in  the  Tribunal's
    application of paragraph 289A, in so far  as  the  Tribunal  failed  to
    apply the correct time frame in which  the  breakdown  occurred.    The
    evidence established that the chronological requirements were  not  met
    in any event.

    14. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision which I  now  give
    with my reasons.

Submissions

    15.  Ms Gore relies on the remaining grounds of  appeal.   She  submits
    that the Tribunal failed to apply the correct  definition  of  domestic
    violence as set out in the IDI's.   There was clearly domestic violence
    based on the  Tribunal's  own  findings  at  [31].  The  police  report
    referred to acts such as self harming which were examples  of  domestic
    violence as coercive and controlling behaviour.

    16.  The Tribunal failed to give sufficient weight to relevant  factors
    under Article 8 such as lawful  6  years  residence  in  the  UK,   the
    appellant's leave was in part as a  spouse  and  he  was  a  victim  of
    domestic violence. There were  exceptional  circumstances  relevant  to
    proportionality and a second stage Article  8  assessment  should  have
    been conducted.

    17. Mr Deller  draws  attention  to  the  history  of  the  immigration
    proceedings; the appellant made no formal application  under  paragraph
    289A, he was admitted for 27 months with a marriage visa  and  when  he
    applied for further leave  to  remain  he  did  not  have  the  English
    language certificate and so he was then granted discretionary leave for
    3  years  outside  of  the  Rules.    It  was  during  the  period   of
    discretionary leave that the breakdown of the marriage occurred.

    18.  The Tribunal was correct to find that the cause  of  the  marriage
    breakdown was not domestic violence.  There were incidents of  domestic
    violence but the cause of the marriage breakdown was  found  to  be  an
    adulterous affair by the appellant's wife and her decision to  commence
    divorce proceedings.

    19. Article 8 was correctly considered under the  Rules  and  were  not
met.

    20.  Mr Deller submits that whilst there remained controversy as to the
    application of the "Gulshan" gateway test,  there  was  nevertheless  a
    need to establish a strong case to engage Article 8 before going on the
    consider the steps in Razgar. None of the  factors  relied  on  by  the
    appellant were of sufficient weight to engage Article 8.

    21. Ms Gore argues that the section 120 Notice included the appellant's
    application under 289A.   The  Tribunal  should  have  focused  on  the
    respondent's failure to consider the application under  the  rules  and
    whether or not the decision made was not in accordance  with  the  law.
    The Tribunal's findings as  to  domestic  violence  were  unclear,  non
    specific and failed to encompass the whole period of time from  2008  -
    2014.  Domestic violence   caused the marriage breakdown.

Discussion and conclusion

    22.  I am satisfied that there is no material error of law disclosed in
    the determination.  Although no formal application made under paragraph
    289A and  no  consideration  under  paragraph  289A  was  made  by  the
    respondent, the Tribunal did consider [26-30] whether  the requirements
    were  met  and  concluded  that  they  were  not.   This  is  a  wholly
    sustainable  finding  on  the  evidence  before  the   Tribunal.    The
    Tribunal's error as to the period in which  domestic  violence  was  to
    have caused the breakdown was not material. The Tribunal has considered
    all of the available evidence adduced in support of  domestic  violence
    and concluded that whilst there were incidents  of  a  domestic  nature
    between the parties, there was no domestic  violence  that  caused  the
    marriage to breakdown [31-36]. The Tribunal  found  at  [36]  that  the
    reason for the breakdown was the appellant's discovery  that  his  wife
    was having an affair, leading to her  demand  for  a  divorce.    I  am
    satisfied that the appellant's argument is essentially  a  disagreement
    with the decision made. The Tribunal carefully analysed the evidence of
    incidents in 2009 and 2011 and fully engaged with the  relevant  issues
    and evidence including the appellant's  own  evidence  [7-17]  and  the
    independent documentary evidence. In the context  of  the  requirements
    under the Rules the Tribunal correctly focused  on  the  cause  of  the
    breakdown of the  marriage  rather  than  the  occurrence  of  domestic
    violence.

    23.  It is accepted that the appellant cannot meet the requirements  of
    the Rules in Appendix FM and paragraph 276 ADE for family  and  private
    life.  The Tribunal approached the Article 8  issue  having  regard  to
    "compelling circumstances"  citing Haleemudeen. I am satisfied that the
    Tribunal  properly  considered  whether   there  were  exceptional   or
    compelling or strong circumstances to justify a second stage assessment
    under Article 8 ECHR and it found, correctly in  my  view,  that  there
    were not. The Tribunal followed the law as it currently stands  in  MM.
    Although Mr Deller alluded to the fact that the  respondent  maintained
    that the Gulshan approach was good law, he accepted that the Tribunal's
    approach was properly approved and appropriate.  I  am  satisfied  that
    the Tribunal  found  no  evidence  of  domestic  violence  towards  the
    appellant  that  would  amount  to   an   exceptional   or   compelling
    circumstance and indeed there was no  evidence  to  show  that  he  had
    suffered either physically or mentally.  The other  factors  relied  on
    including six years residence in the UK and leave as a  spouse,  simply
    do not carry sufficient weight for engagement of Article 8.


Decision

    24.  There is no material error of law disclosed in  the  determination
    which shall stand.

                               Signed


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




                               No fee award.
                               No anonymity order made nor requested






                               Signed


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


