
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/13514/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 4 January 2016                    |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                             mr abdoune el hadj
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Simon Harding, Counsel, instructed by Kilby
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Edwards) dismissing the appellant's appeal  against  a  decision
    taken on 25 February 2014 to refuse an application for indefinite leave
    to remain outside the Immigration Rules and  to  remove  the  appellant
    from the UK.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria born in 1962. He states  that  he
    entered the UK illegally in 1992 using a French  ID  card  in  a  false
    name.  In  September  2000  his  legal  representatives  wrote  to  the
    respondent to advise that he wished to claim asylum but  no  claim  was
    made. On 4 August 2004 the appellant was included  in  his  ex-spouse's
    application for an  EEA  residence  permit  but  that  application  was
    refused on 24 November 2004. He then applied for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on 3 October 2013. He claimed to have established a private life
    in the UK, having worked in the same employment for 13 years and having
    paid taxes in the UK for 22  years.  The  appellant  had  no  immediate
    family members in Algeria and no links to that country. He had  married
    in Belgian citizen in 2003 but was divorced from her in 2011. He had  a
    sister, brother in law and three nieces living in the UK.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  appellant's   identity   and
    nationality but rejected his account to have arrived in the UK in  1992
    because his French ID card in a false identity was issued in  1994  and
    his Algerian passport was issued  in  Algeria  on  3  August  1998  and
    contained a 1999 Schengen visa. The P60s and wage slips  from  1992  to
    2000 were issued in a false identity. The respondent  did  accept  that
    the appellant had been resident in the UK since 2003 and  had  been  in
    employment, albeit unlawfully. He was 51 years old and had not  severed
    all ties to Algeria. He did not meet the requirements of the Rules.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Richmond on 9 October 2014.  He  was  represented  by  Mr  P
    Nathan of counsel. The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant had
    an appalling immigration history and only seemed  to  exist  under  his
    true identity since about  2003  and  it  was  impossible  for  him  to
    establish on what date he actually commenced life in the UK. His sister
    may have conduced to his alleged arrival but even she was vague  as  to
    when that was. He did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and there was nothing to allow him to  succeed  under  the  Human
    Rights Act.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
    determine whether the appellant had entered the UK in 1992  as  claimed
    by the appellant, his sister and his niece. The sister came to  the  UK
    in 1994 as accepted by the respondent and could not have "conduced"  to
    the appellant's arrival in 1992.

 7. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Vice  President  Ockelton  on  8
    September 2015 following a successful application for  judicial  review
    of the earlier refusal of the Upper Tribunal  to  grant  permission  to
    appeal. Mr  Justice  Blake  found  that  there  was  substance  in  the
    appellant's contention that the central issue in the appeal was whether
    the claimant had resided in the UK for more than 20  years  before  the
    respondent's decision in March 2014 and the judge did not  decide  that
    issue nor did he recite the evidence of the sister  that  was  said  by
    counsel to support entry some time before 1994.

 8. In a rule 24 response dated 22 September 2015 the respondent  submitted
    that the findings were open to the  judge  and  all  of  the  available
    evidence was considered.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

10. Mr Harding submitted that this was a 20 year rule  case.  There  was  a
    considerable bundle of evidence before the judge  from  1992  and  then
    1995 onwards. The French alias was used from 1995 onwards.  There  were
    no findings of fact in paragraph  17  of  the  decision  and  that  was
    immediately fatal. The judge should have  considered  the  use  of  the
    alias and come to a rounded assessment of  whether  the  appellant  had
    been in the UK for 20 years. The judge failed to attach weight  to  the
    sister's evidence or the documents. The decision  was  flawed  and  the
    appeal should be remitted for a de novo hearing. The French ID document
    and the Algerian passport were in the appellant's bundle. There  was  a
    pay slip from 1992 at page 44 of the appellant's bundle. The 1994 point
    was addressed in the  appellant's  witness  statement  -  he  lost  the
    original document and had a replacement false  document  sent  to  him.
    There was no presenting officer and  therefore  no  cross  examination.
    There were documents such as pay slips and P60s from 1998.  There  were
    no findings on the positive case made by the appellant.

11. Mr Staunton submitted that the judge applied  the  correct  burden  and
    standard of proof. The appellant could  not  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof upon him.

12. I find that the central issue in this appeal is whether  the  appellant
    has proved that he had resided in the UK for at least 20  years  as  at
    the date of application and therefore met the requirements of paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration Rules. There is a significant  amount
    of witness and documentary evidence relating to that issue. I find that
    the judge failed to engage with that evidence and  make  findings  upon
    the key areas of dispute. Paragraph 17 of the decision (see paragraph 5
    above) is extremely unclear and does not include a finding as  to  when
    the appellant did arrive in the UK or whether he met the 20 year  rule.
    Nor are there any clear findings regarding the evidence of  the  sister
    and niece. There is no attempt to engage with the documentary evidence.
    Overall, I find that the failure to make clear findings on the evidence
    or to give adequate reasons amounts to a material error of law.

13. That does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the  appellant's  appeal  will
    succeed. The issues  raised  at  paragraph  3  of  Mr  Justice  Blake's
    judicial review decision will need to be addressed by  the  parties  at
    the rehearing and clear findings of fact are required from  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

14. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law and its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

15. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

16. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.

Signed   [pic]    Date 6 February 2016

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
