
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13190/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 June 2014                               |On 26 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                rajkumar mani

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Smeaton Counsel instructed by KTS Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India and his date of  birth  is  20  May
    1987.  On 28 September 2012 he made an application to vary his leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom  as  a  Tier  2  (General)  Migrant.   His
    application was refused by the respondent in  a  decision  of  9  April
    2013.  The reason for the refusal is that according to  the  respondent
    the appellant submitted a false  certificate  from  the  University  of
    Gloucestershire.  The respondent had  received  confirmation  from  the
    University of Gloucestershire that it has no record  of  the  appellant
    having studied there.  The appellant appealed against the decision  and
    his appeal  was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  C
    Greasley, in a determination which was promulgated on 29  January  2014
    following a hearing on 22 January  2014.   The  appellant  was  granted
    permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey in a decision of 13
    May 2014.  Thus the matter came before me.

2.   The matter was listed initially on 14 November  2013  before  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Blum.  At that hearing the appellant  submitted
    evidence which supported his case that he had  never  claimed  to  have
    studied at the University of Gloucestershire.  He had initially started
    his studies at E-College (also known as Eden College) and the  awarding
    body was then the  University  of  Bolton.   The  course  that  he  was
    studying was then transferred to  LSME  (London  School  of  Management
    Education) which was affiliated to the awarding body of the  University
    of Gloucester.

3.   The matter was adjourned  in  order  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    consider the appellant's.  The matter came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Greasley  on  22  January  2014.   At  that  hearing  the
    respondent produced an e-mail of 6 December 2013 from the University of
    Gloucestershire to a caseworker at UKBA.   The  author  of  the  e-mail
    confirms that the University of Gloucestershire  has  never  accredited
    forces with Eden College or E-College.  It is further stated  that  the
    appellant applied to study with the University  of  Gloucestershire  in
    April 2013 and was rejected in June 2013  after  receiving  no  further
    communication or response from the appellant.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal


4.   The Judge  went  on  to  make  findings  at  paragraphs  19-25  of  his
    determination as follows:

         "19. I am satisfied that the respondent has established  the  facts
             upon which it sought to rely in relation to the production  of
             a false certificate through deception, and I so  find,  having
             applied the high standard of proof required as set out by  the
             Court of Appeal in A v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773.  I  find  the
             appellant has acted dishonestly.


         20.  After the November adjournment, on 4th December 2013 the  UKBA
             wrote to the University regarding the appellant's studies.  On
             6 December 2013 the University wrote to the respondent stating
             that they had never accredited courses with  Eden  College  or
             eCollege.  Records showed that 'the appellant had  applied  to
             study with the University in April 2013 but  was  rejected  in
             June 2013'.  No further communication was received from him.


         21.  The respondent's file notes that an email dated 20th  December
             2012  was  written  to  the  University   of   Gloucestershire
             requesting confirmation that the appellant had 'studied at the
             University  of  Gloucestershire'  and  has  been  awarded  the
             qualification as stated.  By the same date, an email responded
             stating that an official had spoken to the colleagues who  had
             checked records and who found 'no trace of the student'.


         22.  Miss Smeaton submits  that  the  respondent  did  not  contact
             eCollege, London or the London School of Management Education,
             to confirm the appellant's attendance at either establishment,
             and that they had  asked  the  wrong  question  of  the  wrong
             college, but I find this does not  avail  the  appellant.   He
             claims that the University of Gloucestershire was  the  degree
             awarding body, (whichever college the appellant had  attended)
             but the University say that they have never accredited courses
             with either Eden College or eCollege, and it is  the  eCollege
             which the appellant claims he attended and  which  transferred
             him for completion of his dissertation.  The  University  also
             state that '...the appellant applied to  study  with  them  in
             April 2013 but was rejected'.  This information  is  something
             which the appellant has never mentioned at any  stage  in  the
             appeal process.  I find this revealing information  serves  to
             further damage the appellant's credibility and  suggests  that
             he is not being candid and forthright in this claim.


         23.  Furthermore, the appellant has not produced one single item of
             coursework,  timetables,  schedules,  or  indeed  his   actual
             dissertation.  I find it likely this would have been  retained
             on modern computer storage facilities, or that a copy  of  it,
             together with other  items  of  coursework,  could  have  been
             obtained or produced from a college.   No  such  evidence  has
             been forthcoming.  He has had ample opportunity to do so.  All
             of the items of  correspondence  referred  to  in  the  appeal
             bundle pre-date the refusal decision.  All  of  the  items  of
             documentary  evidence  contained  in  the  appeal  bundle  are
             photocopies.  Nor has  an  original  degree  certificate  been
             produced.


         24.  Miss Smeaton submits that the respondent did not ask the right
             questions relating to the attendance at the London  School  of
             Management  Education  and  that  solicitors  had  written  to
             eCollege on 25th September and 30th October  2013,  copies  of
             which were in the appeal bundle, seeking confirmation  of  the
             appellant's studies, but that, according to Ms Smeaton,  there
             had been no replies.  The letters  threatened  proceedings  if
             there was no reply.  These letters bear  no  recorded  deliver
             markings, and assuming they have been sent, I cannot  be  sure
             that they have been received.  They appear to have been copied
             to interesting parties such as the affiliated colleges and the
             University  of  Gloucestershire.   Had  these   letters   been
             received I find it likely that either  the  eCollege,  or  the
             University of Gloucestershire, or both, would  have  responded
             to  these  letters,  and  possibly  through  their  own  legal
             representatives.  The absence of replies, to my mind,  damages
             the appellant's credibility further as there is no  supporting
             documentary  evidence  from  the  colleges  to   support   the
             appellant's claims.


         25.  I therefore do not accept that the appellant has  successfully
             completed his MBA course and been  awarded  a  degree  by  the
             University of  Gloucestershire.   I  find  that  he  has  used
             deception or provided false documentation in his  application.
             I find that the respondent's evidence does not, as Ms  Smeaton
             indicates, fall short of the necessary standard to  justify  a
             refusal arising under  paragraph  322(1A)  and  accordingly  I
             reject the appellant's claims that he did not provide a  false
             document; having regard to the high  evidential  standard.   I
             find the respondent has established the facts  upon  which  it
             seeks to rely relating to false documentation."

The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal and Oral Submissions

5.   The grounds seeking leave to appeal contain  five  grounds.   The  main
    ground of appeal is that the Judge misdirected himself on the  evidence
    and reached a perverse conclusion.  Ms Smeaton expanded  upon  this  in
    oral submissions.  Ms Holmes indicated that in  her  view  the  grounds
    seeking leave to appeal made sense and it  appeared  to  her  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

Conclusions

6.   In my view the Judge made a material error of law because  he  did  not
    engage with  the  appellant's  evidence  as  set  out  in  his  witness
    statements or the arguments advanced by Ms Smeaton orally  and  in  her
    written skeleton argument prepared for the hearing on 22 January  2014.
    The appellant's case was and is that he studied latterly at LSME  which
    was affiliated to the  University  of  Gloucestershire  which  was  the
    awarding body.  I set aside the decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  and
    remake the decision. It was agreed by both parties that I could  remake
    the appeal without the need for a re-hearing.

7.    Paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules is a  mandatory  ground  of
    refusal and reads as follows:

         "Where false representations have been made or false documents have
         been submitted (whether or not material  to  the  application,  and
         whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge),  or  material  facts
         have not been disclosed in relation to the application or in  order
         to obtain documents from the Secretary of State or  a  third  party
         required in support of the application."



8.       The respondent received the certificate from  the  appellant  which
    was  awarded  by  the  University  of  Gloucestershire  and  they  made
    enquiries about  this  with  the  University.  However,  their  initial
    enquiry was whether the appellant had studied  there  which  had  never
    been the appellant's case. The second enquiry was generated a  response
    which was that the university had never accredited  courses  with  Eden
    College E-college. The appellant's case was that the course he  studied
    was at LSME.   It  was  on  the  basis  of  these  enquiries  that  the
    respondent concluded the certificate was false. There was  no  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal that LSME  was  not  affiliated  to  the
    University of Gloucestershire or that the University of Gloucestershire
    has never accredited courses with LSME.   One  may  have  expected  the
    University of Gloucestershire to be able to verify the  certificate  of
    award which was submitted by the appellant with his application and  to
    confirm the authenticity of it.  However, this must  be  considered  in
    the context of the questions that they were asked by the respondent.

9.       I was referred by Ms Smeaton to the evidence that  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal in the appellant's  bundle  at  pages  39-45  which
    strongly support the appellant's case.  I bear in mind that the  burden
    of proof rests on the respondent and in my view the respondent has  not
    established on the evidence submitted that the certificate submitted by
    the appellant is not genuine and on this basis the  appeal  is  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules.

10.  In my view the  respondent  has  not  established  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the certificate submitted by the appellant with  his
    application, namely a certificate which indicates that it  was  awarded
    by the University of Gloucestershire to the appellant was not  genuine.
    For these reasons the appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.





Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 24 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam



