

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/13811/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination  Promulgated   |
|On 25th September 2014                        |On 13th October 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                       MR SHASHIDARAN KANAPATHIPILLAI
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms M Sanchez, Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant in the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary  of  State  for
       the Home Department. The respondent is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  born
       on 17th September 1974; he is referred to hereafter as the claimant.
       Permission was granted to the Secretary of State to  appeal  against
       the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kempton  (the  Judge)
       allowing the claimant's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
       decision to refuse him a residence card as confirmation of  a  right
       to reside in the United Kingdom under Regulation 15(1)  of  the  EEA
       Regulations 2006.


    2. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge R A Cox on  13th
       June 2014 because he considered the grounds of appeal  were  clearly
       arguable, namely that the Judge  had  failed  to  give  reasons  for
       findings on material matters and/or committed procedural unfairness.
       I was satisfied after the initial hearing before me  on  7th  August
       2014 that the Judge had erred in law and I set  the  decision  aside
       for the reasons fully set out in that decision. The claimant was  at
       that time without legal representation but indicated that he  wished
       to reinstruct solicitors.  I therefore adjourned to allow  time  for
       the claimant to obtain  representation  and  the  matter  now  comes
       before me again for a continuation hearing in order  to  remake  the
       decision.


    3. The relevant law, under regulation 15(1)(b) of the  Regulations,  is
       that a family member of an EEA national who is not  himself  an  EEA
       national but who has resided in the  United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
       national in accordance with the Regulations for a continuous  period
       of 5 years shall acquire the right to reside in the  United  Kingdom
       permanently.   The  EEA  national  is  the  claimant's   wife,   Mrs
       Nagarajah, a person of French nationality. The claimant claims  that
       she has been residing  in  the  United  Kingdom,  exercising  Treaty
       rights as a qualified person, in  accordance with the Regulations.


    4. Regulation 6 sets out the categories of qualified people as follows:


              "Qualified person"

           This sectionnoteType=Explanatory Memorandum has no associated
             6.  (1)  In these Regulations, "qualified  person"  means  a
           person who is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

           (a )a jobseeker;

           (b) a worker;

           (c) a self-employed person;

           (d) a self-sufficient person; or

           (e) a student



    5. The Secretary of State's reasons for refusal of the application  are
       set  out  in  a  letter  dated  7th  March  2014.   The   claimant's
       application, made on 19th December 2013, was considered  firstly  on
       the basis of the EEA sponsor's status as a qualified person deriving
       from her status as a worker for a period of 5 years.  The supporting
       evidence consisted of  a letter of employment from Londis dated 10th
       October 2007 confirming the sponsor's  employment  from  10th  April
       2007; a job offer letter from Sandwich 4 You dated 27th March  2007;
       a letter and payslip from Mahalaxmy Silks confirming  an  employment
       start date from 1st November 2013. The Secretary of State  found  an
       absence of evidence to show how the sponsor  was  exercising  Treaty
       rights in the United Kingdom between the end of her employment  with
       Londis in April 2008 and the beginning of her next job  in  November
       2013.


    6. The Secretary of State states that she took further account  of  the
       claimant's statement that his wife ceased to exercise Treaty  rights
       whist she was having children; the claimant provided  his  own  work
       documents for that period.  The Secretary of State asserted that the
       claimant's income could only be taken into account for  the  purpose
       of showing his wife to be a self-sufficient person for the period in
       which she was not working in accordance with  Regulation 4(1)(c)  as
       follows:


             Worker", "self-employed person", "self-sufficient person"  and
       "student"

           This sectionnoteType=Explanatory Memorandum has no associated
             4.  (1)  In these Regulations -

           (a)"worker" means a worker within the meaning of Article 39 of
           the Treaty establishing the European Community(1);

           (b)"self-employed person" means a person who establishes himself
           in order to pursue activity as a self-employed person in
           accordance with Article 43 of the Treaty establishing the
           European Community;

           (c)"self-sufficient person" means a person who has-

           (i) sufficient resources not to become a burden on the social
           assistance system of the United Kingdom during his period of
           residence; and

           (ii) comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the United
           Kingdom;



    7. The Secretary of State found a lack of any submitted  evidence  that
       the  EEA  national  and  her  family  members  in  this   case   had
       comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the United Kingdom for the
       period from April 2008 to November 2013. There was considered to  be
       a further lack of evidence that there had been no dependency on  the
       social assistance system of the United Kingdom during the period  of
       residence.  The  Secretary  of  State  concluded  that   there   was
       insufficient evidence to establish whether the EEA national had been
       exercising Treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
       period of 5 years and refused the application.


    8. The Secretary of State advised the  claimant  that  the  refusal  to
       issue a permanent residence card did not require him  to  leave  the
       United Kingdom if he could otherwise demonstrate his right to reside
       under the Regulations. He was  further  advised  that  consideration
       could be given to the application under Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
       276 ADE of the Immigration Rules if he made and paid for a  separate
       application under those provisions.


    9. At the outset of the hearing before me I allowed some  time  to  the
       representative now  instructed  by  the  claimant,  Ms  Sanchez,  to
       consider my decision on the error of law and the  setting  aside  of
       the previous decision as it had not apparently been served upon her.
       Ms Sanchez had been unaware that the matter was listed today  for  a
       hearing to remake the decision; had she been aware of the  situation
       she said that she would have brought the claimant's  wife,  the  EEA
       national, to give evidence as well as the claimant who was  present.
       Ms Sanchez asked me to adjourn if I wished  to  hear  from  the  EEA
       national.  My response was that the manner of conducting of her case
       was for Ms Sanchez and I would consider the merits of an application
       to adjourn should such an application be  made.  After  taking  some
       time to consider the position Ms Sanchez opted to continue with  the
       hearing on the available evidence without applying to adjourn.


   10. The sole ground of appeal is that the Secretary of State's  decision
       causes a breach of the claimant's rights under the EEA  Regulations.
       The burden of proof is upon the claimant and the standard  of  proof
       is on the balance of probabilities. I may  consider  evidence  about
       any matter which I think relevant to the substance of the  decision,
       including evidence which concerns a matter arising after the date of
       decision.


   11. Clarification was not forthcoming at the beginning  of  the  hearing
       before me about whether the claimant relies on his wife's status  as
       a worker throughout the necessary 5-year period or  whether  she  is
       claimed to  have  been  a  self-sufficient  person  because  of  the
       claimant's income. On his application  form  the  claimant  did  not
       complete section 4.17 asking whether he is the family  member  of  a
       person qualified as a worker or as an  economically  self-sufficient
       person. In the section listing the documents  submitted  he  entered
       "N/A" against the provision of a document showing sickness insurance
       for the category  of  a  self-sufficient  person,  although  he  now
       submits such evidence.


   12. The covering letter from  Thomas  Sanchez,  Solicitors,  dated  19th
       December 2013, sent with the claimant's application  submitted  that
       the claimant's wife qualified as a  worker  under  the  Regulations,
       notwithstanding her maternity leave. Although it was submitted  that
       the claimant had worked since his arrival in the United  Kingdom  in
       2007 it was not submitted that his wife was a self-sufficient person
       and no document was submitted to  show  any  comprehensive  sickness
       insurance cover.


   13. There is no statement or oral evidence from the claimant's  wife  in
       support of the appeal. The claimant's evidence is contained  in  his
       statement dated 25th April  2014  which  was  adopted  in  his  oral
       evidence before me.  He states that he and his wife married in India
       on 24th March 2003.  In 2004 the claimant moved to  France  to  live
       with his wife, a French citizen. On  31st  March  2006  their  first
       child was born in France and in April 2006 the claimant came to  the
       United Kingdom as a student; his wife and child moved to the  United
       Kingdom to join him in February 2007.


   14. On 10th April 2007 the claimant's wife started her  employment  with
       Londis which continued until 28th  February  2008  when  she  became
       pregnant with the couple's second child; that child, a son, was born
       in London on 22nd October 2008, after which the claimant's wife  did
       not work again until 1st November 2013. It was the couple's decision
       that the claimant should continue to work after the birth  of  their
       children and his wife would remain at home to look after them.


   15. In his statement the claimant asserts that the  Secretary  of  State
       has acted wrongly and unfairly in refusing his  application  because
       he had a legitimate expectation that the she  would  apply  her  own
       policy and guidelines as set out on the website  dealing  with  "EEA
       and Swiss Nationals".   The advice set out therein and  relied  upon
       by the claimant is that the definition of "worker"  includes  "those
       between jobs (for example,  women  who  have  ceased  employment  on
       becoming pregnant but who intend to resume work at some point  after
       the birth)".


   16. The claimant's oral evidence is that his wife intended to work again
       when she stopped in February 2008 but did not do so for a period  of
       over 5 years when their son started school.  The  claimant  did  not
       know whether his wife had applied  for  maternity  leave.  They  did
       investigate the possibility of child care from other sources but did
       not wish to follow that course; it was  the  claimant's  view  that,
       particularly when they had two children, it was better for his  wife
       to look after them whilst he worked full time; it is the  claimant's
       belief that children cared for by their parents are well behaved and
       better behaved than those looked after by child carers.  It  is  his
       opinion that it was better for the children  to  have  a  parent  at
       home.


   17. In her final submissions the main argument put forward by Ms Sanchez
       for the claimant was that he was entitled to rely upon  the  website
       guidance set out above (and included in  the  bundle  of  documents)
       giving the  definition  of  a  "worker"  for  the  purposes  of  the
       Regulations.  She submitted that the definition covered the position
       of the claimant's wife, namely that she  had  ceased  employment  on
       becoming pregnant but intended to resume work at  some  point  after
       the birth. It was unfair on the part of the Secretary  of  State  to
       have decided the matter as she did, namely by failing to give weight
       to her own guidance and deciding the application  on  the  basis  of
       self-sufficiency without allowing an opportunity to submit  evidence
       of sickness insurance.


   18. Mr Avery's submission for the Secretary of State was  that  although
       there is now some evidence of French medical insurance cover  it  is
       not adequate for the  purposes  of  the  claimant's  application  or
       appeal.  He relied upon the case of Ahmad v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 988
       which considered  the  issue  of  comprehensive  sickness  insurance
       cover; he submitted that there was  insufficient  evidence  to  show
       that  the  French  cover  was  adequate  for  the  purposes  of  the
       Regulations, particularly in the light of the  length  of  time  the
       parties had been in the United Kingdom.


   19. Dealing with issue of self-sufficiency first of all I find that  the
       appeal cannot succeed on that ground. I find a lack of evidence that
       there was comprehensive  sickness  insurance  cover  in  the  United
       Kingdom as required by the Regulations.  It  is  apparent  from  the
       covering solicitors' letter that the application was not put made on
       this basis and the necessary evidence was not submitted.  I  do  not
       accept  the  argument  that  there  was  unfairness  caused  by  the
       Secretary of State failing to allow an opportunity to the  appellant
       to submit necessary evidence of  insurance  cover;  he  was  legally
       represented and specifically entered "N/A" in the relevant  document
       box on the application form.


   20. It is open to me to consider the evidence now  submitted  which  was
       not with the application and I do so.  It consists of a document and
       its translation from French into English, at pages 13 -  16  of  the
       claimant's bundle of documents submitted to the Upper Tribunal.  The
       document  is  dated  6th  February  2006  and  is  described  as   a
       certificate of additional universal health cover, the insured person
       being the claimant's wife.  The certificate,  which  was  issued  in
       France, declares the rights and benefits  of  the  insured  and  her
       family  members  to  exemption  from  advance   fees   from   health
       professionals.  The  entitlement  is  recorded  as  being  from  1st
       February 2006 to 31st January 2007; the claimant's wife and children
       are named as its beneficiaries.  I am not  satisfied  that  this  is
       sufficient evidence of comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the
       United Kingdom and I find that the claimant's wife was not qualified
       as a self-sufficient person for the purposes of the Regulations.


   21. Ms Sanchez in her final submissions referred to the  case  of  Jessy
       Saint Prix v Secretary of State for Work  and  Pensions  (Case  C  -
       507/12) CJEU (Fourth  Chamber),  19th  June  2014,  considering  the
       effect of pregnancy and childbirth  upon  a  person's  status  as  a
       "worker" and relied on paragraph 42 in particular in submitting that
       the question of the "reasonableness"  of  the  length  of  maternity
       leave has been left open by the European Court. She  submitted  that
       the period that has elapsed between  childbirth  and  starting  work
       again is reasonable taking account of all the specific circumstances
       of this case.  She submitted that no laws have  broken  and  in  the
       light of the birth of the claimant's second child it was  reasonable
       for his wife to remain at home given the greater demands  of  caring
       for two children rather than one child; a legitimate choice had been
       exercised by the parties.


   22. I accept that in her deliberations set out in the refusal letter the
       Secretary of State did not consider the definition of a "worker"  in
       the context of maternity leave, but nor did  she  move  directly  to
       consider the issue of self-sufficiency as submitted by  Ms  Sanchez.
       The Secretary of State interpreted the application as  stating  that
       the appellant's wife had not exercised Treaty rights whilst she  was
       having children and found no evidence  of  the  exercise  of  Treaty
       rights by her between April 2008 and November 2013.


   23. Although there may have been a misinterpretation of the  solicitors'
       submissions I do not accept that the Secretary of  State  failed  to
       apply her own policy. There was an absence of  any  evidence  I  can
       identify before the Secretary of State that the claimant's wife  had
       any intention of resuming work at some point after the birth. It  is
       accepted for the claimant  that  this  is  a  necessary  element  of
       retaining the status of "worker" and I find that it was absent  from
       the information before the Secretary of State.


   24. I accept that the claimant's wife did return to work,  although  not
       for a period of over 5 years after ceasing work. The  only  evidence
       that she intended to resume work at  some  point  is  contained  the
       claimant's oral evidence before me. If I accept  that  evidence  the
       issue then revolves  around  whether  the  status  of  "worker"  was
       retained in the light of the period of absence from work. I  do  not
       accept the submission that  the  website  guidance  stating  that  a
       worker can be a woman who "intends to  resume  work  at  some  point
       after the birth" is the end of the matter.  Ms Sanchez suggests that
       this is a binding definition  from  which  the  Secretary  of  State
       cannot depart so that no time limit can  therefore  be  put  on  the
       length of absence from work for maternity reasons. The  guidance  is
       in my view no more than guidance and does not stand apart from  case
       law on the issue.


   25. The relevant findings in the  case  of  Jessy  Saint  Prix   are  as
       follows:
                        39      In the present case, it is clear from  the
           order for reference, a finding not contested by the  parties  in
           the main proceeding, that Ms Saint Prix was  employed  in  the
           territory of the United Kingdom before giving up work, less than
           three months before the birth  of  her  child,  because  of  the
           physical constraints of the late stages  of  pregnancy  and  the
           immediate aftermath of childbirth. She returned  to  work  three
           months after the birth of her child,  without  having  left  the
           territory of that Member State during the period of interruption
           of her professional activity.
           40      The fact that such constraints require a woman to  give
           up work during the period  needed  for  recovery  does  not,  in
           principle, deprive her of the  status  of  'worker'  within  the
           meaning Article 45 TFEU.
           41      The fact that she was not  actually  available  on  the
           employment market of the host Member State for a few months does
           not mean that she has ceased to belong  to  that  market  during
           that period, provided she returns to work or finds  another  job
           within a reasonable period after confinement (see,  by  analogy,
           Orfanopoulos and Oliveri, C-482/01 and C-493/01,  EU:C:2004:262,
           paragraph 50).
           42      In order to  determine  whether  the  period  that  has
           elapsed between  childbirth  and  starting  work  again  may  be
           regarded as reasonable, the national court concerned should take
           account of all the specific circumstances of  the  case  in  the
           main proceedings  and  the  applicable  national  rules  on  the
           duration of maternity leave, in accordance  with  Article 8  of
           Council  Directive  92/85/EEC  of  19 October  1992   on   the
           introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety
           and health at work of pregnant  workers  and  workers  who  have
           recently given birth  or  are  breastfeeding  (tenth  individual
           Directive within the  meaning  of  Article 16(1)  of  Directive
           89/391/EEC) (OJ 1992 L 348, p. 1).
           43      The approach adopted in paragraph 41  of  the  present
           judgment is consistent with the objective pursued by Article 45
           TFEU of enabling a worker to move freely within the territory of
           the other Member States and to stay there  for  the  purpose  of
           employment  (see  Uecker  and  Jacquet,  C-64/96  and   C-65/96,
           EU:C:1997:285, paragraph 21).
           44      As the Commission contends, a Union  citizen  would  be
           deterred from exercising her right to freedom of movement if, in
           the event that she was pregnant in the host State  and  gave  up
           work as a result, if only for a short period, she risked  losing
           her status as a worker in that State.
           45      Furthermore,  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  EU  law
           guarantees special  protection  for  women  in  connection  with
           maternity. In that regard, it should be noted that Article 16(3)
           of Directive 2004/38 provides, for the  purpose  of  calculating
           the continuous period of five years of  residence  in  the  host
           Member State allowing Union citizens to  acquire  the  right  of
           permanent residence in that territory, that  the  continuity  of
           that residence is not affected, inter alia, by an absence  of  a
           maximum of 12 consecutive months for important reasons  such  as
           pregnancy and childbirth.
           46      If, by virtue of that protection,  an  absence  for  an
           important event such as pregnancy or childbirth does not  affect
           the continuity of the five years of residence in the host Member
           State required for the granting of that right of residence,  the
           physical constraints of the late stages  of  pregnancy  and  the
           immediate aftermath of childbirth, which require a woman to give
           up work temporarily, cannot, a fortiori, result  in  that  woman
           losing her status as a worker.
           47      In the light of all the foregoing  considerations,  the
           answer to the questions referred for a preliminary ruling by the
           referring court is that Article 45 TFEU must be interpreted  as
           meaning that a woman who gives up work, or seeking work, because
           of the physical constraints of the late stages of pregnancy  and
           the aftermath of childbirth  retains  the  status  of  'worker',
           within the meaning of that article, provided she returns to work
           or finds another job within a reasonable period after the  birth
           of her child.
   26. In paragraph 39, as set out above, the situation considered is  that
       in relation to the  physical  constraints  of  the  late  stages  of
       pregnancy and the immediate aftermath of childbirth,  not  the  need
       for childcare in the following years. The finding is that the period
       needed for recovery does not, in principle, deprive a woman  of  the
       status of 'worker' within the meaning Article 45 TFEU. The reference
       to the period needed for recovery after childbirth in my  view  does
       not  extend  to  years  of  post-birth  child  care.   There  is   a
       requirement for the period  between  childbirth  and  starting  work
       again to be reasonable.


   27. Article 16(3) of Directive 2004/38 provides,  for  the  purpose  of
       calculating the continuous period of five years of residence in  the
       host Member State allowing Union citizens to acquire  the  right  of
       permanent residence in that territory, that the continuity  of  that
       residence is not affected, inter alia, by an absence of a maximum of
       12 consecutive months for important reasons such  as  pregnancy  and
       childbirth. In paragraph 46 above the contemplation is that work  is
       given up temporarily. The requirement is to return to  work,  or  to
       find another job, within a reasonable period after the birth  for  a
       woman to remain within the category of a worker.


   28. In these circumstances I reject the submission by  Ms  Sanchez  that
       the appellant's wife had a free choice about when to return to  work
       with no upper limit. If that argument were followed through it would
       be possible for a woman to exercise that choice and not to  work  if
       she wished to remain at home to care for a third, fourth,  or  fifth
       child and so on. That in my  view  goes  beyond  a  reasonable  time
       within the relevant case law and beyond the time allowed to remain a
       worker for the purposes of the Regulations, as does the period of  5
       years exercised as a matter of choice in this case.  For this reason
       I find that the claimant fails to show that his  family  member  was
       exercising Treaty rights as a worker for the period required by  the
       Regulations.  The appeal fails under the EEA Regulations.  I find no
       other ground on which the appeal can succeed and it is dismissed.

Summary of Decisions


   29. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was previously
       found to have involved the making of errors on a point of law.  That
       decision was set aside and is remade as follows.


   30. The appeal is dismissed under the EEA Regulations.


   31. The appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
       succeeds in the Upper Tribunal.



Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.   There  is  no
    application to make such a direction and there is  nothing  to  suggest
    that such a direction is needed.

Signed

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date:  10th October 2014


Fee Award

         The full fee award made in the First-tier Tribunal falls away with
    the dismissal of the

    claimant's appeal on its remaking in the Upper Tribunal.

Signed

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 10th October 2014

