
[pic]
IAC-FH-ar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13760/2014
     IA/13761/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 29th October, 2014                      |On 19th November 2014          |
|Signed 17th November, 2014                 |                               |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         OLUWABUKOLA ELIZABETH JESSE
                          OLUWABUKOLA MICHAEL OYEMI
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Pretzell, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this  appeal  is  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and I shall  refer  to  her  as  being  the  claimant.   The
    respondents  are  both  Nigerian   citizens,   and   mother   and   son
    respectively.  The first respondent was born on 14th  June,  1975,  and
    appears to have entered the United Kingdom in April 2000.   The  second
    named respondent was born in the United  Kingdom  on  8th  July,  2002.
    They both made  application  to  the  appellant  asserting  that  their
    removal from the United Kingdom would breach  their  rights  under  the
    1950 the European Convention for the Protection  of  Human  Rights  and
    Fundament  Freedoms.   The  claimant  was  not   satisfied   that   the
    respondent's rights would be breached by  their  removal  and  on  28th
    February 2014, decided to remove the respondents as persons subject  to
    administrative removal under Section 10 of the 1999 Act.

2.   The respondents appealed this decision and their appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish at Bennett House on 27th June  2014.
    In his determination he recognised that the best interests of the child
    must be a  primary  consideration.   He  noted  that  the  first  named
    respondent came to the United Kingdom in 2000, intending to  abuse  the
    immigration state and he noted that she has done  so  ever  since.  The
    judge was clearly perplexed and could not understand why the  appellant
    considers it worth opposing a third appeal from the respondent when the
    claimant had done  nothing  whatsoever  to  enforce  her  two  previous
    successful appeals.

3.   The judge was well aware of the fact  that  the  first  respondent  had
    abused the immigration system. Nonetheless he found that it is  in  the
    best interests of the second named respondent to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom where he may possibly be saved  from  potentially  very  severe
    lameness whereas were he to be removed to Nigeria  he  would  not.  The
    best interests of the second named respondent also involved his mother,
    the first respondent, remaining with him. He allowed both appeals.

4.   The claimant  challenged  the  decision  on  the  basis  that  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules is not freestanding and  that  the
    application should be refused under s.LTR1.6, because the  presence  of
    the first named respondent in the United Kingdom was not conclusive  to
    the public good. because of her conduct making it undesirable to  allow
    her to remain in the United Kingdom. The basis for that  is  the  claim
    that she made a false asylum claim in the name of  someone  other  than
    her own.

5.   For the respondents Mr Pretzel pointed out that reliance was now  being
    placed upon s. LTR1.6 when in fact  it  had  not  been  raised  by  the
    claimant in the Reasons for Refusal Letter of  24  February  2014.   Mr
    Diwnycz conceded that the issue was not  raised  earlier  and  conceded
    that as a result the determination did not contain any error of law.  I
    am grateful to him.  In making his decision First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Frankish did not err in law and his decision shall stand.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
     17th November, 2014
