
IAC-AH-DN/DH-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13752/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th February 2015                          |On 16th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 YAW GYIMAH
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MaDE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Pratt of WTB Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a determination of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Raikes promulgated on 19th September 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant entered the  United  Kingdom  on  19th  March  2013  as  a
    visitor, with a visit visa valid between 11th February  2013  and  11th
    February 2014.  After arriving in the United Kingdom he met  Vera  Adu-
    Gyamfi to whom I shall refer as the Sponsor,  and  who  has  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  The couple underwent a marriage
    ceremony.  They both remained in the United Kingdom but this  was  done
    by proxy in Ghana on 25th August 2013, and the marriage was  registered
    on 18th September 2013.

 4. Although the Claimant had a multivisit visa, he should have only stayed
    in the United Kingdom for a maximum of six months.  He  overstayed  and
    on 10th February 2014 applied for leave to remain  using  form  FLR(FP)
    the reason for his application being that he wished to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom with his wife, the Sponsor.  The  application  confirmed
    that the Claimant and Sponsor had married by way of  a  proxy  marriage
    carried out in Ghana by family members, and contended  that  they  were
    able to support themselves without recourse to public  funds  and  that
    they had  adequate  accommodation.   They  had  third  party  financial
    support from the Claimant's brother who was a general  practitioner  in
    the United Kingdom.  It was accepted in the covering letter  dated  7th
    February 2014, which was  submitted  with  the  application,  that  the
    application  could  not  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules,   but
    contended that the application should be granted under Article 8 of the
    1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the  1950  Convention).   The
    application was refused on 4th  March  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refusing to vary leave to  remain,  and  making  a  decision  that  the
    Claimant should be removed from the United Kingdom.   The  reasons  for
    refusal  are  contained  in  a  letter  dated  4th  March  2014.    The
    application was considered under section EX.1 of  Appendix  FM.   There
    was no indication that EX.1(a) applied, because at that time the couple
    did not have any children.  In relation to EX.1(b) it was  acknowledged
    that the Claimant may have a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with
    his partner, but it was not accepted  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life  with  that  partner  continuing  outside  the
    United Kingdom.  Therefore the  application  failed  with  relation  to
    Appendix FM.

 5. The Claimant's private life was considered with reference to  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules and failed  because  the  Claimant  had
    only entered the United Kingdom on 19th March 2013, and in relation  to
    paragraph 276(vi) it was not accepted that the  Claimant  had  no  ties
    (which was the test at that time) to Ghana.

 6. The Secretary of State did not accept  the  application  disclosed  any
    exceptional circumstances which would warrant granting leave to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules.  It was noted that the Sponsor was  less
    than two months pregnant, there was no  medical  evidence  provided  to
    indicate that she was unable to travel,  and  the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that there was nothing preventing the  Claimant  and  Sponsor
    returning to Ghana.

 7. The Claimant appealed contending in summary that the  refusal  breached
    Article 8 in that  the  Claimant  resided  with  the  Sponsor  who  has
    indefinite leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  Sponsor  is
    pregnant and the Claimant is the father of the child, and the  Claimant
    and  Sponsor  intended  to  live  together  permanently  in  a  genuine
    relationship.  Adequate financial  maintenance  was  available  from  a
    combination of the Sponsor's earnings and third party support from  the
    Claimant's brother.  The Claimant had family in the United Kingdom  but
    no family in Ghana and no ties to that country.

 8. The appeal was heard by Judge Raikes (the judge) on 3rd September 2014.
     The judge head evidence  from  the  Claimant,  the  Sponsor,  and  the
    Claimant's brother who was providing  third  party  financial  support.
    The judge found (paragraph 30) that "there does not appear  to  be  any
    issue about the Appellant and his wife returning to Ghana per se".  The
    judge noted that the Claimant had lived in Ghana all his life until  he
    arrived in the United Kingdom in March 2013 as a visitor.  It was  also
    noted that the Sponsor lived in Ghana all her  life  until  2009.   The
    judge however went on to find that the appeal could not  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules recording in paragraph 33, "I  am  not  satisfied
    that the Appellants have met the Immigration Rules as stated in respect
    of either Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE."

 9. The judge went on to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules,
    and found that because the Claimant and Sponsor had a child,  it  would
    be unreasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.  It is
    apparent that the child was born  after  the  refusal,  and  after  the
    Notice of Appeal was entered.  The date of birth is not recorded in the
    First-tier Tribunal determination or the papers submitted in connection
    with the appeal but the indication given is that the child was born  in
    August 2014.  The judge in assessing proportionality,  noted  that  the
    child is a British citizen, because the Sponsor had indefinite leave to
    remain, and although recording in paragraph 43 that "there would be  no
    real issues with the family returning to Ghana per se" the decision  to
    remove the Claimant would be disproportionate as it would  prevent  his
    child from exercising his rights as a British citizen.

10. The judge concluded that the Secretary of State's decision was not fair
    and reasonable, and found it to be disproportionate and  therefore  the
    appeal was allowed under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

11. This decision caused the Secretary of  State  to  apply  for  leave  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In brief summary it was  contended  that
    the judge had erred in the Article 8 consideration.  It  was  contended
    that the judge had not taken into account case law such as Nagre [2013]
    EWHC 720 (Admin) and Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).  It was contended
    that an Article 8 assessment outside the rules should only  be  carried
    out where there are compelling  circumstances  not  recognised  by  the
    rules, and the judge had not identified such  compelling  circumstances
    and had failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision breached Article 8.

12. It was contended that having a British child  is  not  a  "trump  card"
    enabling an individual to stay in the United Kingdom.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    McWilliam who found the grounds seeking permission to appeal not to  be
    particularly well drafted, but that there was  arguable  merit  in  the
    contention that the judge had inadequately explained why it  would  not
    be reasonable to expect the British citizen child to leave  the  United
    Kingdom noting that the child is very young, and that both parents  are
    citizens of Ghana.

14. Following the grant of  permission,  the  Claimant  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending in summary that the judge adequately considered whether
    it would be reasonable to expect the British citizen child to leave the
    United Kingdom.  It was contended that the  judge  had  carried  out  a
    balanced consideration  and  appropriately  considered  relevant  legal
    tests,  and  in  particular  had  considered  section   117B   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It was submitted that it
    was not open to the Secretary of  State  to  argue  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the British citizen  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, in the light of the Secretary of State's own guidance set  out
    at section 11.2.3 of the Immigration Directorate Instructions on Family
    Migration and the following extract  was  quoted  in  support  of  this
    contention;

         Save in cases involving criminality, the decision  maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child.  This reflects the European Court of  Justice  judgment
         in Zambrano.

15. The Tribunal issued a direction that there should be a  hearing  before
    the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination contained errors of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Error of Law

16. Mr McVeety relied upon the grounds contained with the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  In particular he submitted that  the  judge  had
    erred in paragraph 43 in assessing proportionality.  The judge  had  in
    fact  regarded  British  citizenship  as  a  trump  card  and  had  not
    undertaken a balanced proportionality exercise.  It appeared  from  the
    determination that the appeal had been allowed simply because the child
    was a British citizen.  While it was accepted that  significant  weight
    must be attached to British citizenship,  Mr  McVeety  submitted  there
    were other factors that needed to be  considered,  and  the  judge  had
    given inadequate reasons for the findings that were made.

17. Mr Pratt in making oral submissions relied upon the rule  24  response,
    and pointed out that the judge had taken into account in  paragraph  41
    the young age of the child, although the exact age had not been  given.
    Mr Pratt relied upon the Secretary of State's  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions referred to in the rule 24 response which  indicated  that
    it would not be reasonable for a British child to  have  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

18. Having considered the submissions I found that the judge had  erred  in
    law as contended by the Secretary of State.  ZH (Tanzania) [2007]  UKSC
    4 indicates that nationality is not a "trump card", although it  is  of
    particular importance in assessing the best interests of any child.  My
    view was that the judge had not undertaken a  balanced  proportionality
    exercise, and had not given adequate reasons for finding that it  would
    be unreasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom and had given
    inadequate reasons, when making the  Article  8  findings.   The  Upper
    Tribunal gave guidance on the need for reasons in  Budhathoki  (reasons
    for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) in the following terms which are
    set out in the headnote;

         It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal
         judgment to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.   This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost.

19. The judge made conflicting findings, and found  in  paragraph  30  that
    there did not appear to be any issue with the  Claimant  and  his  wife
    returning to Ghana per se. The judge found  that  the  requirements  of
    section EX.1 in Appendix FM could not be satisfied,  which  included  a
    consideration of whether it would be reasonable for the child to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  The judge found against  the  Claimant  under  the
    immigration rules, but then went on to allow the appeal under Article 8
    outside the rules, on the basis that it would be unreasonable  for  the
    child to leave the United Kingdom.  I  found  that  inadequate  reasons
    were given for findings and therefore the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was set aside.

20. Both representatives indicated that they were in a position to  proceed
    so that the decision could be remade.

Remaking the Decision

21. The Claimant attended the hearing, but Mr Pratt indicated that  it  was
    not proposed to call further evidence, and the evidence  given  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal would be relied upon.

22. Both representatives agreed that there had been  no  challenge  to  the
    findings made by the judge in relation to the  immigration  rules,  and
    therefore findings made that the appeal could  not  succeed  under  the
    immigration rules must be preserved.  I found  this  to  be  the  case,
    although in my view there was a conflict between the  judge's  findings
    that the appeal could not succeed under EX.1(a) which  deals  with  the
    issue of whether it is reasonable to expect a British  child  to  leave
    the United Kingdom, which  the  judge  dismissed,  and  the  subsequent
    findings in relation to Article 8 outside the rules, that it would  not
    be reasonable for a British citizen child to leave the  United  Kingdom
    and therefore the appeal was allowed.

23. In any event, I agreed that in the absence  of  any  challenge  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal findings under  the  immigration  rules,  the  only
    issue before me related to remaking the decision in relation to Article
    8 outside the rules.

24. I ascertained that I had all  the  documents  upon  which  the  parties
    intended to rely.  I had the documents that had been before the  First-
    tier Tribunal, those being the Secretary of State's bundle with annexes
    A-E, and the Claimant's bundle comprising 167 pages.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

25. Mr McVeety submitted  that  the  appeal  should  be  dismissed  as  the
    Claimant, Sponsor and their child would encounter no problems  if  they
    returned to Ghana.  Both the adults  originated  from  Ghana,  and  the
    child was of a very young age.  Alternatively the Sponsor and her child
    could remain in the United Kingdom and it would  be  proportionate  for
    the Claimant to return to Ghana to make an entry clearance  application
    to satisfy the immigration rules.  Mr McVeety submitted that  this  was
    not a case such as considered by the House of Lords in Chikwamba [2008]
    UKHL 40, in that in this case the Claimant would not  be  returning  to
    Ghana to make an entry clearance application simply  for  the  sake  of
    procedure.  In this case there had been no satisfactory attempt made to
    satisfy the immigration rules for leave to remain as a spouse.   I  was
    asked to find that significant weight should be attached  to  the  fact
    that the immigration rules  dealing  with  family  life  could  not  be
    satisfied, and the Claimant's removal from the United Kingdom would  be
    proportionate.

The Claimant's Submissions

26. Mr Pratt pointed out that ZH (Tanzania) predated the Zambrano decision,
    and that it was not permissible to expect a British  citizen  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  I was asked to find that it was not open  to
    the Secretary of State to argue that it was reasonable for the child to
    leave.

27. In relation to section 117B of the 2002 Act, Mr  Pratt  submitted  that
    the Claimant could speak English, and could be  financially  maintained
    by third party support from his brother.  There  had  been  no  dispute
    that the family have a close and loving  relationship,  nor  had  there
    been any dispute that they have a British child.

28. I was asked to attach significant weight to the British citizenship  of
    the child and to allow the appeal under Article 8.

29. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

30. I have taken into account all the evidence, both oral and  documentary,
    which has been placed before me.  As there has been no challenge to the
    First-tier Tribunal findings in relation to the  immigration  rules,  I
    have to consider Article 8 outside the immigration rules.  The Claimant
    has to prove that Article 8 is engaged.  The Claimant must show that he
    has a family and/or private life  that  would  engage  Article  8,  and
    thereafter it is for the Secretary of State to show that  the  decision
    which is the subject of challenge is lawful, necessary for one  of  the
    reasons set out in Article 8(2), and proportionate.

31. I find as a fact that the Claimant is a Ghanaian citizen and  I  accept
    that he entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 19th March 2013.  He
    subsequently met the Sponsor and he overstayed in this country.   There
    has been no challenge to the fact that a proxy marriage was undertaken.
     I am not asked to decide upon the validity of  that  marriage.   I  do
    find that the Claimant and Sponsor are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship, and this has not been  challenged  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.

32. I also find that the couple have a child who it  appears  was  born  in
    August 2014, and the fact that this child is a British citizen has  not
    been challenged by the Secretary of State.

33. In relation to Article 8, where this  has  been  considered  under  the
    immigration rules, I have to decide whether it is appropriate for  this
    to be subsequently considered outside the rules.  I take  into  account
    the guidance given in MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and  I  set  out
    below paragraph 135;

         Where the relevant group of IRs  upon  their  proper  construction,
         provide a "complete code" for dealing with  a  person's  Convention
         rights in the context of a particular IR  or  statutory  provision,
         such as in the case of  "foreign  criminals",  then  the  balancing
         exercise and the way the various  factors  are  to  be  taken  into
         account in an individual case must be done in accordance with  that
         code, although references to  "exceptional  circumstances"  in  the
         code will nonetheless entail a proportionality  exercise.   But  if
         the relevant group of IRs is not such a "complete  code"  then  the
         proportionality test will be more at large, albeit  guided  by  the
         Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law.

34. I find that Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE are not a  complete  code,
    unlike the immigration rules that deal with deportation, and  therefore
    I conclude that it is proportionate for  Article  8  to  be  considered
    outside the rules.

35. In considering Article 8 outside the rules, I  take  into  account  the
    guidance given in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, and I accept the Claimant  has
    established a family life with the Sponsor and their child, and also  a
    private life, which engages  Article  8.   I  find  that  the  proposed
    interference with that family and private life is  in  accordance  with
    the law, on the basis that the Claimant cannot satisfy the requirements
    of the immigration rules, in order to be granted leave to remain.

36. I conclude that the proposed interference is necessary in a  democratic
    society in the interests of maintaining effective immigration  control,
    which is necessary for the economic well-being of the country.

37. The issue to  be  decided  is  whether  the  proposed  interference  is
    proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.

38. The decision in Beoku-Betts  [2008]  UKHL  39  means  that  I  have  to
    consider the Article 8 rights of all members of the  family,  not  only
    the Claimant.  In  considering  proportionality  I  take  into  account
    sections 117A and 117B of the 2002 Act.  If this appeal did not involve
    considering the interests of the child, I would have no  hesitation  in
    dismissing the appeal as in my view, if I was considering the  Claimant
    alone, the decision to refuse to vary  his  leave  to  remain,  and  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom would be in accordance with the law,
    necessary  in  the  interests  of  maintaining  effective   immigration
    control, and  proportionate.   The  Claimant  has  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor with no expectation of being  granted  settlement,
    undergone a marriage ceremony when he only had leave  to  remain  as  a
    visitor, subsequently overstayed, and cannot  satisfy  the  immigration
    rules.

39. However the couple have a British citizen child, and the best interests
    of that child are a primary  consideration.   ZH  (Tanzania)  confirmed
    that the best interests of the child broadly means  the  well-being  of
    the child, and a consideration of where those best interests  lie  will
    involve asking whether it is reasonable to expect the child to live  in
    another country.  In making a proportionality assessment under  Article
    8, the best interests of the child must  be  a  primary  consideration,
    although they can be outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of  other
    considerations.  Having found that although nationality is not a "trump
    card" Lady Hale stated that it is of particular importance in assessing
    the best interests of any child and that significant weight  should  be
    given to the importance of British citizenship, recording at  paragraph
    32;

         32.  Nor should the intrinsic importance of citizenship  be  played
             down.  As citizens these children have rights which they  will
             not be able to exercise if they move to another country.  They
             will lose the advantages of growing up and being  educated  in
             their own country, their own culture and their  own  language.
             They will have lost all this when they come back as adults.

40. Lord Hope, in agreeing with Lady Hale stated at paragraph 41;

         41.  But there is much more to British citizenship than the  status
             it gives to the children in immigration law.  It carries  with
             it a host of other benefits and advantages, all of which  Lady
             Hale has drawn attention  to  and  carefully  analysed.   They
             ought never to be left out of account, but they  were  nowhere
             considered in the Court of Appeal's  judgment.   The  fact  of
             British citizenship does not trump everything  else.   But  it
             will hardly ever be less than a very significant  and  weighty
             factor against moving children who have that status to another
             country with a  parent  who  has  no  right  to  remain  here,
             especially if the effect of  doing  this  is  that  they  will
             inevitably lose those benefits and advantages for the rest  of
             their childhood.

41. The Upper Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT  00197  (IAC)  confirmed
    that as a starting point it is in the best interests of children to  be
    with both their parents, and  it  is  generally  in  the  interests  of
    children  to  have  both  stability  and  continuity  of   social   and
    educational provision and the benefit of growing  up  in  the  cultural
    norms of the society to which they belong.

42. Guidance on consideration of the best interests of children  was  given
    by the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ  874  and  I
    set out below paragraphs 35 and 36;

         35.  A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
             will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)
             the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they
             have been in education; (c) what  stage  their  education  has
             reached; (d) to what extent they have  become  distanced  from
             the country to which it  is  proposed  they  return;  (e)  how
             renewable their connections with it may be; (f) to what extent
             they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties  in
             adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which
             the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
             their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.

         36. In a sense the Tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain?  The longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance.  By contrast if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the results may  be  the
             opposite.

    In this case the child is too young to have commenced education.  There
    are no relevant medical issues.  The child is  British  and  has  never
    been to Ghana.  Both the child's parents are however Ghanaian  citizens
    and I conclude that there would be  no  linguistic,  medical  or  other
    difficulties to the child adapting to life in that country.

43. In reaching my conclusion as to the best interests  of  the  child,  my
    primary finding is that the best interests would be served by remaining
    with both parents. As a secondary finding  I  conclude  that  the  best
    interests of the child would be to remain  with  both  parents  in  the
    United Kingdom, where the child could enjoy the  benefits  of  being  a
    British citizen.

44. The above however is not a complete  answer,  as  I  have  to  consider
    whether there are any countervailing factors to take into account,  and
    I have to reach a conclusion as to whether it would be  reasonable  for
    the child to leave the United Kingdom.

45. I take into account paragraph 95 of Sanade and others (British children
    - Zambrano-Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) which I set out below;

         95.  We shall take this helpful submission  into  account  when  we
             consider the application of  Article  8  to  each  Appellant's
             case.  We agree with it.  This means that where the  child  or
             indeed the remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore
             a citizen of the European Union, it is not possible to require
             them to relocate outside of the European Union  or  to  submit
             that it would be reasonable for  them  to  do  so.   The  case
             serves to emphasise  the  importance  of  nationality  already
             identified  in  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  ZH
             (Tanzania).  If interference with the family  life  is  to  be
             justified, it can only be on the basis that the conduct of the
             person to be removed gives  rise  to  considerations  of  such
             weight as to justify separation.

46. I also take account of the IDI referred to in the rule 24 response  and
    in particular section  11.2.3  which  has  the  heading  "Would  it  be
    unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the  UK?"   Set
    out below is the section in part;

         Save in cases involving criminality, the decision  maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child.  This reflects the European Court of  Justice  judgment
         in Zambrano.

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU.

47. Having found that the best interests of the child would  be  served  by
    remaining with both parents in the United Kingdom, I have  to  consider
    the matters contained in section 117B of the 2002 Act.  In summary this
    states that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
    public interest.  It is in the public interest that persons seeking  to
    remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English  and  are
    financially independent.  Little weight should be given  to  a  private
    life or a relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner  which  is
    established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully, and little weight should be given to a private life
    established by a  person  when  that  person's  immigration  status  is
    precarious.

48. I set out below section 117B(6);

         In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.

    I find that, in the light of the  authorities  referred  to  above,  it
    would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  In my view section 117B(6) assists the  Claimant  because  it
    specifically states that the public interest, to which  I  accord  very
    significant weight, does not require his removal, if he has  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child.   It  has
    not been disputed that the Claimant does have such a relationship  with
    a British child.  Therefore, it  is  my  view,  that  the  Respondent's
    decision  to  remove  the  Claimant  does  breach  Article  8  and   is
    disproportionate because he has a British citizen child, and  therefore
    the appeal is allowed on that basis.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed under the immigration rules.

The Claimant's appeal is allowed on human  rights  grounds  in  relation  to
Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request for anonymity, and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.



Signed        Date 11th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is allowed I have considered whether to make a fee  award.   I
make no award.  The  appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of  evidence  that
relates to the Claimant's child, who was not  born  when  the  Secretary  of
State's decision was made.



Signed        Date 11th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
