
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: Ia/13584/2014
                                                               IA/14937/2014
                                                               IA/14944/2014
                                                               IA/14950/2014
                                                               IA/14956/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 7 December 2015                   |On 25 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                       mr kehinde daramole olaoye + 4
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel, instructed by A Vincent
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willcocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Henderson) dismissing the appellants' appeal against a  decision
    taken on 22 November 2013 to refuse to grant further  leave  to  remain
    and a further decision taken on 6 March 2014 to remove  the  appellants
    from the UK.

Introduction

 3. The first appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 15 September  1968.
    The remaining appellants are his wife and three children (born in  2002
    in Nigeria, 2006 in the UK and 2012 in the  UK).  The  first  appellant
    came to the UK in 2003 on a visit visa valid until July  2003  and  has
    overstayed. The second and third appellants came to the UK in  2005  on
    visit visas and also overstayed. The appellants applied  for  leave  to
    remain on 28 August 2013.

 4. The Secretary of State concluded that the appellants did not  meet  the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  there   were   no
    exceptional circumstances such as to justify a grant of  leave  outside
    the Rules. The family would return to Nigeria  as  a  family  unit  and
    could be  educated  there.  Removal  was  a  lawful  and  proportionate
    response.

The Appeal

 5. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 19 February 2013. They were  represented  by
    Mr Waithe, Counsel.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  adult
    appellants had not given any evidence as to why it was  not  reasonable
    for the children to leave the UK but did say that their lives in the UK
    were much better than they were likely to be upon  return  to  Nigeria.
    Life in Nigeria would be hard. The judge therefore heard no evidence to
    establish that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
    leave the UK, as required under paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules.  The
    appellants did not meet the requirements of the Rules. The  judge  then
    applied Razgar and found that Article 8 was engaged. The judge  applied
    section 117B of the 2002 Act but once again considered that no evidence
    had been heard to establish that it would not be reasonable to  require
    the children to leave the UK. The children would be able  to  integrate
    into the educational  system  in  Nigeria.  There  were  not  yet  such
    significant links established by the third and fourth appellants in the
    UK so as to move from the starting point that their best interests were
    to remain with their parents. The children currently lived and  thrived
    in a multi-racial environment.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law. The judge  ignored
    written evidence in relation to reasonableness, failed to consider that
    the oldest child was just months away from attaining the age  when  she
    could register as a British citizen, failed to properly consider Azimi-
    Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC), failed to consider that section 117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act specifically states  that  it  is  not  in  the  public
    interest to remove the parents of qualifying  children  and  failed  to
    consider  the  hand  written  evidence  from  the  third   and   fourth
    appellants.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb  on  21
    July 2015. It was arguable that the judge erred in law by finding  that
    she  had  heard  no  evidence  about   reasonableness;   that   was   a
    misconstruction of the requirement that would exclude consideration  of
    the children's circumstances in Nigeria. There was arguably  no  proper
    finding on reasonableness of leaving the UK.

 8. In a rule 24 response dated 12 August  2015  the  respondent  submitted
    that it was for the appellants to demonstrate that it was  unreasonable
    to expect the children to return to Nigeria.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

10. Mr Karim submitted that the judge made reference in paragraphs  41,  45
    and  53  of  the  decision  to  the  absence  of   evidence   regarding
    reasonableness but overlooked pages 308-310 of the  appellant's  bundle
    which contain evidence from the two oldest children  and  set  out  the
    children's circumstances in the UK.  That  was  crucial  evidence.  The
    eldest child has been in the UK from ages 3-13  but  the  judge  simply
    said at paragraph  62  that  because  the  parents  are  returning  the
    children must also return. The conclusions are inadequate and  contrary
    to the evidence that was before the judge who  should  have  considered
    the reasonableness of the children returning. Looking  at  the  parents
    first put the cart before the horse. The decision should be set aside.

11. Ms Willcocks-Briscoe submitted that the judge may  not  have  expressly
    referred to the letters but clearly was apprised of the facts  and  the
    circumstances. The judge dealt  with  credibility  and  considered  the
    children at paragraphs 30-35 of the decision. The judge  addressed  the
    evidence and support that the children could be given  in  Nigeria.  At
    paragraph 41, there was no reason why it was  not  reasonable  for  the
    children to leave the UK. The  letters  from  the  children  express  a
    preference  but  there  is  no  background  evidence  to  support  that
    preference. The findings were open to the judge and  the  full  context
    from paragraph 27 onwards should be considered. The judge did  properly
    assess the claim through the lens of reasonableness. The judge did  not
    miss any relevant background information and all  relevant  information
    was taken into account.

12. I find that paragraph 60 of the decision is critical. The judge  stated
    that the Tribunal did not have the benefit of hearing evidence from the
    third and fourth appellants. There  is  no  reference  to  the  written
    evidence from the third and fourth appellants which  appears  at  pages
    308-310 of the appellants' bundle. I am satisfied that the judge failed
    to consider the  direct  evidence  from  the  children  when  assessing
    reasonableness and best interests and that is a material error of law.

13. I find that it was  a  further  material  error  of  law  to  determine
    reasonableness solely on the basis that the judge had heard no evidence
    as to whether it was reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.
    The judge was required to assess reasonableness on the basis of all  of
    the available evidence. That was not done and there is  effectively  no
    proper finding on reasonableness either for the  purpose  of  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules or section 117B of the 2002 Act.

14.  I  am  also  satisfied  that  the  best  interests  consideration  was
    inadequate. It was not sufficient for the judge to find at paragraph 62
    of the decision that it was in the best interests of  the  children  to
    remain within the family unit, wherever that unit was based. A  careful
    examination of all relevant factors relating to the best  interests  of
    the children  was  required  in  the  context  of  the  proportionality
    assessment. The judge's approach excluded the  possibility  of  finding
    that it was in the children's  best  interests  to  remain  with  their
    parents in the UK. Section 117B(6) of the  2002  Act  states  that  the
    public interest does not require removal of the parents where it is not
    reasonable to expect the children to  leave  the  UK.  The  failure  to
    properly consider the best interests  of  the  children  is  a  further
    material error of law.

15. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellants'
    appeals involved the making of an error of law and its decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

16. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

17. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.


Signed   [pic]    Date 22 January 2016

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
