
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/13163/2015
      IA/17370/2015
      IA/15030/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On              the               13th               July               2016
                     On the 25th July 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                MR YASIR ALI
                            MR SANDEEP RAI HARSH
                             MRS PRIYANKA SINGH
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Claimants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal
Representation:
For the Claimants: Mr Solman (Counsel)
For the Secretary  of  State:  Mr  Norton  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Samimi promulgated on the  7th  January  2016,  in
      which he allowed the  Claimants'  appeals  the  Secretary  of  State's
      refusal of the application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
      under the Immigration Rules as two Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants  and
      a dependant under the Points Based System. Mr Harsh was the  dependant
      spouse of Mrs Singh in respect of the application.

   2. In the Grounds of Appeal it is argued,  inter  alia,  that  the  Judge
      failed to give reasons or adequate reasons for  findings  on  material
      matters and that at [7 and 8] of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal
      Judge made a finding that the Secretary of State had failed  to  apply
      her  discretion  in  the  Claimants'  case  by  requesting  additional
      information under Paragraph 245DD(j) of the Immigration Rules.  It  is
      said that the Judge came to this conclusion  on  the  basis  that  the
      Claimants had submitted their applications on the 4th April  2013  and
      the 3rd May 2013 respectively and the decision had been  made  on  the
      24th February 2015, and that additional information had been  provided
      which the Judge could not take  into  account  by  virtue  of  Section
      85A(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   It  is
      argued that the reasons for the Claimants' refusal still has not  been
      resolved following the hearing and that the Judge failed  to  consider
      that the onus is on the Claimants to provide all  necessary  documents
      and information to satisfy the Immigration Rules, when they  submitted
      their applications, and  the  Judge  was  incorrect  by  allowing  the
      appeals under Paragraph 245DD(j) of the Immigration Rules.

   3. Permission to appeal has been granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Heynes on the 24th May 2016, in which he noted  that  the  Grounds  of
      Appeal complained that the Judge wrongly took  into  account  evidence
      not submitted with the application  and  failed  to  resolve  all  the
      issues between the parties and he found that the grounds were  clearly
      arguable.

   4. It was on that basis that the case proceeded before me  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal.

   5. In his oral submissions to the Upper Tribunal, Mr Norton  argued  that
      there was a Robinson point in that the Judge had  allowed  the  appeal
      under the Immigration Rules, despite  having  simply  found  that  the
      decision was not in accordance with the law, so that the appeal should
      not have been allowed under the Immigration Rules and that at most the
      Judge  could  therefore  have  said  that  the  decision  was  not  in
      accordance with the law.

   6. However, Mr Norton  further  argued  that  there  was  nothing  within
      Paragraph 245DD(j) of the Immigration Rules to reverse the  burden  of
      proof on the Claimants and that a reservation of a  right  to  request
      further information was not an obligation on the Secretary of State to
      request further evidence from Claimants to fill gaps in  the  evidence
      that they had submitted in support of their application.   He  further
      argued that it was  clear  from  the  statements  that  the  Claimants
      submitted that further evidence  had  been  submitted  by  them  post-
      decision.

   7. In his submissions on behalf of the Claimants,  Mr  Solman  sought  to
      argue that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had dealt with  most  of  the
      issues raised within the refusal letter between paragraphs 6 and 7  of
      the decision.  He argued that when the Judge referred to the  question
      regarding whether or not the appeal should have been allowed under the
      Immigration Rules was not argued within the  refusal  letter,  but  he
      argued that in any event, the finding  of  the  Judge  that  the  case
      should be allowed under the  Immigration  Rules,  should  be  read  in
      accordance with the previous paragraph where  it  was  said  that  the
      decision was not in accordance with the law and that it was clear that
      the Judge had not intended to allow  the  appeal  outright  under  the
      Immigration Rules.  He specifically conceded that the  Judge  had  not
      intended to allow the appeal outright under the Rules.

   8. Mr Solman argued that the Secretary of  State  was  under  a  duty  to
      consider whether or not to request further documents  under  Paragraph
      245DD(j) of the Immigration Rules, which he  had  failed  to  do.   He
      further argued that when read as a whole, the  reasons  given  by  the
      Judge as to why the discretion ought  to  have  been  exercised,  were
      clear.  He further argued that the Judge had not taken account of  new
      evidence, as the Judge had not actually  allowed  the  appeal  on  the
      basis of new evidence, but simply found that the decision was  not  in
      accordance with the law.

   9. Both parties agreed that if there was a material error of law the case
      should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  rehearing  de
      novo before  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Samimi.

   My Finding on Error of Law and Materiality

  10. Although within [7] of the decision First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Samimi
      had noted that the Claimant had produced  a  number  of  post-decision
      documents in the form of an accountant's report, advertising  as  well
      as business website, he duly noted that pursuant to Section 85A(4)  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the  Tribunal  could
      not have regard to "any new evidence".  However, Judge Samimi went  on
      to state that "However, I note that the  Appellants  had  applied  for
      leave to remain in  the  UK  as  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrants  on
      4.4.2013 and 3.5.2013 respectively.  The Respondent made a decision on
      24.2.15.  I find  that  the  Respondent  ought  to  have  exercised  a
      discretion in order to request the additional  information  (paragraph
      245DD(j) of the Rules and Policy Guidance).".

  11. In my judgement, it is wholly unclear having considered  the  decision
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge Samimi,  as  to  why  he  felt  that  the
      Secretary of State ought in such circumstances  to  have  exercised  a
      discretion in  order  to  request  any  additional  information  under
      Paragraph  245DD(j)  of  the  Rules.   Although  he  states  that  the
      applications had been made in April and May 2013, and the decision was
      in February 2015, he has not explained why this in itself should  lead
      to further additional evidence having been requested, if the  evidence
      submitted in support of the application was insufficient to  establish
      that the Claimants' met the  criteria  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in
      respect of Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrants.   I  find  that  there  is
      clearly inadequate reasoning in this regard.

  12.  Further, the terms of Paragraph 245DD(j),  as  at  the  date  of  the
      decision, in which it was stated that the "Secretary of State reserves
      the right to request additional information and  evidence  to  support
      the assessment" I find is simply a reservation of a right  to  request
      additional information, and does not impose a duty on the Secretary of
      State to request additional information in every single case where the
      Claimants  have  not  submitted  the  requisite  documentary  evidence
      necessary in order to establish compliance with the Immigration Rules,
      as at the date of the decision.  This is not a case  in  which  it  is
      said that the Claimants have submitted specified documents,  but  some
      of the documents in the sequence had been omitted; or that a  document
      was in the wrong format; or a document  was  a  copy  rather  than  an
      original; or did not contain all of the specified information for  the
      purpose of  Paragraph  245AA  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  where  the
      Secretary  of  State  may  then   contact   the   applicant   or   his
      representative in writing  and  request  the  correct  documents,  and
      criticism can rightly been made if that has not been  done.  The  more
      generalised "reservation of a right" under Paragraph 245DD(j),  in  my
      judgement simply allows the Secretary of State to request any  further
      evidence, but does, given the fact this is a reservation  of  a  right
      and the breadth of the discretion in this  regard,  mandate  that  all
      gaps in the evidence have to be notified to a Claimant, in  order  for
      those gaps to be remedied, prior to a decision being reached.

  13. However, even if I am wrong in that  regard,  the  inadequacy  of  the
      reasoning as to why in the  judgement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Samimi, what he believed to be discretion should have been  exercised,
      such that the decision was not in accordance with  the  law,  has  not
      been adequately explained, and in itself amounts to a  material  error
      of law.  This in itself is sufficient to set  aside  the  decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Samimi in its entirety, and as was agreed by
      both representatives, this being in my judgement, a material error  of
      law, it does mean that the case should be remitted back to the  First-
      tier Tribunal for rehearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other
      than First-tier Tribunal Judge Samimi.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Samimi  does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside;

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  rehearing  before
any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Samimi.

Signed
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 17th July 2016

