
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13401/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 November 2016                  |On 12 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     KAW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells, Counsel, instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of KAW from a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Broe promulgated on 27 June 2016, finding that the appellant's putative
    marriage to BB was a marriage of convenience.

2.   Mr Wells presented four distinct grounds  of  appeal.   We  shall  deal
    first of all with ground 2, which in our opinion is  the  strongest  of
    the grounds.  The judge relied on a  report  of  an  unannounced  visit
    which showed a number of items of female clothing in the flat where the
    appellant lived. A number  of  other  matters  were  contained  in  the
    report, details of which appear in the original determination, but they
    are not material for present purposes.

3.   The  judge  not  only  had  regard  to  the  report  but  also  to  the
    appellant's  medical  records,  which  were  provided  by  way  of   an
    explanation for his inability to attend an  interview  which  had  been
    arranged on behalf of the respondent.  He refers to  these  records  at
    paragraphs 34 and 35 of the determination and points out that the notes
    record that  the  appellant  suffered  from  various  ailments  but  in
    particular back pain.  He noted that the  appellant  went  to  see  his
    doctor on 21 September 2015 and quoted the record as follows:

         "History: He got bad new [sic] yesterday,  his  brother  back  home
         died suddenly due to MI at age 40 years.  He has not slept since he
         heard the bad new, sad tearful since, he lives in  a  shared  flat,
         came with his flatmate today - who is keeping an eye on him."


4.   He goes on to say that the plan noted in the record was "Had a chat  to
    patient (BCB) (or (8CB), it is not clear which), friends are keeping an
    eye on him". At paragraph 35 he says that he finds it significant  that
    there is no reference to the appellant's wife anywhere in  the  medical
    records.  He says it is clear that the appellant spoke  to  his  doctor
    about his grief and was accompanied by the person with whom the  doctor
    notes he shared a flat.  The plan was that his friends  would  keep  an
    eye on him.  There is nothing to suggest, he  says,  that  he  had  the
    support of his wife at the time of the death of his brother.

5.   He also goes on to note that the  medical  records  show  that  he  was
    living at a particular address on 25 September 2015 but also that  from
    18 July 2011 to 4 December 2014 he was living at a different address in
    Luton,  which  contradicted  the  appellant's  account  of  living   in
    Peterborough.  These matters were not put to the  appellant  and  there
    was no Home Office  Presenting  Officer  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent at the original hearing.

6.   A discussion about the import of these paragraphs ensued before us  and
    a number of authorities were referred to both in connection  with  this
    discrete point and in connection with other arguments which were raised
    about irrationality and lack of reasons.

7.   In particular the Home Office Presenting Officer, Ms Ahmad,  relied  on
    the case of Maheshwaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173 at paragraph  5  where  the
    following was said:

         "Where much depends on the credibility of a  party  and  when  that
         party makes several inconsistent statements which  are  before  the
         decision maker, that party manifestly has a forensic problem.  Some
         will choose to confront the inconsistencies straight  on  and  make
         evidential or forensic submissions on them.  Others will hope  that
         'least  said,  soonest   mended'   and   consider   that   forensic
         concentration on the point will only make matters worse and that it
         would be better to try and switch the Tribunal's attention to  some
         other aspect of the case.  Undoubtedly it is open to  the  Tribunal
         expressly to put a particular inconsistency to a witness because it
         considers that the witness may not  be  alerted  to  the  point  or
         because  it  fears  that  it  may  have  perceived   something   as
         inconsistent  with  an  earlier  answer  which  in  truth  is   not
         inconsistent.  Fairness may in some circumstances require  this  to
         be done but this will not be the usual case.  Usually the Tribunal,
         particularly if the party is represented, will  remain  silent  and
         see how the case unfolds."


8.   This is not the same sort of situation as that where  a  witness  makes
    two mutually contradictory statements in the course of giving evidence.
     The witness should know for himself or herself that he has done so and
    the Tribunal can take what they wish from that without further ado.

9.   In this case, however, it appears to us that the  judge  has  conducted
    his own examination of the medical records and drawn conclusions  which
    may or may not be open to him.  For example, we do  not  know  who  the
    flatmate is, we do not know how the  appellant  communicated  with  the
    doctor, we do not know if the doctor in fact has wrongly  assumed  that
    the flatmate was a mere flatmate.  For all we  know  it  may  been  the
    putative wife.  We simply do not know who this flatmate is or what  sex
    the flatmate is.  This could potentially have  been  resolved  had  the
    issue been put to the appellant.

10.  In addition the reference to the addresses is not something  which  was
    put to the appellant and is a matter which seems to us to  be  of  some
    materiality.  Whether or not it is necessary for a judge to put matters
    to an appellant will depend very much on the context and on the  nature
    of the case.  In our opinion this is a case  where  had  these  matters
    been weighing with the judge then he ought to have either mentioned  it
    at the time or in due course  asked  for  written  submissions  on  the
    matter.

11.  We find that these matters are material in the sense that  a  different
    decision could have been made.  In particular, we note that  the  judge
    found it "significant" that there was no reference to  the  appellant's
    wife anywhere in the  medical  records,  assuming  no  doubt  that  the
    flatmate was not the wife.  It may or may not have been her but that is
    a matter which should have been explored in evidence.

12.  We do not need to consider the other arguments  which  were  presented,
    which were detailed matters of irrationality, but we do wish  to  point
    out that something was said before us about the reference to  language.
    In paragraph 15 of the determination the judge tells us that  he  asked
    the appellant how he and his  wife  communicated.   He  said  that  she
    understood basic English.  She spoke the "gypsy language" of  which  he
    could understand a little bit.  In a reference to her giving  evidence,
    he narrated that she said that she and the appellant  communicated  "in
    the gypsy language and we use Czech.  I am learning English  as  well".
    He tried to clarify the question and asked what language they  used  at
    home and she said "mostly gypsy and Czech".

13.  While there is not a complete consistency between the  two  answers  it
    is not clear at all to us what weight, if any, the judge  gave  to  the
    evidence as to language or indeed what he accepted. The existence of  a
    common language is a matter of some materiality in deciding  whether  a
    marriage is one of convenience or  not  and  one  would  have  expected
    rather clearer findings than we did in this case.

14.  In all the circumstances we are  satisfied  that  this  is  a  decision
    which cannot stand, being vitiated by an error of law  in  relation  to
    ground 2.  We make no comment on the other grounds.  We do not think it
    is necessary to do that at this stage.  Since  the  matter  has  to  be
    reheard it is better, we  think,  if  we  do  not  say  anything  about
    individual aspects of the evidence which might influence another  judge
    hearing the case in due course.

15.  We have decided that this case is one of those rare cases,  paying  due
    regard to the President's Practice Note,  in  which  a  complete  fresh
    factual hearing will have to be held and we  think  it  appropriate  to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for that  to  be  done.   The
    decision is therefore that we allow the appeal  and  remit  it  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh determination.

16.  We note  that  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  there  was  an  anonymity
    direction made but neither party was able to tell us why.  In  case  we
    have missed something we shall maintain that direction meantime but the
    matter should be revisited by the First-Tier Tribunal if appropriate.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                       Date: 11 January 2017

