
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Upper Tribunal Appeal Number:
IA/13032/2014
                                                               IA/13052/2014
                                                               IA/13054/2014
                            First-tier Tribunal Appeal Number: IA/45172/2014
                                                               Ia/45179/2014
                                                               IA/45197/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 05 August 2015                    |On 11 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                    O O-A
                                                             First Appellant
                                    A E A
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     FA
                                                             Third Appellant
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                   IN RESPECT OF THE THIRD APPELLANT ONLY)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V. Chikwe of St. Valchikwe Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. We find that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of the  first  and  second  appellants'
case that might infringe their protected  rights  if  the  details  were  to
become known publicly. For this reason no anonymity  direction  is  made  in
relation to the first and second appellants.

The third appellant is a minor and for  this  reason  we  find  that  it  is
appropriate to make an anonymity direction. Unless and until a  tribunal  or
court directs otherwise,  the  third  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.  No
report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The first two  appellants  are  citizens  of  Nigeria  who  have  been
    refused leave to remain on human rights grounds. The third appellant is
    their dependent daughter who is 16 years old.

2.    The appellants have another daughter, VA, who is  21  years  old.  She
    was the fourth appellant at an earlier stage of the appeal process.  On
    10 October 2014 she was granted  leave  to  remain  in  her  own  right
    because she met the private life requirements  contained  in  paragraph
    276ADE of the immigration rules. Subsequent  to  that  her  appeal  was
    withdrawn.

3.    For reasons that  are  explained  in  more  detail  below,  the  Upper
    Tribunal   is   rehearing   the   original   appeals    (IA/12032/2014,
    IA/13052/2014 and IA/13054/2014) ("the first  set  of  appeals")  after
    having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in a  decision
    promulgated on 05 June 2015. It became apparent at the  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal on 27 May  2015   that  the  appellants  had  lodged
    further   appeals   in   the   First-tier   Tribunal    (IA/45172/2014,
    IA/45179/2014 and IA/45197/2014) ("the second set of appeals").

4.    Given that the substantive issues arising  in  both  appeals  are  the
    same, the Upper Tribunal decided to link the  appeals  sitting  as  the
    Upper Tribunal and in our capacity as First-tier Tribunal  judges.  The
    substantive issues are exactly the same in both  sets  of  appeals.  As
    such our reasons are the same in both sets of  appeals.  This  decision
    therefore serves as a decision of the Upper Tribunal in relation to the
    first set of appeals and a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to the second set of appeals.



Background

5.    It is not clear from the evidence exactly when the family entered  the
    UK.  The appellants claim that they entered the UK on  visit  visas  in
    2004. However, in an application for an EEA residence card made in 2008
    the respondent says that the first appellant claimed that  she  entered
    the UK in 2007. It is not disputed  that  they  overstayed  once  their
    visit visas expired.

6.     The  parents'  immigration  history  is  characterised  by   numerous
    applications for leave to remain  on  various  different  grounds.  The
    exact chronology and the nature of each application is not  clear  from
    the evidence currently before the Tribunal. Both parents made  separate
    applications for EEA residence cards. The first appellant  applied  for
    an EEA residence card as an extended family member in 2008 and 2010 but
    both applications were refused. The  refusal  letter  relating  to  the
    application made in 2010 names three other people  in  the  application
    but none of them are the family members named in these appeals.  It  is
    possible that one was the first  appellant's  son  but  it  is  unclear
    whether he is still in the UK or is now in Nigeria. It  is  unclear  on
    what basis the first  appellant  claimed  to  be  entitled  to  an  EEA
    residence card.

7.    The respondent's skeleton argument states that  the  second  appellant
    also made an application for an EEA residence card but it is not  clear
    when the application was made or on what basis. It is said that he  was
    issued with an EEA residence card that was valid  until  2015  but  the
    card was revoked on 15 November 2011. Again, there is  no  evidence  to
    show on what basis the EEA residence card was revoked.

8.    It is said that the first appellant and  her  two  daughters  made  an
    application for leave to remain outside the  immigration  rules  on  16
    June 2011. The second appellant did not form part of  the  application.
    The appellants' skeleton argument states that  the  application  raised
    protection issues relating to a fear of forced circumcision in Nigeria.
    The application was refused. There is no evidence  to  show  the  exact
    grounds on which the application was made or the  reasons  for  refusal
    but the first appellant's witness statement suggests that the claim was
    likely to be based on the appellant's assertion that her husband  would
    force her to be circumcised if she returned to Nigeria. Given that  the
    first appellant's evidence is that her husband had been living with her
    in the UK since 2004, and she later reneged  on  the  claim,  it  seems
    highly likely that the protection claim she made in 2011 was unfounded.



9.    On 27 June 2012 the first and second appellants  made  an  application
    for leave to remain outside  the  immigration  rules  on  human  rights
    grounds. Their two daughters were  included  in  the  application.  The
    application was refused on 27 June 2013 with no right  of  appeal.  The
    appellants sought to challenge the decision by way of  judicial  review
    and in response the respondent agreed to reconsider the decision.

10.   On 27 February  2014  the  respondent  refused  the  application.  The
    respondent was not satisfied that the parents met the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules.  Although  it
    was accepted that the youngest daughter had resided in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of 7 years, it was considered  reasonable  to  expect
    her to return to Nigeria with her parents. The oldest daughter  was  19
    years old but had not lived in the UK for more than half  her  life  so
    did not qualify  for  leave  to  remain  under  paragraph  276ADE.  The
    appellants were given a right of appeal.

11.   The exact course of the judicial review proceedings  is  unclear  from
    the  evidence  currently  before  the  Tribunal.  It  seems  that   the
    proceedings continued in parallel to these events despite the fact that
    the appellants had lodged an appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  which
    should have brought the judicial review proceedings to an  end  because
    the appellants had an alternative remedy. However, we are told  that  a
    Consent Order was agreed on 06 June 2014. As a  result  the  respondent
    conducted a further review of the cases apparently in ignorance of  the
    fact that there was an ongoing appeal.

12.   In the meantime the appellants' appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal
    was heard on 26 September 2014. For unknown reasons  the  decision  was
    delayed by several months and was not  promulgated  until  10  February
    2015. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal.

13.   On 10 October 2014  the  respondent  decided  to  grant  their  oldest
    daughter (who was now an adult) leave to remain  because  she  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) (being aged  between  18-25  and
    having spent half her life living continuously in the UK). However, the
    respondent maintained the decision to refuse leave  to  remain  to  the
    first, second and third appellants in a decision dated 27 October 2014.

14.   The respondent's  further  decision  was  made  after  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing  but  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  was
    promulgated in February 2015. As such the First-tier Tribunal Judge was
    not aware of the developments when he dismissed the appeal. The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge made damning credibility findings relating  to  the
    immigration history of the first and second appellants.  He  found  the
    first  appellant  to  be  particularly  mendacious  in  light  of   her
    constantly changing evidence, and at one point, her apparent attempt to
    conceal the presence of her husband in the UK  [33].  He  rejected  her
    protection claim entirely [34]. The second appellant did not attend the
    hearing to give evidence. As a result the First-tier Tribunal Judge had
    doubts whether there was family life between the second  appellant  and
    his wife and two daughters [36].  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    careful not to take into consideration the misconduct  of  the  parents
    when considering the best interests of the children [33] but  concluded
    that in the circumstances of this case it would be reasonable to expect
    the appellants to return to Nigeria as a family unit [39].

15.   The  appellants  were  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. At the hearing on 27 May 2015 it  became  apparent  that  the
    respondent made fresh decisions in October 2014 and granted the  oldest
    daughter, VA, leave to remain. For the reasons given  in  our  decision
    dated 05 June 2015 we found that the grounds of appeal had no merit and
    amounted to no more than disagreements  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision (see Appendix). However, in light of  the  fact  that  VA  was
    granted leave to remain before the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  was
    promulgated we concluded that this development was  capable  of  giving
    rise to an error on the face of the record.  After  having  taken  into
    account what the First-tier Tribunal Judge's said at  paragraph  37  of
    the decision, it was at least possible that separation  of  the  family
    members might have made a difference to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
    view of the case in light of what he said at paragraphs  36-37  of  the
    decision:

         "36. ......there would be no interruption of that  family  life  if
         the three - or four - are returned together, none  of  them  having
         any right to remain in the United Kingdom.  In  the  absence  of  a
         breach, therefore, there is actually no further  need  to  consider
         the analysis, but for the purpose of completion I shall do this.

         37. Had there been a breach - had some been  returned  and  another
         not - then it would be serious one. "

16.   The first and second  set  of  appeals  were  joined  and  listed  for
    hearing on 05 August 2015. The findings of fact made by the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the first set of appeals were preserved. The hearing was to
    focus on how the change in circumstances, following the grant of  leave
    to remain  to  the  oldest  daughter,  might  affect  the  other  three
    appellants. Directions were made for further evidence and  any  further
    arguments to be served in relation to that issue.

Decision and reasons

Best interests of the child

17.   In assessing the best interests  of  the  child  we  have  taken  into
    account the statutory guidance "UKBA Every Child  Matters:  Change  for
    Children" (November 2009), which gives further detail about the  duties
    owed  to  children  under  section  55.  In  that  guidance  the   UKBA
    acknowledges the importance of a number  of  international  instruments
    relating to human rights including the UN Convention on the  Rights  of
    the Child (UNCRC). The guidance goes on  to  confirm:  "The  UK  Border
    Agency must fulfil the requirements of these instruments in relation to
    children whilst exercising its functions as expressed  in  UK  domestic
    legislation and policies." We take into account the fact that the UNCRC
    sets out rights including a child's right to survival and  development,
    the right to know and be cared for by his or her parents, the right not
    to  be  separated  from  parents  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  highest
    attainable  standards  of  living,   health   and   education   without
    discrimination. The UNCRC also recognises the common responsibility  of
    both parents for the upbringing and development of a child.

18.   We have also taken into account the decisions in ZH (Tanzania) v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4, Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV  (Philippines)  and
    others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The best interests of the child  are
    a primary consideration in this case  but  may  be  outweighed  by  the
    cumulative effect of other matters that weigh in the  public  interest.
    We take into account that the younger the child the more important  the
    involvement of a parent is likely to be:  see  Berrehab  v  Netherlands
    (1988) 11 EHRR 322. It is in the  best  interests  of  a  child  to  be
    brought up by both parents unless it is contrary to his best  interests
    to see one or other of his parents: see also  E-A  (Article  8  -  best
    interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315.

19.   FA is 16 years old and although her exact date of entry is unclear  it
    is likely that she has lived in the UK for a  period  of  at  least  10
    years.  She arrived in the UK at a young age and has lived here  during
    an important formative period  of  her  life.  The  appellants'  bundle
    contains a number of school reports and certificates. We have no reason
    to doubt that she has been attending school and  has  been  progressing
    well with her education since she arrived in  the  UK.  The  appellants
    have produced very little other evidence of the extent of her  ties  to
    the UK. FA's statement prepared for the First-tier Tribunal hearing was
    drafted in a way more redolent of a  skeleton  argument.  It  does  not
    provide any meaningful detail about her life in the UK or  explain  how
    removal might impact on her life. Very  little  of  her  own  voice  is
    contained in the statement.

20.   Despite the  fact  that  the  Tribunal  made  directions  for  further
    statements to be provided on the narrow issue  to  be  determined,  the
    appellants' representative only prepared a further brief statement from
    the first appellant in  support  of  this  appeal.  When  asked  if  he
    intended to call any evidence Mr Chikwe said that he did not  think  it
    was necessary. Again, the statement is drafted more in the  form  of  a
    legal argument and does not provide any  meaningful  detail  about  the
    impact that it would have on the family if VA decided to remain in  the
    UK and the  appellants  had  to  return  to  Nigeria.  No  up  to  date
    statements were drafted from VA or FA to outline the  nature  of  their
    sibling relationship or to explain how it would impact on the girls  if
    they were to be  separated.  The  first  appellant's  statement  merely
    states that it would be irrational to separate  the  family  and  would
    breach Article 8 if her daughters were separated.

21.   In assessing the best interests of the  child  we  bear  in  mind  the
    factors outlined by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  EV  (Philippines).  We
    conclude that very little evidence has been produced to show the extent
    of FA's ties to the UK, the strength of her relationship with her adult
    sibling or the effect that removal would have on the girls. We have  no
    reason to doubt that in the 10 year period FA has lived in the UK  that
    she has forged ties with friends and has also benefited from being able
    to continue her education in the UK. Given her age it  is  likely  that
    she has just completed her GCSE exams but has not yet embarked on her A
    levels. After such a long period of time  she  is  likely  to  be  well
    integrated into life in the UK. But FA is not a  British  citizen.  She
    has lived with her parents throughout the time that she has been in the
    UK. It is likely that  she  continues  to  have  connections  with  the
    Nigerian community through her parents and will not be unfamiliar  with
    Nigerian culture. It is not  clear  whether  she  speaks  any  Nigerian
    languages but English is widely spoken there. If she were to return  to
    Nigeria  her  parents  would  be  able  to  assist  her  to  renew  her
    connections with her country of origin. There is no evidence to suggest
    that FA suffers from a serious medical condition or that  she  has  any
    other particular vulnerability that would be relevant to the assessment
    of her best interests.

22.   We have considered FA's circumstances as a whole  within  the  context
    of the limited evidence that has  been  produced  in  support  of  this
    appeal. We conclude that it is likely to be in her  best  interests  to
    remain with her parents. Although education and  healthcare  facilities
    are available in Nigeria it is likely to be more readily available  and
    of a better quality in the UK. No doubt the main reason why  the  first
    and second appellants  brought  the  girls  to  the  UK  was  with  the
    intention of providing them with a better life. While we conclude  that
    it is likely to be in FA's best interests to remain in the UK where she
    has access to better healthcare and education  facilities  we  conclude
    that it is only marginally in her best interest. There is  insufficient
    evidence before us to conclude that her best interests  point  strongly
    towards her remaining in the UK.

Immigration rules

23.   The original application for leave to remain on human  rights  grounds
    was made on 27 June 2012. At the time the application had  to  be  made
    outside the rules. The application predated the major changes that took
    place to the immigration rules on  09  July  2012,  which  incorporated
    private and family life requirements into the  immigration  rules.  The
    case is complicated by the fact that the respondent  has  made  several
    decisions in response to the original application on 27 June  2013,  27
    February 2014 and 27 October 2014. Paragraph 276ADE, which sets out the
    private life requirements, has been amended on  several  occasions  and
    different tests applied on the  different  dates  that  decisions  were
    taken.

24.   The first and second appellants do not have leave  to  remain  and  do
    not meet the requirements of the  immigration  rules  for  the  reasons
    already given by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in his earlier decision.
    They have not been resident in the UK for a  continuous  period  of  20
    years for the purpose of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii). In light of the fact
    that the first and second appellants grew up in Nigeria and came to the
    UK when they were well into adulthood they are unable to show that,  at
    the date of the  application,  they  had  no  ties  (including  social,
    cultural  or  family)  in  Nigeria  for  the   purpose   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) (the previous test at the date of the decisions  in  June
    2012 and February 2014 i.e. the subject of the first set  of  appeals).
    The immigration rules have since been  amended  and  the  test  is  now
    whether there are "very significant obstacles"  to  reintegration  (the
    test at the date of the decision made in October 2014 i.e. the  subject
    of the second set  of  appeals).  However,  for  the  same  reasons  we
    conclude that the first  and  second  appellants  would  face  no  such
    obstacles given their age on arrival in the UK. They  worked  for  many
    years and were able to support their family in Nigeria before they came
    to the UK. They complain that it would  be  difficult  to  re-establish
    themselves there, but there is no evidence to suggest that  they  would
    in fact face "very significant obstacles" within  the  meaning  of  the
    immigration rules.

25.   The case therefore hinges on  whether  it  would  be  "reasonable"  to
    expect FA to leave the UK with her parents in circumstances  where  her
    sister has now been granted leave to remain in her own right. The  test
    is  relevant  to  whether  she  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) and whether her parents, as a result  of  her  length  of
    residence, also meet the requirements of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.
    The  "reasonableness"  test  was  contained  in  both  parts   of   the
    immigration rules at the date when all  three  refusal  decisions  were
    made.

26.   We are conscious of the fact that FA has lived in the UK for the  same
    period of time as her older sister. VA has now been  granted  leave  to
    remain because her length of  residence  was  such  that  she  met  the
    private life requirements of the  immigration  rules  at  the  relevant
    time. A lay person may consider that if one daughter is  granted  leave
    because she has established connections to the UK that  are  worthy  of
    protection that the other should be granted leave to remain as well  in
    circumstances where she has lived in the UK  for  the  same  length  of
    time.

27.   However, we find that there are some qualitative  differences  between
    the different  parts  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  and  (v)  that  are
    underpinned by legitimate public policy issues. Paragraph  276ADE(1)(v)
    provides for a young adult between the age of 18-25 who has spent  more
    than half her life in the UK to be granted leave to remain. The  person
    has spent a significant portion of her life in the UK, and as  a  young
    adult, it is likely that she is beginning to develop her  own  ties  to
    the UK outside that of her close family.  The  young  adult  is  moving
    towards establishing an independent life of her own.

28.   In contrast, a child who is under 18 years of age is still  considered
    to be dependent upon her parents. Her ties to the  UK  might  still  be
    strong, and where there is sufficient evidence to show  that  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK,  she  will  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv). However, because the child
    is still dependent upon her parents the assessment  of  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect her to leave the UK needs  to  take  into  account
    other  factors.  The  best  interests  of  the  child  are  a   primary
    consideration  that  must  be  given  significant  weight  but  can  be
    outweighed by the cumulative effect of other public interest factors.

29.   In this case we have found that it is only  marginally  in  FA's  best
    interests to remain in the UK with her parents  because  she  would  be
    able to access better education  and  healthcare  facilities  than  she
    would in Nigeria. However, those facilities are  available  in  Nigeria
    albeit that they might not be quite the same  standard.  We  find  that
    there is insufficient evidence to show how close  her  relationship  to
    her older sibling is or to show what the effect of separation would be.
    While it is understandable that, as sisters, they are likely to have  a
    bond of affection, there is insufficient evidence  before  us  to  show
    that their relationship goes beyond the normal emotional  ties  between
    an adult sibling and her younger sister. There no evidence before us to
    show that there would be any particularly harsh or  detrimental  effect
    on FA if she returned to Nigeria and her sister decided  to  remain  in
    the UK.  Her parents would be able to support her and she  would  still
    be able to keep in contact with her older sister.

30.   We were told that VA is still part of the family  unit  and  does  not
    yet live independently. However, at 21 years old she is now of  an  age
    where she could begin to forge an independent life outside her  family.
    She hopes to attend university, which is a time when many young  adults
    take the step of leaving their family home. She has been granted  leave
    to remain because of her individual ties to the UK and not as  part  of
    the  family  unit.  There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  VA   is
    particularly vulnerable or would not be able to look after  herself  if
    she remained in the UK  without  her  family.  She  would  be  able  to
    continue to keep in contact with them by telephone,  messaging,  social
    networks and Skype and could make periodic visits to  Nigeria.  Nothing
    in that pattern of contact would be particularly unusual  for  a  young
    adult of her age.

31.   We conclude that insufficient evidence has been produced to show  that
    there is any dependency beyond the normal emotional ties found  between
    an adult daughter and her parents and  younger  sibling  such  that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect the rest of the  family  to  return  to
    Nigeria. VA has been granted leave to  remain  and  is  not  liable  to
    removal from the UK with the rest of her  family  but  it  would  be  a
    matter for her whether she returned to Nigeria with them if she decided
    that she wanted to remain with the family unit rather  than  remain  in
    the UK in order to establish an independent life.

32.   We have made detailed findings relating to FA's  interests  and  treat
    them as a primary consideration. However, we  must  also  consider  the
    very poor immigration history of her parents outlined by the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in his decision. It seems quite clear from that  history
    that  there  is  a  strong  public  interest  in  the  maintenance   of
    immigration control. The first and second appellants remained in the UK
    in the full knowledge that they had no  leave  to  remain  and  made  a
    number of unfounded applications. It is understandable that they  might
    have wanted a better life for themselves and their children  but  their
    actions  undermine  the  effective  administration  of  the  system  of
    immigration control. We take into  account  the  fact  that  the  child
    should not suffer as a result of the behaviour of her parents,  but  in
    certain cases the  cumulative  effect  of  other  factors  might  still
    outweigh the best interests of the child.

33.    While  we  acknowledge  that  FA  is  likely  to  face  some  initial
    difficulties readjusting to life in Nigeria we consider  that,  in  the
    absence of any compelling  evidence  relating  to  the  effect  of  the
    possible separation of the family, the cumulative effect of the  public
    interest considerations are capable of outweighing the  best  interests
    of the child on  the  facts  of  this  particular  case.  FA  is  still
    dependent upon her parents  and  we  conclude  that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable to expect her to return to Nigeria with them. There is  no
    evidence to suggest that they would  be  unable  to  provide  her  with
    adequate care. They lived in Nigeria for many years  before  coming  to
    the  UK.  They  would  be  able  to  support  her  and  assist  her  to
    reintegrate. Both  secondary  and  higher  education  is  available  in
    Nigeria. For these reasons  we  conclude  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants do not meet the requirements of paragraph EX.1 and that  the
    third  appellant  does  not  meet   the   requirements   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) because it would be reasonable to  expect  the  dependent
    child to leave the UK with her parents.

Article 8 (private and family life)

34.   In this case we have already  considered  all  the  factors  that  are
    relevant to the assessment of Article 8 outside the rules and  as  such
    do not consider it necessary to make detailed findings.

35.   Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  protects  the
    right to private and family life. However, it is not an absolute right.
    The state is able to lawfully interfere with an appellant's private and
    family life as long as it is  pursuing  a  legitimate  aim  and  it  is
    necessary and proportionate in all the circumstances of the  case.  The
    starting point is the basic principle that a state  has  the  right  to
    control the entry and residence of people within its borders. There  is
    a  strong  public  interest  in  maintaining  an  effective  system  of
    immigration control. This is done through  the  immigration  rules  and
    policies, which set out the requirements for leave to enter  or  remain
    in the UK. The immigration rules and policies are  the  main  guide  to
    what  decisions  are   likely   to   be   considered   reasonable   and
    proportionate. It is still possible for cases that fall  outside  those
    requirements to engage the operation of Article 8 but only if there are
    compelling circumstances that are not sufficiently recognised under the
    immigration rules: see Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11, Patel  &  Others  v
    SSHD [2013] UKSC 72, R (on the application  of  MM  &  Others)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and SS (Congo) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

36.   Although there is little meaningful evidence before us, we  find  that
    it is likely that the appellants have established a private life in the
    UK as a result of their length of residence.  As  such,  we  find  that
    removal in consequence of the decision is likely to interfere with that
    right in a sufficiently grave way as to engage the operation of Article
    8 (questions (i) & (ii) of Lord Bingham's five stage approach in Razgar
    v SSHD [2004] INLR 349).

37.   The appellants do not meet the requirements of the  immigration  rules
    and the normal course of action would be to require them to  leave  the
    UK. In assessing what weight to place on  the  public  interest,  where
    relevant, the Tribunal must take into account  section  117B  (general)
    and 117C (deportation) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 ("NIAA 2002"),  which  outlines  a  number  of  factors  that  the
    Tribunal must consider when assessing whether an  interference  with  a
    person's right to respect for private and family life is justified  and
    proportionate.

38.   The maintenance of an effective system of immigration  control  is  in
    the public interest. The appellants speak English but  this  a  neutral
    factor that does not weigh in favour of them remaining in the UK. It is
    unclear from the evidence how the  first  and  second  appellants  have
    supported the family while in the UK or whether they have been a burden
    on the taxpayer. Any private life that the first and second  appellants
    have established in the UK should be given little weight because it was
    established at a time when they knew that they had no leave to  remain.
    In any event, there is very little evidence  to  show  that  they  have
    established any significant ties beyond mere length  of  residence.  In
    FA's case we place weight on the private life that she has  established
    in the UK during an important developmental period of her life.  It  is
    not her fault that she was brought  to  the  UK  and  remained  without
    leave. That was the responsibility of her parents.

39.   We have  given  particular  consideration  to  section  117B(6)  which
    states that the public interest will not  require  a  person's  removal
    where they have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
    qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to
    leave the UK. The wording of this test echoes the wording of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) and paragraph EX.1 of the immigration rules  and  we  can
    see no significant difference in the way the test should be applied. We
    have already given detailed reasons why we consider that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the dependent child  to  leave  the  UK  with  her
    parents on the facts and evidence produced in support of  this  appeal.
    The appellants have failed to produce sufficient evidence to show  that
    there are any compelling circumstances that would render their  removal
    disproportionate.  For  these  reasons  we  conclude  that  removal  in
    consequence of the decision would  not  amount  to  a  disproportionate
    interference with  the  appellants'  rights  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention (points (iv) & (v) of  Lord  Bingham's  five  stage
    approach in Razgar).

40.   For the reasons given above we conclude that for the purpose  of  both
    sets of appeals  the  appellants  have  failed  to  produce  sufficient
    evidence to show that they meet the  requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules or that their removal in consequence of  the  decision  would  be
    unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  as  being
    incompatible  with  their  rights  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention.

DECISION

In relation to the first set of appeals (Upper Tribunal)

We re-make the decision and DISMISS the appeals under the immigration  rules
and on human rights grounds

In relation to the second set of appeals (First-tier Tribunal)

We DISMISS the appeals under the  immigration  rules  and  on  human  rights
grounds


Signed      [pic]      Date 09 September 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

                                 [APPENDIX]

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/13032/2014
                                                               IA/13052/2014
                                                               IA/13054/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27 May 2015                       |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                    O O-A
                                                             First Appellant
                                    A E A
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     FA
                                                             Third Appellant
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                   IN RESPECT OF THE THIRD APPELLANT ONLY)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V. Chikwe of St. Valchikwe Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. We find that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of the  first  and  second  appellants'
case that might infringe their protected  rights  if  the  details  were  to
become known publicly. For this reason no anonymity  direction  is  made  in
relation to the first and second appellants.

The third appellant is a minor and for  this  reason  we  find  that  it  is
appropriate to make an anonymity direction. Unless and until a  tribunal  or
court directs otherwise,  the  third  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.  No
report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    In a decision promulgated on  10  February  2015  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dennis dismissed the appellants' appeal  against  a  decision  to
    refuse to grant them leave to remain in the UK on human rights  grounds
    and to remove them from the UK under section 10 of the Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999.

2.    The judge was not satisfied that the appellants met  the  requirements
    of Appendix FM  or  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  immigration  rules  and
    concluded that their removal would not amount to a breach of Article  8
    of the  European  Convention  outside  the  rules  in  light  of  their
    immigration history and the fact that it was reasonable to expect  them
    to return to Nigeria as a family unit.

3.    The appellants appealed on the ground that  there  was  a  significant
    delay in promulgating the decision and  as  a  result  the  judge  made
    errors of fact. It was alleged that  the  decision  was  "riddled  with
    speculation". It was also argued that  the  judge  failed  to  properly
    apply the approach set out in Razgar v SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27.  It  was
    alleged that the judge erred in considering whether the appellants  met
    the terms  of  the  current  immigration  rules  because  the  original
    application was made prior to 09 July 2012, when  the  new  rules  were
    introduced.  Permission to appeal was granted largely on the basis that
    it was arguable that  the  judge  erred  in  relation  to  whether  the
    immigration rules were applicable to the case. Whilst noting  that  the
    other grounds were "rather imprecise" and that  it  was  unlikely  they
    would disclose a material error of law, permission was granted  on  all
    grounds.

4.    The  matter  came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law.

Submissions

5.    On behalf of the appellants Mr  Chikwe  expanded  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal. He asserted that the judge made errors of fact about the  first
    appellant's date of birth and  certain  aspects  of  their  immigration
    history. He alleged that the judge was biased and referred to  passages
    in the decision where the judge made negative findings.  He  said  that
    the judge erred because he failed to take  into  account  the  skeleton
    argument he had submitted at  the  hearing  and  failed  to  apply  the
    principles set out in Razgar. He asserted that the  judge  should  have
    applied the rules as they were before 09 July 2012.

6.    In response Mr Melvin submitted that the  first  appellant's  date  of
    birth was not material to the decision. There was no evidence  of  bias
    and the judge's findings were open to him on the evidence  relating  to
    the appellants' immigration history. Any errors of  fact  made  in  the
    decision were not material to the overall findings in relation  to  the
    immigration rules or Article 8. He argued that the judge did not make a
    mistake in applying the current immigration rules following  the  Court
    of Appeal judgment in Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74.

7.    A new issue had arisen because  the  appellant's  oldest  daughter  VA
    (DOB: 04/07/94) was granted leave to remain on  10  October  2014  i.e.
    after the hearing but before the First-tier decision in this appeal. It
    seems that there was a  complicated  procedural  history  including  an
    application for Judicial Review and as a result of a Consent Order made
    on 06 June 2014 the applications were reconsidered. The  appellants  in
    this appeal were refused on broadly the same grounds as before but  the
    Secretary of State now recognised that their oldest  daughter  met  the
    private life requirements of the immigration rules.  As  a  result  her
    representative withdrew her appeal, which no longer forms part  of  the
    linked appeals before the Upper Tribunal. The matter was complicated by
    the fact that the appellants lodged further appeals against  the  fresh
    decisions made in October 2014, which are currently pending before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions

8.    We find that the grounds as argued have no merit and amount to  little
    more than disagreements with the First-tier  Tribunal  decision.  While
    there was a delay in promulgating the decision Mr Chikwe was unable  to
    say how any minor errors of fact might have made a material  difference
    to the overall decision. The grounds of appeal  relating  to  bias  and
    speculation were vague and  pointed  to  no  material  error  that  was
    capable of affecting the decision. While the judge used  rather  strong
    language in places his overall findings about the weight to  be  placed
    on the immigration history of the appellants and the reasonableness  of
    the family returning to Nigeria as a single unit are sustainable on the
    facts of this particular case. The judge considered the best  interests
    of the children  and  gave  reasons  why  he  considered  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect them to return to Nigeria  as  a  family.  We  see
    nothing in Mr Chikwe's skeleton  argument  that  would  have  made  any
    material difference to the outcome of the  appeal  even  if  the  judge
    overlooked it. It is clear from paragraph 36 of the decision  that  the
    judge properly directed himself to the five stage approach  in  Razgar.
    We find that Mr Chikwe's criticisms amounted  to  little  more  than  a
    disagreement with the conclusions that the judge  reached,  which  were
    open to him on the evidence that was before him at the time.

9.    Following the Court of Appeal  decision  in  Singh  we  conclude  that
    there was no error of law in relation to the judge's assessment of  the
    post 09 July 2012 immigration rules. Although the application was  made
    before 09 July 2012 the Secretary of State's decision in this case post-
    dates the narrow window now identified by  the  Court  of  Appeal  that
    might still give rise to error. Decisions made after the  Statement  of
    Changes to the immigration rules HC565 was introduced on  06  September
    2012 can be made with reference to Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE
    even if the application was made prior to 09 July 2012.

10.   Although we find nothing in the grounds of  appeal  that  disclose  an
    error of law we conclude that the developments since the  last  hearing
    are capable of giving rise to an error on the face of  the  record.  Of
    course this is no fault of the judge who heard the case because he  was
    unaware of the fact that the Secretary of State subsequently decided to
    grant the oldest daughter leave to remain in the UK. However, this is a
    factor that may have been capable of affecting his decision in view  of
    the findings he made in paragraph 37 where he infers that it would have
    been a serious matter if some members of the family were  returned  but
    not others. It is for this reason alone that we find that the  decision
    involves the making of an error of law.

11.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  will  be
    remade by the same panel at a resumed hearing on  Wednesday  05  August
    2015.

DIRECTIONS

12.   The resumed appeal will be heard by the Upper Tribunal at Field  House
    on Wednesday 05 August 2015.

13.   The three linked appeals  currently  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (IA/45172/2014, IA/45179/2014 and IA/45197/2014) will be linked to this
    appeal and dealt with by the Upper Tribunal (sitting as the  First-tier
    Tribunal) on the same day.

14.   The Secretary of State is to prepare  a  brief  chronology  of  events
    explaining the course of events that led to the further decisions being
    made in October 2014 to be served by Wednesday  26  July  2015  at  the
    latest.

15.   Although many of the facts relating  to  the  appellants'  immigration
    history and life in the UK do not appear to be in any  serious  dispute
    it may be that the Tribunal will have to make findings in  relation  to
    some factual matters such as the exact length of  time  the  appellants
    have lived in the UK, how  much  of  that  time  their  stay  has  been
    unlawful, the nature of their family circumstances and  the  effect  of
    removal on the rest of the family if the oldest daughter remains in the
    UK. The appellants should prepare fresh witness statements in  relation
    to those matters if they are not already dealt  with  in  the  existing
    statements.

16.   The main focus of the hearing will be to determine how the  change  in
    circumstances following the grant of leave  to  remain  to  the  oldest
    daughter might affect the appellants in this appeal in relation to  the
    immigration rules or in relation to an Article 8 assessment outside the
    rules.

17.   The parties must serve any further documents relied upon by  Wednesday
    26 July 2015 at the latest.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

We set aside the decision and will remake the decision at a resumed hearing


Signed       [pic]     Date 02 June 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
