
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/13740/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 4th February 2015                          |On 17th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE PATTERSON
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                                MR irfan ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Price, Counsel instructed by Pioneer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  who  appealed  against  the
    decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  1st  March  2014  to  refuse  his
    application made on 19th August 2013 for indefinite leave to remain  on
    the basis of ten years'  continuous  lawful  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  His subsequent appeal to the Tribunal was dismissed under the
    Immigration Rules by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Steer  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 3rd November 2014.

 2. The judge set out the background.  The Appellant had entered the UK  on
    4th September 2003 with entry clearance as a student  and  was  granted
    further leave to remain as a student on four subsequent occasions.  His
    further application on 16th January 2010 was refused and  a  subsequent
    appeal  was  dismissed  by  both  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunals.

 3. On 11th May 2011 he made a fresh application for leave to remain  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student and the  next  day  he  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted.  On 7th June 2011 his  application  of  11th  May  2011  was
    rendered void by the Respondent as it had  been  submitted  whilst  the
    Appellant had an ongoing appeal.  On 27th July 2011 he submitted an out
    of time application for leave to remain as a student which was  granted
    on 9th September 2011 until 30th August 2013.

 4. On 19th August 2013 he submitted the application which is the basis  of
    this appeal.

 5. Judge Steer noted that the Appellant was without lawful  leave  between
    8th June and 8th  September  2011,  a  period  of  approximately  three
    months.  That period of leave broke the period  of  claimed  continuous
    residence here and therefore the Appellant could  not  demonstrate  ten
    years' continuous residence.

 6. The judge then went on to consider the terms  of  the  refusal  letter.
    She noted that the Appellant maintained that the  Respondent  ought  to
    have exercised her discretion in his favour as refusal had been on  the
    basis of a technicality.  The thrust of the submissions  on  behalf  of
    the Appellant (as we shall see from the Grounds of  Appeal)  were  that
    discretion to allow him leave to remain should be properly exercised in
    a grant of leave in his favour.

 7. The judge noted that the Respondent had set out her published  guidance
    on the exercise of discretion where continuous leave had  been  broken.
    The Appellant had submitted his application 50 days out of time and had
    not provided  any  evidence  that  he  had  submitted  the  application
    together with an explanation of the exceptional reasons as to its  late
    submission.  In his witness statement the Appellant had stated that the
    delay had been caused by  the  need  to  obtain  a  new  CAS  and  bank
    statements. The judge said that the  Appellant  had  not  provided  any
    further  detail,  or   documentary   evidence   outlining   exceptional
    circumstances that had intervened such that it had taken a period of 50
    days to obtain the documents.  The judge also concluded that  from  the
    detailed refusal letter the Respondent  had  exercised  her  discretion
    under  the  published  guidance  and  had  exercised  that   discretion
    properly.

 8. There was nothing to suggest that the Appellant had established  family
    life in the UK and in  relation  to  private  life  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE applied.  There were no submissions made as  to  human
    rights grounds outside the Rules and the judge went on to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

 9. Grounds of Appeal were lodged which we shall summarise.  The  Appellant
    was being penalised not because he had failed to obey  the  Immigration
    Rules but because he was caught by a technical point which was not even
    made out by the Respondent.  The 50 day gap that  had  appeared  was  a
    direct result of the return of the application by the Respondent as the
    Appellant had to start the process of finding a college and building up
    his maintenance all over again.  The judge had failed to give  adequate
    weight to this explanation at page 12 of the Appellant's bundle in  his
    personal statement.  The whole point of Counsel's submissions  was  not
    that the application should have been accepted at the time as lawful as
    at  the  time  the  Respondent  may  well  have  acted  lawfully.   The
    submission made by Counsel was that when the same was considered by the
    Respondent  for  the  purpose  of  continuous  residence,   there   was
    discretion to take  into  account  the  whole  background  of  how  the
    Appellant had in fact appealed and even pursued his appeal all the  way
    to the Upper Tribunal.  The judge had failed to understand the  correct
    basis of the appeal and had speculated about the lawfulness rather than
    use of discretion of  the  Respondent.   Moreover  the  judge  had  not
    mentioned the case of Ukus (discretion: when  reviewable)  [2012]  UKUT
    00307 (IAC) which had been relied on heavily by Counsel.  It  had  been
    submitted to the judge that since the Respondent had failed  to  follow
    the guidance in Ukus the correct  course  of  action  was  for  her  to
    substitute her own discretion for the Secretary of State's and  make  a
    lawful informed decision.

10. In considering the grounds First Tier Tribunal Judge Cox found that the
    grounds had arguable merit and that the decision might be unsafe.  Thus
    the matter came before us.

11. Before  us  Ms  Price  produced  a  skeleton  argument  which  we  have
    considered and which repeated much of what was said in the  Grounds  of
    Appeal. In particular it was said that having exercised her  discretion
    in his favour previously the Appellant  had  a  legitimate  expectation
    that his leave would be continued. She reminded us  that  Judge Cox had
    concluded the decision might be unsafe.  She emphasised to us that  the
    only basis of challenge to the decision was on the issue of discretion.
     The  Secretary  of  State  could  have  asked  the  Appellant,  as  an
    overstayer, to return to his country of nationality and  make  a  fresh
    application.  She had not done that.  Ms Price had asked Judge Steer to
    remit the matter back to the Secretary  of  State  so  that  discretion
    could be exercised properly.

12. Reliance was placed on the case of Ukus as set out in the grounds.  The
    Appellant had been here lawfully and had taken steps to continue  that.
    He was seeking not to break the Rules.   There  had  been  no  material
    change in the Appellant's circumstances since he had submitted  an  out
    of time application for leave to remain as a  student  which  had  been
    granted.  The Secretary of State had a discretion which  had  not  been
    properly exercised. We were asked to set the decision aside  and  allow
    the appeal outright.

13. In response to submissions from Mr Bramble she said  that  Sultana  and
    Others (rules: waiver / further enquiry; discretion)  [2014]  UKUT  540
    (IAC) did not apply as it was a points-based  case.   Importantly,  the
    Secretary of State had already exercised discretion in the  Appellant's
    favour and there had been no material changes  since  that  time.   The
    Appellant was being asked to comply with the requirement of  the  Rules
    which the Secretary of State kept changing.  The whole case  turned  on
    whether the Secretary of State had exercised her discretion properly.

14. Mr Bramble referred us to Sultana and to the head note which  indicated
    that:

         "Where applicants wish to invoke any discretion.... they should  do
         so when making the relevant application, highlighting the  specific
         provision of the Rules invoked  and  the  grounds  upon  which  the
         exercise of discretion is requested.  Where  any  request  of  this
         kind was made and refused, a brief explanation should  be  provided
         by the decision maker."

    In paragraph 20 it was said that an applicant:

         "should make his case accordingly, the court advancing all relevant
         facts, justifications and explanations.  Issues of this kind belong
         firmly to the domain of the primary decision maker and  should  not
         be belatedly ventilated at the stage of either  first  instance  or
         second instance appeal".

    Furthermore,  "adequate,  intelligible  explanation  for  any  discrete
    refusal of this kind should always be provided by the ECO."

    Mr Bramble reminded us of the history of the case  and  said  the  only
    point that  the Appellant had expanded was in his witness statement  at
    paragraph 5 was the fact that his application was 50 days out of time.

15. In terms of the refusal letter the Secretary of State had exercised her
    discretion. In particular at page 3/7 detailed reasons were  given  why
    the  Appellant  had  not  demonstrated  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence and, on page  4/7,  it  was  noted  that  the  Appellant  had
    provided "no exceptional reasons for not submitting a valid application
    within 28 days.  With this in mind it is considered not appropriate  to
    exercise discretion in your circumstances."  While the  judge  had  not
    specifically mentioned Ukus she had followed the approach taken  there.
    The judge had dealt with the issue of discretion in her decision noting
    in the reasons for refusal letter that the Respondent had set  out  her
    published guidance on the exercise of discretion where continuous leave
    had been broken (paragraph 23).  The burden was on the Appellant to set
    out the reasons for the delay in his witness statement. The  judge  had
    commented on that, noting that the Appellant had not  provided  further
    detail on the reasons for the delay.

16. There had been no error by the judge who had given  full  consideration
    to the issue of whether the Respondent had carried out  her  discretion
    properly.  We were asked to uphold the decision.

17. We reserved our decision.



Conclusions

18. The proper approach to the exercise of discretion by the  Secretary  of
    State and any subsequent decision by the Tribunal  is  as  set  out  by
    Vice President Ockelton, in the case of Ukus.

19. The head note is in three parts. Firstly, if a decision  maker  in  the
    purported exercise of a discretion vested in him noted his function and
    what was required to be done when fulfilling it, and then proceeded  to
    reach a decision on that basis  the  decision  is  a  lawful  one,  the
    Tribunal cannot intervene in the absence of a statutory power to decide
    that the decision should have  been  exercised  differently.  Secondly,
    where the decision maker has failed  to exercise a discretion vested in
    him, the Tribunal's jurisdiction on appeal is  limited  to  a  decision
    that the failure renders the decision "not in accordance with the law".
    Because the discretion is vested  in  the  Executive,  the  appropriate
    course will be for the  Tribunal  to  require  the  decision  maker  to
    complete his task by reaching a  lawful  decision  on  the  outstanding
    application, along the lines set out in SSHD v Abdi [1996] Imm AR  148.
    In such a case,  it  makes  no  difference  whether  there  is  such  a
    statutory power as is mentioned above.  Thirdly, if the decision  maker
    has lawfully exercised his discretion  and  the  Tribunal  has  such  a
    statutory power the  Tribunal  must  either  (i)  uphold  the  decision
    maker's decision (if the Tribunal  is  unpersuaded  that  the  decision
    maker's discretion should have been  exercised  differently);  or  (ii)
    reach a different decision in the exercise of its own discretion.  That
    is the approach Judge Steer had to follow.

20. We consider that Sultana is relevant to the present  case  in  that  it
    sets out guidance on  the  use  of  discretion  and,  for  example,  as
    referred  to  by  Mr  Bramble,  applicants  when  making   a   relevant
    application should  highlight  the  specific  provision  of  the  Rules
    invoked and the grounds  upon  which  the  exercise  of  discretion  is
    requested. However the outcome of this appeal does not hinge on that.

21. The facts in this case are not really in dispute and we note there  was
    no oral evidence presented at the appeal which proceeded on  the  basis
    of  submissions  only  (paragraph  13  of  Judge   Steer's   decision).
    Accordingly the factual background as set out by  Judge  Steer  is  not
    contentious.  In particular it is not disputed that on 27th  July  2011
    the Appellant had submitted an out of time  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a student which had been granted.  It is  also  not  disputed
    that he was without lawful leave between 8th  June  and  8th  September
    2011, a period of approximately three months.  We did not understand Ms
    Price to dispute the fact that this period of leave broke the period of
    claimed continuous residence in the United Kingdom  and  therefore  the
    Appellant could not demonstrate ten years' continuous lawful  residence
    in terms of the Rules.

22. We can also accept, as Ms Price urged us to do,  that  the  Immigration
    Rules are not straightforward, that there are often changes in them and
    no doubt the Appellant was doing his best to comply with those changes.
     Ms Price's contention is that given the factual background to the case
    and the fact that the Secretary of State had exercised  her  discretion
    in favour of the Appellant in the past then absent any  change  in  the
    material circumstances, discretion should have been  exercised  in  his
    favour again.

23. However, it seems to us that the Secretary  of  State  was  making  two
    distinct decisions on different  issues  at  different  times,  and  it
    cannot realistically  be  said  that  any  legitimate  expectation  was
    created by the fact that the Secretary of State allowed  the  Appellant
    to continue as a student when he submitted an out of  time  application
    for  leave  to  remain.   We  cannot  see  any  inconsistency  in   the
    Respondent's position that she would look afresh at the merits  of  the
    Appellant's application on whether he should succeed on  the  ten  year
    residence route.  There  was  plainly  no  representation,  promise  or
    assurance by the Secretary of State that might have led  the  Appellant
    to consider he had a legitimate expectation that the application  would
    have had a favourable outcome.  It  would  be  wrong  to  conflate  the
    decisions as they were entirely different in nature.  Contrary  to  the
    submissions of Ms Price it is quite clear  from  the  detailed  refusal
    letter that the Secretary of State  did  exercise  her  discretion  and
    noted that there were no "exceptional reasons"  for  not  submitting  a
    valid application within 28 days.   We  do  not  think  that  Ms  Price
    disputed this but had  argued  before  Judge  Steer  that  insufficient
    weight had been placed on the Appellant's explanation for  why  it  had
    taken the length of time it did take to submit the application.

24. Far from ignoring the explanation given by the Appellant,  Judge  Steer
    referred to his witness statement and said that the Appellant "did  not
    provide  any  further  detail,  or  documentary   evidence,   outlining
    exceptional circumstances that had intervened such that it had taken  a
    period of 50 days to obtain a new CAS and bank statement."  She went on
    to say that she considered the Respondent had exercised her  discretion
    properly as the Appellant had not provided such detail  and  supporting
    evidence to establish exceptional circumstances had existed  which  had
    prevented him from submitting the application at an earlier  date.   We
    consider that the judge  was  entitled  to  reach  such  a  view.   The
    Appellant says very little about this in paragraph  5  of  his  witness
    statement, simply saying that to submit  a  new  CAS  letter  and  bank
    documents "took further time".

25. Judge Steer concluded, on the basis of what was presented to  her  that
    the Respondent had exercised her discretion properly for the clear  and
    cogent reasons she gave.  Indeed in our view it is difficult to see how
    Judge Steer could have decided otherwise. In our view the  exercise  of
    discretion is very much a matter for the Secretary of State and  should
    not be interfered with by the Tribunal unless it can be said  that  the
    decision is Wednesbury unreasonable which is not the  position  reached
    in this case. Contrary to what is said in  the  skeleton  argument  the
    fact that the Respondent had already exercised her discretion in favour
    of the Appellant on one occasion did not - at the risk of repetition  -
    give him a legitimate expectation that discretion would be exercised in
    his favour on an  entirely  separate  issue.   It  seems  to  us  that,
    contrary to the grounds of appeal, the judge did understand the correct
    basis of the appeal and was entitled to make the findings  she  did  on
    whether the Respondent had exercised her discretion properly.  There is
    no error in law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is required or is made.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

