
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13947/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2016                  |On 23 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SUMAIR ASLAM
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Gaisford, Counsel instructed by M R Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan born on 18 November 1978. On  3
    December 2014 he applied for a residence  card  under  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006  ("2006  Regulations")  as  an  extended  family
    member of an EEA national.

 2. His appeal was refused and he appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. In a
    decision promulgated on 17  February  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Singh allowed the appeal on the basis that the respondent satisfied the
    definition of an extended family member in Regulation 8(2).

 3. The Secretary of State appealed on the ground  that  there  was  not  a
    lawful basis to allow the appeal outright as the Secretary of State had
    not yet applied her discretion  under  Regulation  17(4)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.

 4. Before me, Mr Singh, on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  argued,
    firstly, that following Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal)  2016  UKUT  00411
    (IAC) I should find an error of law on the  ground  that  there  is  no
    statutory right of appeal in this case. Secondly, he  argued  that  the
    judge was not, in any event, entitled to allow  the  appeal  under  the
    2006 Regulations and at  the  most  could  only  have  found  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with law as the Secretary of  State  had
    yet to exercise her discretion.

 5. Mr Gaisford's response was that if the  judge  erred  by  allowing  the
    appeal outright the error  was  not  material.  He  stressed  that  the
    judge's findings of fact had not  been  challenged  and  should  stand,
    regardless of my finding regarding jurisdiction.  He  also  noted  that
    jurisdiction has not been raised in the grounds.

Consideration

 6. Although there has been a longstanding assumption that there is a right
    of appeal under  Regulation  26  of  the  2006  Regulations  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State to not grant a residence card  under
    Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations to a person claiming to be  an
    extended family member of an EEA national, the Upper Tribunal panel  in
    Sala has made clear that there is no such right. For the reasons  given
    in Sala, with which I agree, the respondent did not  have  a  right  of
    appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

 7. The judge's decision was made before Sala was promulgated and therefore
    the judge cannot be faulted for proceeding on the basis that there  was
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal. However,  for  the  reasons  given  in
    Sala, there was no jurisdiction and it was an error of law  to  proceed
    on the basis that there was.

 8. This finding is sufficient to  dispose  of  the  matter.  However,  for
    completeness, and in any event, I find that a further error arises from
    the judge allowing the appeal when whether or not to issue a  residence
    card to an extended family  member  is  at  the  Secretary  of  State's
    discretion.  Where,  as  in  this  appeal,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    discretion has not yet been exercised the most  the  judge  could  have
    done (if he had jurisdiction) was to allow the appeal as not  being  in
    accordance with the law, leaving the matter of  how  to  exercise  that
    discretion to the Secretary of State.  See  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -  meaning)
    Nigeria [20111] UKUT 340 (IAC).



Decision

 1. The First-Tier Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

 2. Given the absence of jurisdiction, it was an error of law to  hear  the
    appeal and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

 3. I remake the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  dismissing  the
    respondent's appeal as he does not have a  statutory  right  of  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to not grant him a  residence
    card as an extended family member of an EEA national.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 22 November 2016              |

