
IAC-AH-KRL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13533/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 June 2015                       |On 12 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                Junaid Saleem
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rahman, Eden Law
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Junaid Saleem, was born on 8 June 1978 and is a  citizen
    of Pakistan.  By a decision which I promulgated on 1 May  2015,  I  set
    aside the First-tier Tribunal decision in this appeal  and  directed  a
    resumed hearing.  I have now remade the decision  following  a  resumed
    hearing which took place in Manchester on 3 June 2015.  My reasons  for
    setting aside the First-tier Tribunal decision were as follows:

 2. The appellant, Junaid Saleem, was born on 8 June 1978 and is a  citizen
    of Pakistan.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Bruce,  as
    she then was) against a decision of the respondent  dated  12  February
    2014 to refuse to vary the appellant's leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and to make directions for his removal subject to Section 47 of
    the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed his appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  27  June
    2014.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. Judge Bruce's findings and conclusions are contained in her decision at
    [10 - 13]:

         "10. The relevant Rule is paragraph 287(a) of the Immigration Rules
             and the provisions in issue are (i)(a), (ii) and (iii).

             '287. (a) The requirements for indefinite leave to remain  for
                  the spouse or  civil  partner  of  a  person  present  and
                  settled in the United Kingdom are that:

                  (i)(a) the applicant was admitted to  the  United  Kingdom
                      for a period not exceeding  27  months  or  given  an
                      extension  of  stay  for  a  period  of  2  years  in
                      accordance with paragraphs 281 to 286 of these  Rules
                      and has completed a period of 2 years as  the  spouse
                      or civil partner of a person present and  settled  in
                      the United Kingdom; ...

                  (ii)     the  applicant  is  still  the  spouse  or  civil
                      partner of the person  he  or  she  was  admitted  or
                      granted an extension of stay to join and the marriage
                      or civil partnership is subsisting; and

                  (iii)    each of the parties intends to  live  permanently
                      with the other as his or her spouse or civil partner;
                      and

         11.  It will be observed that there is no specific requirement that
             the parties prove that they have  been  cohabiting  throughout
             the entire probationary period.  There is however in (i)(a)  a
             requirement that the applicant  has  completed  the  appellant
             period of two years as a spouse.  Since the  provisions  under
             which the appellant's leave was granted expressly required him
             to intend to live permanently with his wife, it is in my  view
             implicitly that the couple needs to have been living  together
             for the duration of the probationary period, unless particular
             circumstances exists. It is the appellant's own evidence  that
             in January 2013 his wife left the UK for Australia.  Mr Timson
             asked me to find that this is a temporary arrangement with the
             substance of the relationship.

         12.  I have weighed the evidence before me. There  has  never  been
             any  suggestion  that  this  is  a  sham  marriage.  An  Entry
             Clearance Officer was satisfied that the appellant was  coming
             here to marry Miss Ismail. He did marry her within the  period
             stipulated by his fianc� visa.  The  Secretary  of  State  was
             therefore satisfied that this was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             marriage and that  the  parties  intended  to  live  with  one
             another granting the appellant leave to remain on  that  basis
             in September 2011.  I accept and  find  as  a  fact  that  the
             couple were indeed living together for the sixteen months that
             followed.  The documentary evidence supports  the  appellant's
             evidence that he and Miss Ismail were living together.   There
             is nothing to be read into the fact that the appellant's  name
             still featured on  correspondence  when  he  was  actually  in
             Pakistan or that her name remains on the bills even though she
             has not lived there for almost one and a  half  years.   Names
             can be left on bills out of laziness, convenience, or  as  the
             appellant himself notes, in the expectation or hope  that  the
             other person will come back to the property.  The question  is
             what is  the  significance  of  Miss  Ismail's  departure  for
             Australia in  January  2013,  some  eight  months  before  the
             probationary period was over.

         13.  I have considered the appellant's evidence that his  wife  has
             taken this job in order to further  her  career.  This  is  no
             doubt the case. However this is not a job  that  was  only  to
             last a few weeks or even a few months. It has been well over a
             year since she  left  and  on  the  appellant's  evidence  her
             contract will keep her there until  at  least  next  year.   I
             appreciate that families may take pragmatic  decisions  to  be
             apart for a period - even quite long periods  -  in  order  to
             further a partner's career. For instance  in  the  UK  married
             couples very often choose - or are competed by necessity -  to
             live in different  cites  during  the  working  week.  However
             Australia is a very long way away, and the  opportunities  for
             actually seeing each other are likely to be  limited.  It  was
             not the evidence that Miss Ismail was unable to find any  work
             in the UK; it was her choice to take this 'good job'.  I  find
             that  this  decision  raises  a  strong  suggestion  that  her
             relationship with the appellant was over, or was  ending  when
             she left.  Had there been some more evidence from Miss  Ismail
             that  suggestion  could  well  have  been  rebutted,  but  the
             evidence from her was scant.  At the  outset  of  the  hearing
             there was absolutely nothing from her.  The appellant and  his
             representatives have known for months why his application  was
             refused and yet no steps have been taken to get  a  statement,
             letter, or live video-link evidence from Miss Ismail.  If  she
             is returning to the UK in  August  the  representatives  could
             have made an adjournment application to that effect weeks ago.
              The email raised more questions than it answered. The  papers
             before me indicate that Gizelle Rowlands changed her  name  by
             deed poll to Gazzala Ismail when she and the appellant  marred
             in Islamic law. It was therefore  puzzling  to  see  that  she
             currently describes  herself  as  "Gizelle  Rowlands  formally
             'Gazzala Ismail'.  The appellant sought  to  explain  this  by
             saying that his wife  has  reverted  to  her  given  name  for
             professional reasons. This is possible but  does  not  explain
             why she felt the need to make this distinction in  this  email
             to the Tribunal nor does she  state  at  any  point  that  the
             relationship is in fact subsisting.  She  simply  states  that
             'when' she returns to England - no time frame is offered - she
             will be 'living with' the appellant.  That could  simply  mean
             sharing a house.  There is  not  the  evidence  before  me  to
             demonstrate on a balance of probabilities that  the  appellant
             and Miss Ismail nee Rowlands are  currently  in  a  subsisting
             relationship or have been at any point since she left the UK."

 4. Granting permission, Judge Grubb wrote:

         "It is arguable that the  judge  erred  in  law  in  requiring  the
         parties to establish that the appellants have been living  together
         for the duration of  the  probationary  period,  unless  particular
         circumstances exist.  That  does  not  necessarily  flow  from  the
         requirement  that  they  "intend"  to  live  together  permanently.
         Further, the judge arguably  drew  irrational  inference  from  the
         spouse's email that she would  be  'living  with'  the  sponsor  on
         return from her work in Australia as implying that was  other  than
         as a 'spouse'.  The judge's  adverse  findings  contrast  with  the
         positive findings that the marriage had been genuine and subsisting
         until the sponsor took a temporary job in Australia."

 5. In the hearing before the Upper Tribunal  at  Manchester  on  14  April
    2015, I recorded that the appellant pursues the appeal  solely  on  the
    basis of the Immigration Rules; there is no  separate  Article  8  ECHR
    appeal.

 6. In addition to the matters raised in the refusal letter, Miss Johnstone
    also sought to rely upon [5] of the Rule 24 response submitted  by  her
    colleague, Mr Parkinson dated 24 December 2014:

         "The  sponsor  is  also  concerned  from  the  chronology  in   the
         determination as to whether at the  date  of  the  application  the
         sponsor was 'present and settled'. It would appear that the sponsor
         was not spent in the UK at the date of  the  application.   Rule  6
         requires that the sponsor is 'present' in the UK."

 7. Mr Rahman objected that this additional reason for refusal had not been
    contained in the original refusal letter nor had it been raised  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Having heard the submissions of both parties,
    I directed that the parties should submit written submissions  on  this
    issue no later than 28 April 2015 following which I would then make  my
    decision.   I have received an email from Mr Rahman in which he states:

         "The issue of whether the applicant's spouse was present in the  UK
         at  the  date  of  the  application.   No  reason  given  when  the
         respondent refused the appellant's application nor an issue  raised
         at the hearing brought before Immigration Judge Bruce  [sic].   The
         appellant has instructed us that in fact his wife was in the UK  at
         the date he made the application for indefinite leave to remain."

 8. I have received no submissions from Miss Johnstone.

 9. I share Judge  Grubb's  concern  (see  above)  regarding  the  apparent
    irrationality of the judge's finding that the appellant's spouse might,
    on return from Australia, live in the same property  as  the  appellant
    but "other than as his spouse".   As Judge Grubb  noted,  that  finding
    sits uneasily with the judge's finding that "there has never  been  any
    suggestion that this is a sham marriage". [12]  I do not consider  that
    the apparent irrationality can be explained away  by  the  use  by  the
    spouse of her maiden name [13]; I cannot see any  reason  why,  if  she
    uses both married and a professional names, the spouse should not refer
    to both names in an email sent to the First-tier  Tribunal.   Likewise,
    it is difficult to reconcile Judge Bruce's acknowledgment that  couples
    in subsisting relationships often live and  work  apart  for  financial
    reasons with her concern that Australia is "a very long way away" [13];
      there is no obvious reason why, say, a wife working in  Brussels  may
    be able to remain in a subsisting relationship with a  husband  in  the
    United Kingdom while the continuity and viability of  the  relationship
    might be doubted if she were working in Sydney.   I  am  not  satisfied
    that the reasons given by Judge  Bruce  are  sufficiently  rational  to
    support her conclusion that the appellant and his spouse are not  in  a
    subsisting relationship.

10. I also share Judge Grubb's  concerns  regarding  the  determination  at
    [11].  Judge Bruce appears to have introduced an additional requirement
    to the Rule, namely that during the probationary period referred to  in
    paragraph 287(i)(a) spouses should "have been living together  for  the
    duration of the probationary period,  unless  particular  circumstances
    exist".   She  has  added  a  gloss  to  the  Rule  which  its   proper
    construction does not require.

11. In the light of what I have said above, I set aside  the  determination
    of Judge Bruce.  The Upper Tribunal shall remake the decision following
    a resumed hearing.  At that hearing, the issues raised in  the  refusal
    letter shall be addressed. In addition, the Tribunal will also  address
    the proper construction of the words "present and settled" as raised by
    Mr Parkinson in the letter of 24 December 2014.  Whilst I  am  grateful
    to  Mr  Rahman  for  his  email  submission,  his  assertion  that  the
    appellant's  spouse  was  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  time   the
    application was made is, with respect,  nothing  more  than  that;  the
    Tribunal will expect the appellant to  adduce  evidence  sufficient  to
    prove, on the standard of proof of the balance of  probabilities,  that
    the spouse was present in the United Kingdom as asserted.

DECISION

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    27 June 2014 is  set  aside.   The  Upper  Tribunal  shall  remake  the
    decision following a resumed hearing on a date to be fixed at the Upper
    Tribunal, Manchester.

13. One part of the error of law decision is not accurate; Ms Johnstone did
    send submissions to the Tribunal but unfortunately these did not  reach
    me. She gave me a copy at the resumed hearing.

14. The appellant  attended  the  resumed  hearing  and  gave  evidence  in
    English.  He had supplied, on the morning of the resumed  hearing,  two
    additional documents; a photocopy of  a  passport  of  Gizelle  Camille
    Rowlands (formerly Gazzala Ismail, his wife)  and  a  photograph  of  a
    stamp from a passport (it was  not  clear  whose  passport)  indicating
    entry into Melbourne, Australia on 3 October 2013.

15. The appellant's application,  which  is  the  subject  of  this  appeal
    appears to have been signed by Ms Rowlands and  the  appellant.   Their
    signatures are dated 26 September 2013.  The document appears to have a
    stamp indicating that it was received by the respondent on 30 September
    2013.  The appellant told me that  Ms  Rowlands  had  left  the  United
    Kingdom to work in  Australia  in  January  2013.   That  statement  is
    consistent with the appellant's previous written  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the record of the oral evidence  given  by  the
    appellant before that  Tribunal  (see  paragraph  8  of  Judge  Bruce's
    decision).  He said that his wife had returned to the United Kingdom on
    or about 21/22 September 2013 and had flown back to Australia on  about
    1 October 2013 (which, he said, was evidenced by the stamp of 3 October
    2013 in Melbourne).

16. The appellant and  his  representative,  Mr  Rahman,  agreed  with  the
    written submissions made by Ms Johnstone in  her  letter  of  17  April
    2015, namely that paragraph 287 of HC 395 requires the spouse or  civil
    partner of an applicant for indefinite  leave  to  remain  to  be  both
    "present and settled" in the United Kingdom  when  the  application  is
    made.  Indeed,  the  appellant  explained  to  me  that  his  wife  had
    travelled back from Australia especially in order to be present in this
    country when the application for leave to remain was submitted  and  so
    that she might comply with the requirements of the Rule.

17. The Tribunal reserved its decision.

18. I expressed my surprise to the appellant and Mr Rahman at  the  resumed
    hearing that, notwithstanding  the  fact  that  I  had  given  a  clear
    indication in my decision on the error of law [10] that I would  expect
    the appellant to address the matter of the presence of Ms  Rowlands  in
    the United Kingdom at the  date  of  the  making  of  the  application,
    nothing had been done until the  day  before  the  resumed  hearing  to
    obtain any evidence at all from Ms Rowlands.  The  appellant  explained
    to me that his wife had been busy working and was,  as  a  consequence,
    tired.  I reject that explanation entirely.  I do not  accept  that  Ms
    Rowlands has been so tired or busy with work in  the  past  five  weeks
    that she could not have provided a written statement or a complete copy
    of her passport or other documentary evidence of her movements  to  and
    from Australia during the last two years.  Whilst  I  acknowledge  that
    the application for leave to remain appears to bear the signature of Ms
    Rowlands (Ms Johnstone did not submit to me that the  signature  was  a
    forgery) there is simply insufficient evidence to discharge the  burden
    of proving that  Ms  Rowlands  was  in  the  United  Kingdom  when  the
    application was made.

19. I have also to say that I am compelled to  draw  an  adverse  inference
    from the failure of the appellant to obtain  proper  evidence  from  Ms
    Rowlands.  A copy of the passport which has been produced  which  shows
    that it was issued to Gizelle  Rowlands  on  18  September  2013.   The
    application for leave to remain bears  the  signature  Gazzala  Ismail.
    The appellant told me that his wife had  changed  her  name  back  from
    Gazzala Ismail to Gizelle Rowlands by deed poll but he did not  produce
    a copy of that document.  He told me that his wife had reverted to  her
    maiden name because that name appeared on educational and  professional
    certificates and she wished her passport and official documents  to  be
    consistent with the name shown on those certificates for  the  purposes
    of  her  employment  as  a  nurse  in  Australia.   I  find  that  that
    explanation is unpersuasive in  the  absence  of  any  direct  evidence
    corroborating it from Ms Rowlands herself.  Considering the evidence as
    a whole and the manner in which it has been presented to the  Tribunal,
    I concluded  that,  contrary  to  what  the  appellant  tells  me,  his
    relationship with Ms Rowlands is no longer subsisting.  For that reason
    and because I find as a fact that the appellant has failed to discharge
    the burden of proving that  Ms  Rowlands  was  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom when the application which is the subject of  this  appeal  was
    submitted to the Secretary of State, I find that the appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules must be dismissed.

20. Mr Rahman submitted that the appellant had a private life in the United
    Kingdom.  He has been here for a number of years and has worked  during
    much of that time.  However, I accept Ms  Johnstone's  submission  that
    there was no family life in  this  instance  because  the  relationship
    between Ms Rowlands and the appellant  is  no  longer  subsisting.   As
    regards a private life, the appellant does not suggest that he is  able
    to  meet  the  requirements  of  HC  395  and,  having  regard  to  his
    circumstances, I do not consider that there  is  any  reason  for  the
    Tribunal to proceed to consider Article 8 ECHR outside the  Immigration
    Rules.

Notice of Decision

21. The appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules is dismissed.

22. This appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

