
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13329/2014
                                                               IA/13334/2014
                                                               IA/13339/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2016                   |On 4 November 2016                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                Muhammad [A]
                                Shumaila [R]
                                    [K R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Biggs, instructed by Hanson Young, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge S Taylor) issued on 23 July 2015 dismissing  their
    appeals against the respondent's decision  made  on  28  February  2014
    refusing the first appellant further  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (General)  Migrant,  the  second  and  third   appellants   being   his
    dependants.

Background

2.   The first appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan  born  on  14  September
    1978.  The second and third appellants are his wife and child  born  on
    14 April 1981 and 6 September 2007 respectively.  The first and  second
    appellants have subsequently had two further children born in the UK.

3.   The first appellant first arrived in the UK on 6 July 2004  with  leave
    to enter as a student.  On 8 March 2011 he applied for leave to  remain
    as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant but this application  was  refused  on  2
    January 2013.  The respondent was not satisfied that  he  was  able  to
    meet the requirement of the Rules as he failed to show that he had  the
    required level of earnings but  on  the  contrary  was  satisfied  that
    documents had been submitted in support of the application  which  were
    false and the application was therefore also refused under para 322(1A)
    on the basis that the first appellant had used deception.

4.   The appellants appealed against this decision  and  in  the  notice  of
    appeal sought an oral hearing.  However, on 25 June 2014  their  former
    representatives sent a written notice to the Tribunal to  withdraw  the
    first appellant's appeal.  The purpose of withdrawing was so  that  the
    first appellant could pursue an application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain based on long residence.  However, the intention  was  that  the
    second and third appellants' appeal would be pursued and  in  a  letter
    from  the  appellants'  representatives  dated  30  March  2015,   they
    indicated that they wished the appeal to proceed not as an oral hearing
    but as an appeal to be decided on the papers.

5.   The appeal was duly allocated for decision.  The judge noted  that  the
    first appellant had withdrawn his appeal but  proceeded  on  the  basis
    that this appeared to have been reversed and that his appeal  had  been
    reinstated.  He found that the first appellant was unable to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules and that the respondent had demonstrated that
    one of the documents submitted in support of the appeal relating to one
    of the sources of claimed income was false.  The  judge  dealt  briefly
    with the issue of whether the first appellant had  accrued  ten  years'
    lawful residence but found that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to
    establish this.  He also considered article 8 and the best interests of
    the children but found that family life  could  continue  in  Pakistan.
    Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

6.   Meanwhile, the first  appellant's  application  for  further  leave  to
    remain on the basis of long residence had been refused in May 2015  and
    he appealed  that  decision.   In  October  2015  the  first  appellant
    instructed his current solicitors to deal with his appeal against  that
    decision and in April 2016 they were instructed to deal with what  were
    thought to be the pending appeals of the second and third appellants in
    this appeal.  In April 2016 they made a written  request  to  link  the
    appeals for a joint hearing. On 9 May 2016 the representatives received
    the decision in the present appeal.  It is the  appellants'  submission
    that further enquiries with the Tribunal confirmed that the  notice  of
    reinstatement of  the  appeal  had  never  been  issued  to  the  first
    appellant and the decision currently under challenge had only been sent
    to his former solicitors in July 2015 and had never been  sent  to  the
    appellants.  They have made  enquiries  with  their  former  solicitors
    about whether they had in fact received the decision in July  2015  but
    that at the time of drafting the grounds of appeal no detailed response
    had been received.

7.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  extended  time  for  appealing  and  granted
    permission to appeal on the basis that the grounds indicated  that  the
    appellants may well have been a victim of procedural unfairness.

8.   At the hearing before me Mr Biggs indicated  that  the  appeal  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal in respect  of  the  decision  refusing  the  first
    appellant's leave to remain on the grounds of long residence  had  been
    adjourned on 12 July 2016 pending the outcome of this appeal in respect
    of which he submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  by
    determining the  appeal  by  the  first  appellant  when  it  had  been
    withdrawn.  The decision had concentrated on the issues relating to the
    first appellant and in consequence, so he submitted, the appeals of the
    second and third appellants had not been given  adequate  consideration
    and, in particular, the judge  had  failed  properly  to  consider  the
    public interest in the  light  of  the  provisions  of  s.117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 or the best  interests  of
    the children in the  context  of  the  assessment  of  article  8.   He
    submitted that the decision should be set aside and  remitted  for  the
    appeal to be reheard with the appeal pending against the long residence
    decision.

9.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller did not seek to  resist  this  course  of  action,
    agreeing that the appeals relating to the second and  third  appellants
    had been adversely affected by the adverse findings made by  the  judge
    in respect of the first appellant's appeal.

10.  For these reasons I am satisfied that the judge erred in law  and  that
    the decisions should be set aside.  The appeal by the  first  appellant
    had not in fact been reinstated and it follows that as the  appeal  was
    withdrawn the  judge  had  no  jurisdiction  to  determine  that  issue
    although one might well sympathise with the judge as the  position  may
    not have been entirely clear from the appeal file.   The  decisions  in
    respect of the  second  and  third  appellants  are  set  aside.   Both
    representatives agreed that  the  proper  course  would  be  for  their
    appeals to be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal and  linked  with  and
    heard together with the appeal by the first appellant pending at Taylor
    House under number IA/21836/2016, adjourned on 12 July  2016  to  await
    the outcome of this appeal.


Decision

11.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  There  was  no  jurisdiction  to
    hear the appeal by the first appellant.  The decisions in  relation  to
    the second and third appellants  are  set  aside.   Their  appeals  are
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  together  with  the
    appeal by the first appellant in IA/21836/2016 pending at Taylor House.
    An anonymity order was not made in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 3 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


