
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/13884/2015
                                                               IA/13891/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2016                      |On 28th July 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     I S
                          (AND ONE CHILD DEPENDENT)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Ayanru of Jesuis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves consideration of the welfare of a child. I  find  that  it  is
appropriate to continue the order. Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to  refuse  a
    human rights claim. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Howard  ("the  judge")
    dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 10 December 2015.

2.    The appellant appealed against the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
    the ground that the judge had failed to conduct a sufficiently rigorous
    assessment of the appellant's rights under Article 8  of  the  European
    Convention.

Decision and reasons

3.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

4.    I find that there is some force in the argument that the judge  failed
    to conduct a sufficiently rigorous assessment of the best interests  of
    the child according to the principles outlined in ZH (Tanzania) v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC4, Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and  EV  (Philippines)  and
    others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874. No separate assessment of  the  best
    interests of the child was carried out in accordance with the  guidance
    given in ZH (Tanzania). While the  judge  mentioned  the  child's  best
    interests it was  in  a  fairly  cursory  way  as  part  of  his  final
    proportionality  assessment.  The  only  factor  that  he  appeared  to
    consider was the fact that it was in the best interests of the child to
    remain with her mother. None of the wider range of  factors  identified
    in EV (Philippines) appear to have been considered  save  for  a  brief
    mention of the availability of education in Nigeria. Although,  at  the
    date of the hearing, the child had not been  continuously  resident  in
    the UK for a period of seven years, it was still incumbent on the judge
    to carry out an evaluative assessment of her ties to the UK in order to
    assess whether it was proportionate for her to return to  Nigeria  with
    her mother. The mere fact that the period of seven years identified  in
    the immigration rules is not met does not obviate the need to carry out
    a full assessment outside the rules.

5.    At the hearing Mr Tufan  was  fair  in  accepting  that  the  decision
    contained errors. Although the issues were  not  argued  fully  in  the
    grounds  of  appeal  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge's  findings  in
    paragraphs 17 and 25 indicate that he may have taken the wrong approach
    to the assessment of Article 8 outside the immigration rules. The judge
    appeared to consider that a threshold of "compelling circumstances" was
    necessary before considering Article 8 outside the  immigration  rules.
    The effect of the decision in SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others  [2015]  Imm
    AR 1036 does not create some form of admissibility threshold. The Court
    of Appeal pointed out that there may some cases where the rules do  not
    address relevant Article 8 issues. In such cases there would need to be
    "compelling circumstances" to  justify  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain
    outside the immigration rules. The  judge's  finding  at  paragraph  25
    casts some doubt on whether he applied the correct test.

6.    Mr  Tufan  also  pointed  out  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  any
    consideration to the statutory public interest  requirements  contained
    in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("NIAA 2002"). It is also  possible  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for finding that it would be reasonable to expect  the
    first appellant to return to Nigeria to make an application  for  entry
    clearance without considering the disruption  it  would  cause  to  the
    child.

7.    The first point alone would be  sufficient,  but  the  combination  of
    errors means that the decision must be set aside. I am  told  that  the
    appellant's circumstances with her  partner  have  changed.  Since  the
    decision her daughter has resided in the UK for a continuous period  of
    seven years. As such it is appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal for the changed circumstances to be considered in full at
    a fresh hearing.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside the decision and remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date  27 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








