
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13931/2014
IA/14279/2014

                                                            IA/14282/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  5th September 2014                        |On 10th September 2014       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                  MR ASHOK KAMANCHETTIAR GOVIN DARAJAN (1)
                          MR MATHIYALAGAN MANI (2)
                       mRS aNITHA bALASUBRAMANIAN (3)
                         (NO ANONYMITY ORDERS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants: Mr L Youssefian of DJ Webb & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellants are all citizens of India. The  first  appellant  was
       born on 10th June 1976, the second appellant was born on 2nd January
       1980 and the third appellant (who is the  second  appellant's  wife)
       was born on 25th July 1985. The first and second appellants  entered
       the UK as Tier 4 student migrants, remained on this basis, and  then
       had their leave to remain extended on the basis of Tier 1 post study
       work. The  third  appellant  had  leave  to  remain  as  the  second
       appellant's dependent wife. On  1st  February  2014  the  first  and
       second appellants applied to remain in the UK as Tier 1 entrepreneur
       migrants,  with  the  third  appellant  applying   as   the   second
       appellant's dependent wife. These applications were refused  on  6th
       March 2014. The appeals against  the  decisions  were  dismissed  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta, in a determination promulgated on
       the 26th June 2014.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Levin on the 14th July 2014 on the basis that it was  arguable  that
       the First-tier judge had erred in law in failing to give reasons why
       the unaudited accounts in the appellant's bundle did not satisfy the
       requirement at paragraph  46 -SD (a)  (ii)  of  Appendix  A  to  the
       Immigration Rules.

Submissions- Error of Law

    3. Mr Youssefian submitted that the key issue was whether  the  letters
       that the appellant had submitted to the respondent from  Andy  &  Co
       Accountants and Tax Consultants dated 23rd and  30th  January  2014,
       which were undoubtedly before the respondent at the time of decision
       (as they are recorded as having been received in the refusal letter)
       and were before Judge Pirotta, suffice to meet the  requirements  of
       paragraph 46- SD (a) (ii) with reference to (b) of Appendix A to the
       Immigration Rules. It was disputed  by  the  respondent  that  these
       documents could be  seen  as  unaudited  accounts.  However  if  the
       requirements of unaudited accounts are looked at in paragraph  46  -
       SD (b) all the issues required are recorded in  these  letters:  for
       instance they show the money invested by the applicants;  they  show
       the shareholders and the amounts and value of the shares;  give  the
       name of the accountant; and the date the accounts were produced.

    4. Mr Youssefian  argued  that  the  letters  produced  by  Andy  &  Co
       Accountants were from a member of a UK recognised supervisory body -
       see FCCA (2024959) written after Mr Idowu's name - but in  any  case
       this was not a point disputed in the refusal letter or  relied  upon
       to dismiss the appeal by the First-tier Tribunal.

    5. Mr  Youssefian  argued  that  the  letter  produced  by  Andy  &  Co
       Accountants were also the  "accounts  compilation  report"  as  this
       documentation was not defined in the Immigration Rules. I said  that
       I understood that this was usually a  statement  by  the  accountant
       that they do not give any assurances in  relation  to  the  compiled
       financial statement when giving a write up of  data  provided  by  a
       client without doing an audit, but this was not something which  was
       defined (as far as I was aware) within the Rules or guidance.

    6. Mr Nath accepted that the letters of 23rd and 30th January 2014 gave
       all the details required by paragraph 46 -SD (b) of Appendix  A  but
       he could not say more as the Secretary of  State  did  not  conceded
       that these sufficed as unaudited accounts.

    7. Mr Nath argued that the Secretary of State had put the issue of  the
       compilation report and whether  the  accounts  were  produced  by  a
       qualified member of a UK Recognised Supervisory Body in question  in
       the refusal letter by setting out the whole of paragraph 46 - SD (a)
       of Appendix A.

    8. Mr Youssefian responded by saying  that  the  focus  throughout  the
       refusal was on the absence  of  accounts,  and  the  fact  that  the
       documents submitted did not fulfil the requirements of paragraph  46
       -SD (b) of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules. This had  also  been
       the approach taken by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 11 of the
       determination.

    9. Both parties agreed that the substance of the letters  of  23rd  and
       30th January was such that they showed sufficient funds if they were
       in a suitable form, and found to  fulfil  all  the  requirements  at
       paragraph 46- SD (a) and (b) of Appendix A.  Both agreed  that  they
       did not need to make further submissions for the  re-making  of  the
       appeal if an error of law were found.

   10. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   11. I find that Judge Pirotta erred  in  law  at  paragraph  19  of  her
       determination as she stated  that  the  appellants  had  simply  not
       submitted any accounts, and so did not comply with the criteria  set
       out in the Immigration Rules,  and  did  not  consider  whether  the
       letters  of  23rd  and  30th  January  2014  sufficed  to  meet  the
       requirements for unaudited accounts. Indeed it seems  she  may  have
       been under the misapprehension  that  these  letters  had  not  been
       submitted to the respondent at all given what is said  at  paragraph
       20 of the determination.  However  it  is  certain  that  they  were
       submitted to the respondent as  this  is  set  out  in  the  refusal
       letters for the first  and  second  appellants  under  "evidence  of
       investment" for Appendix A. It was also clear from  the  grounds  of
       appeal, which are  set  out  at  paragraph  12  of  Judge  Pirotta's
       determination, that the appellants argued that  these  letters  were
       sufficient to qualify as unaudited accounts. I thus  find  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal erred  for  failure  to  give  reasons  why  the
       letters of 23rd and 30th January 2014 did not suffice  as  unaudited
       accounts as defined and required by the Immigration Rules.

   12. I therefore set the decision of Judge Pirotta aside.

Conclusions - Re-making

   13. Mr Nath could not point me to any aspect set out in paragraph  46  -
       SD (b) of Appendix A that was not covered by the letters from Andy &
       Co Accountants.  I  find  that  these  letters  therefore  meet  the
       requirements of unaudited accounts.

   14. I am also satisfied that they were written by an accountant who is a
       member of a UK Recognised Supervisory Body as the author, Mr  Idowu,
       has FCCA and a number written after his name, which means he is  the
       member of the Association of Chartered Certified  Accountants.  This
       is listed as a recognised UK supervisory body  at  the  A18  of  the
       glossary in the Tier 1 (entrepreneur) policy guidance.

   15. The issue of the "accounts compilation report" is more difficult  to
       determine. I do not accept the argument that I do  not  need  to  be
       satisfied that there was such an item before the Secretary of State.
       It is clearly part of the Immigration Rules, and Mr  Nath  has  been
       clear that the Secretary of State does not accept that  this  aspect
       was met by the appellants.  It is also clear  that  the  ability  to
       meet the whole provision relating to accounts at paragraph 46-SD  of
       Appendix A, of which this is a part, was the basis of the refusal of
       the appellants. The whole of this provision was set out in  full  in
       the refusal. Mr Youssefian has argued that the letters are  also  an
       accounts compilation report. I note that the Tier  1  (entrepreneur)
       policy guidance version 4/2014 at paragraph 113 (which  formed  part
       of the appellant's bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal)  and  the
       Immigration Rules at paragraph 46- SD of Appendix A do not say  what
       is required of this document, and the title of the  section  of  the
       relevant section of the guidance at 113(ii) is  "unaudited  accounts
       and an accountant's certificate of confirmation".

   16. When all is considered in the round I find that  the  letters  which
       certainly explicitly "confirm" all the relevant information provided
       and  give  the  sources  of  the  information  relied   upon   (bank
       statements, completion statement from Chancery CS Solicitors,  share
       certificates and Companies House documents) and thus make clear that
       the information is not as a result of an audit should also  be  seen
       as an accounts compilation report.

   17. I therefore find that first and second appellants have satisfied all
       aspects of the Immigration Rules relating to entrepreneurs  as  this
       was the only issue, according the reasons for refusal letter,  which
       prevented their obtaining full points under Attributes  Appendix  A,
       and the respondent was satisfied that they  were  entitled  to  full
       points under Appendix B and  C.  As  such  they  were  not  properly
       refused under paragraph  245DD  as  they  could  in  fact  meet  the
       requirements of paragraph 245DD (b) of the Immigration Rules. As the
       second appellant qualified  for  a  grant  of  leave  as  a  Tier  1
       (entrepreneur) migrant the third appellant was not properly  refused
       under paragraph 319C of the Immigration Rules.

Decision

   18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

   19.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   20. The decision is re-made allowing the appeals under  the  Immigration
       Rules.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
5th September 2014

Fee Award

    In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal  by
    allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee  award  (rule  23A
    (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005
    and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
    2007).


    I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note:  Fee  Awards
    in Immigration Appeals (December 2011).


    I make a whole fee award as all necessary documents were submitted with
    the application and thus by proper consideration of these the need  for
    an appeal could have been avoided.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
5th September 2014





