
IAC-HW-MP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/13685/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21st October 2014            |On 21st November 2014           |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                              MR CHIN HSUN KUO
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jagadesham, Howells Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Taiwan, born on 1st January 1988  and  he
    appeals against the respondent's  decision  dated  6th  March  2014  to
    refuse his application which was dated 8th October 2013  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of ten years lawful residence.  The respondent  did
    not accept that the appellant fulfilled the requirements  of  paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules HC 395.

 2. The appellant entered the UK on 10th August 2003 with  a  student  visa
    valid until 31st October 2004 and this visa was extended on application
    to 8th November 2005.  The appellant submitted  a  further  application
    for leave to remain on 15th December 2005 and this  was  granted  until
    3rd January 2006.  This application was made out of time and there  was
    a period when he was in the UK without leave of 34 days.

 3. The appellant's leave was extended, however, until 30th September  2007
    and he made a further application to extend his leave from 31st October
    2007.  That application was rejected and resubmitted  on  4th  December
    2007 and again rejected on 31st December 2007.  The leave  was  finally
    granted on 13th February 2008.  It was submitted that  he  was  without
    leave for a total of 135 days.

 4. A further application was made on 3rd December 2007 which  was  granted
    on 13th February 2008, valid until 31st October  2008.   The  appellant
    made an in time application for a further extension but this was  again
    rejected on 20th November 2008 and he submitted a third application  on
    12th December 2008 and this was refused with no right of appeal on 12th
    May 2009.  However on 18th June 2009 the outcome was  reconsidered  and
    he was granted leave until 31st October 2011.  He was in the UK without
    leave of a total of 229 days.

 5. As the appellant had various gaps in his leave he was unable to provide
    evidence of continuous residence for  ten  years  and  his  appeal  was
    refused by the respondent both under the Immigration Rules and  further
    to Article 8.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson heard the appellant's appeal on  27th
    June 2014 and set out the history of the appellant's  applications  for
    leave to remain at paragraphs 10 to 18.  He dismissed the appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 7. An application for permission was made on the basis that the judge  had
    stated he had considered the appeal outside the Immigration  Rules  but
    had failed to give reasons.  He  had  given  inadequate  reasoning  for
    finding that the matter could not be considered outside the immigration
    rules.  Permission was granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge  Levin  who
    stated

         'Given the appellant had clearly established a substantial  private
         and family life in the UK then the Judge's failure to give adequate
         reasons as to why it was unnecessary to consider Article outside of
         the Rules arguably amounted to an error of law on his part'.

 8. At paragraph 19 the judge found the appellant to be a reliable  witness
    who gave cogent evidence about his immigration history, much  of  which
    was not in issue.  The judge found him to  have  been  a  conscientious
    student educated to a high level with a Degree  in  Genetics  from  the
    University of Sheffield.

 9. The judge then went on to state:

    "22.   It may be that the respondent could have exercised discretion in
         favour of the appellant in the case of the first break.  It is more
         than 28 days but the circumstances are perhaps sufficiently unusual
         to attract such a concession.  The third application is a catalogue
         of errors by both the appellant and the respondent and  it  may  be
         that  this  period  of  overstaying  could  be  re-calculated   and
         disregarded.  However I am not satisfied that both  the  first  and
         the third periods can be disregarded.

    23.    So far as the second period is  concerned,  there  was  again  a
         catalogue of errors.  The date that the application  was  correctly
         submitted to the Home Office was still within  the  28  day  period
         following the expiration of leave.   However  the  application  was
         again rejected for non-payment of  fee  and  then  again,  for  not
         submitting the required documents.  I am not satisfied  that  there
         are any circumstances in which this period could be disregarded.

    25.    Looking at the appellant's history in the  round,  it  is  clear
         that he is ultimately responsible for repeated failures  to  submit
         his application properly and in time.

    26.    In the circumstances I am not satisfied that the  appellant  can
         meet the requirement of 10 years lawful residence and the appeal is
         dismissed under the Rules."

10. It is at this point that the judge then considered  Article  8,  having
    dismissed the appeal under the Rules.

11. The judge cited Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  Rules  -  correct  approach)
    [2013] UKUT 640 at paragraph 28 but at paragraph 27 he stated  "I  have
    considered the appellant's situation outside the Rules." He  then  goes
    on to state at 29 that he was not satisfied that  there  were  arguably
    good grounds for granting leave outside the Rules.  The judge  gave  no
    reasoning to support this finding and indeed his reasoning at paragraph
    22 would appear to contain some contradiction.   On  the  one  hand  in
    reference to the first break of leave of the appellant the judge stated
    "it is more than 28 days but the circumstances are perhaps sufficiently
    unusual to attract a concession".

12. The judge then proceeded at the end of that paragraph to state "however
    I am not satisfied that  both  the  first  and  third  periods  can  be
    disregarded."

13. Not least the judge stated "I have considered the appellant's situation
    outside the Rules".  He did not.  Indeed this  was  not  a  deportation
    case and the Immigration Rules are not a  complete  code.   Bearing  in
    mind this appeal was predicated on the basis of ten years  lawful  stay
    and the appellant had built a substantial private life, I find that the
    judge should have considered MM v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 which states [129]

         'Nagre [and following that Gulshan] does not add  anything  to  the
         [Article 8] debate save for the  statement  that  if  a  particular
         person is outside  the  rule  then  he  has  to  demonstrate  as  a
         preliminary to a consideration outside the rules  that  he  has  an
         arguable case that there may be good grounds for granting leave  to
         remain outside the rules.  I cannot see much  utility  in  imposing
         this further, intermediary test.  If the applicant  cannot  satisfy
         the rule, then there either is, or there is not a further Article 8
         claim.  That will have to be determined by  the  relevant  decision
         maker'.

14. Indeed in MF Nigeria v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  at  44  it  was  held  that  "the  exceptional
    circumstances to be considered in the balancing exercise  involved  the
    application of a proportionality test as  required  by  the  Strasbourg
    jurisprudence".

15. I therefore find that there was an error of  law  and  I  preserve  the
    findings made between paragraphs 19 and 20 and the first two  sentences
    of paragraph 21.  I have also had regard to the background as  set  out
    by the Judge at paragraphs 10 to 18 and the evidence the appellant gave
    therein.

16. I find that there are arguably  good  grounds  for  the  matter  to  be
    considered outside the Immigration Rules as the judge set  out  in  his
    determination there were a catalogue of errors attaching to the failure
    of the appellant's applications to be put in in time but  also  as  the
    judge stated "not all of  this  catalogue  of  errors  is  due  to  him
    personally" and further "even setting aside those incidents that can be
    blamed on the  school  and  those  for  which  the  respondent  may  be
    responsible, the fact remains that for various  reasons  the  appellant
    has repeatedly failed to submit a proper application".

17. I find that it is clear that there have been substantial  gaps  in  the
    appellant's leave but certainly in the first instance this was when the
    appellant was a minor and at school and it was an administrative  error
    on behalf of the school.  The appellant stated in relation to the first
    period of unlawful residence that he relied on  the  school  to  ensure
    that his immigration status was correctly  maintained  and  the  school
    missed the expiration of his leave and did not  present  him  with  the
    application form to sign until 15th December 2005 which contributed  to
    a total of 34 days gap in his leave.

18. In relation to the second period of unlawful residence, the judge found
    that in relation  to  the  second  period  of  unlawful  residence  the
    appellant was in the UK without leave for a total of 135 days.

19. Although at this point he was not a minor, he  was  still  in  fact  at
    school and that once again he entrusted his application to be sent  off
    by the school and the judge accepted that:

         "due to  an  administrative  error  however  the  school  sent  the
         application form to the appellant's parents in Taiwan  ...  by  the
         time it was correctly submitted to the Home Office  it  was  indeed
         out of time.  The appellant had  provided  a  letter  sent  by  the
         school to the Home Office with the application form and dated  31st
         October 2007 which confirms that it was their error that led to the
         late submission of this application".

20. There was then a further delay because the payment was rejected but the
    appellant could not remember why.

21. In relation to the third period of unlawful residence the judge  stated
    the following:

    "16.   On 13/02/2008 the appellant was given further leave valid  until
         31/10/2008.  He made an in time application for  further  extension
         but this was rejected.  The appellant resubmitted  his  application
         on 03/11/2008 but this  was  again  rejected  on  20/11/2008.   The
         appellant submitted a third application on 12/12/2008 and this  was
         refused  with  no  right  of  appeal  on  12/05/2009.   However  on
         18/06/2009 the outcome was reconsidered and he  was  granted  leave
         until 31/10/2011.  He was in the UK without leave a  total  of  229
         days.

    17.    The appellant says  that  his  first  application  was  rejected
         because his credit card had been damaged and he had requested a new
         one.  In error, he had provided the details of his old card on  the
         application form and therefore payment was rejected by  the  credit
         card company.  The Home Office notified him of this and  asked  him
         to submit correct  payment  details  which  he  did.   However  the
         application was rejected again because he had  failed  to  complete
         paragraph 8.7  of  the  application  form.   However  there  is  no
         paragraph 8.7 on the [current version] of the application form  and
         neither side has been able to  provide  a  copy  of  the  form  the
         appellant actually Completed, or a blank version of the form in use
         at the time.

    18.    He submitted a further application  on  28/12/2008  he  did  not
         receive the Home Office response immediately because they had  used
         the incorrect postcode.  When he did  finally  get  the  letter  he
         submitted the various documents and leave was then granted, in June
         2009."

22. What is clear are the following exceptional circumstances.  It  is  not
    just the appellant who was  in  difficulty  with  the  application  but
    clearly the evidence discloses that the respondent also was at fault.

23. The appellant was a child when he came to the  UK  and  has  spent  his
    formative, teenage and educational years and all of his adult  life  in
    the UK.  He has completed secondary education, college and a university
    Degree in this country and has only  rarely  left  the  UK  during  the
    course of his residence.  It is the appellant's claim that his ties are
    much stronger in the UK than in Taiwan and that he is fully  integrated
    into the UK including socially, culturally and educationally.

24. I therefore consider that there are arguably good grounds  outside  the
    Immigration Rules to consider this matter and have done so.  Indeed, Mr
    Diwnycz's submissions were that the appellant's case in Gulshan  was  a
    hopeless case but accepted this was not the case in this  matter.   The
    Guidance on Long  Residence  and  Private  Life  dated  May  2013  give
    examples  of  where  gaps  in  lawful  residence  may  be  excused   in
    exceptional circumstances such as hospitalisation or 'an administrative
    error made by the Home Office'.

25. I therefore apply the principles in R (Razgar) v SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27
    and note that the appellant must have engaged a private  life  and  the
    decision of removal would have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as  to
    engage that private life.  From the above discussion clearly  I  accept
    that he has established a  private  life  having  integrated  into  the
    United Kingdom and he gave evidence that he was currently working which
    I accept.

26. I have  considered  whether  the  appellant  has  made  a  decision  in
    accordance with the law and note that the Policy Guidance as identified
    above which considers the approach to gaps in  leave  and  he  guidance
    indicates quite strongly at page 17 that gaps in  lawful  residence  of
    more than 28 days should be considered by  a  senior  caseworker.   The
    official from the Home Office,  Leanne  Walsh,  who  appeared  to  have
    considered the case made no reference to her own  position  within  the
    Home Office and made no indication that she herself had  referred  this
    matter to a senior caseworker.   As  such  I  find  that  there  is  no
    confirmation that this matter has been considered  in  accordance  with
    the policy.  There are clearly exceptional circumstances identified  as
    being a consideration when applying the discretion and  these  are  not
    described (as I have highlighted above) as being exhaustive.

27.  With  the  qualification  that  I  question  the  application  of  the
    discretion exercised with reference to the Policy Guidance and  whether
    the policy should have been followed,  I consider that the refusal  and
    removal proposed  was  on  the  face  of  it  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules.  I have noted the possible  defect  in  the  refusal
    consideration.  The Immigration Rules have a legitimate  purpose;  that
    is the economic wellbeing of the UK and the protection  of  rights  and
    freedoms of others through the maintenance of firm immigration control.

28. Even if that were  the  case  and  that  had  been  undertaken  I  have
    considered whether the decision is necessary and proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim.  To that end I take into account Section  117A  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 inserted by Section  19  of
    the Immigration Act 2014 and accord weight to the public interest  when
    assessing the proportionality of the decision to remove the  appellant.
    The appellant is not an economic burden on the United  Kingdom  he  has
    obtained a Degree in Genetics from Sheffield University  and  has  been
    working in the UK in order  to  maintain  himself.   His  parents  have
    contributed substantial sums to his education and thus to date he would
    be a net contributor. Indeed there was evidence within  the  bundle  to
    underscore  the  contribution  of  non  EEA  students  to  the  economy
    referenced from the Migration Advisory Committee. Nonetheless he  could
    with his science degree make a contribution to the  UK  economy  rather
    than be a drain and he is clearly integrated in the UK.

29. The question of  whether  he  has  developed  a  private  life  in  the
    knowledge that his life was precarious should also be considered. I can
    accept that the appellant has only had temporary leave to date but this
    could not be described as 'precarious' save for the periods when he was
    here without leave and these he always attempted to regularise.   I  do
    not consider that obtaining leave to study could be described as  risky
    or unpredictable in general terms.   Until  his  last  refusal  he  was
    granted subsequent leave to remain.   This is a boy who had come to the
    UK without his parents and was reliant on the school and even though in
    the second period of unlawful residence he  was  19  he  was  still  at
    school in a foreign country and there is no bright line in  respect  of
    the maturity of a minor and whilst at school  I  can  accept  that  the
    appellant would have expected the  school  to  have  administered  such
    formalities on his behalf.  As a minor and was  effectively  attempting
    to conduct his personal affairs himself  or  at  a  distance  from  his
    parents or through the medium of a third party,  that  is  the  school.
    Indeed the appellant did not have a choice when he was sent to  the  UK
    to study initially and once here, is was reasonable for him to complete
    an education in format in which he started.

30. I do not find that the entire length of time suggested that he has been
    without leave has been shown to be his fault or that  there  was  close
    inspection of the factors or close enquiry of the  factors  behind  the
    rejection by a senior  caseworker.    The  third  period  of  residence
    indicated that he was without leave for a total of 229 days which is  a
    substantial period but on close consideration it was  not  possible  to
    understand what the period of delay was during this  period  which  was
    attributable to the Home Office. I find this is an important factor and
    the evidence produced at court was that an application was rejected but
    "neither side has been able to provide a copy of the  form  itself  the
    appellant actually completed or a blank version of the form in  use  at
    the time".  I find this to be significant because the periods of  delay
    were not only through the fault of the appellant but also  through  the
    delay of the Home Office.

31. Nonetheless the appellant has  family  in  Taiwan  and  can  speak  the
    language there and he grew up there until he came to the UK.   However,
    he maintains that his social, cultural and educational  ties  are  such
    that he is now fully integrated into the UK.   Certainly  he  has  been
    taught in English and has obtained a Degree in  English  and  therefore
    there is no question as to his ability to be able to speak English with
    reference to Section 117.

32. There was a wealth  of  statements  on  the  file  in  support  of  the
    appellant's continued  residence  in  the  UK  from  friends  and  they
    appeared at the First Tier Tribunal and I place some  weight  on  these
    documents.

33. I have considered in the light of Huang v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2007] UKHL 11 and with all the above factors  in  mind
    consider that the decision to remove the appellant would in these  very
    particular circumstances be disproportionate.  Taking full  account  of
    all considerations, I  did  consider  that  the  private  life  of  the
    appellant, in these particular circumstances would be prejudiced  in  a
    manner sufficiently serious to amount to a breach  of  the  fundamental
    right protected by Article 8. I find the appellant has shown  that  the
    immigration policy is not a proportionate response to the  interference
    in this case. I consider that his removal would not be proportionate.

34. Further to Section 12(2) (a) of the Tribunals  Courts  and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 I set aside the decision of the First  Tier  Tribunal  to  the
    extent that I have set out above because of errors of law  and  further
    to Section 12(2) (b) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 I
    remake the decision.



Notice of Decision

35. I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.



Signed      Date 21st November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In the light of the decision to  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing it, I have considered  whether  to  make  a  fee  award  (rule  23A
(costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and
section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  I  have
had  regard  to  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards   in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). I make no fee award  as  the  appellant
has only been successful in part of his appeal and the matter was complex.



Signed      Date 21st November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


