
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13297/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 7th May 2013                               |on 18th June 2013            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  AS (Iraq)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Miss Rutherford instructed by TRP Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. On 14th March 2013 the Upper Tribunal found the determination of  a
        Panel of the First-tier Tribunal, who allowed AS's  appeal  against
        the refusal to revoke the deportation order signed on  11th  August
        2009, contained legal errors such that it was set aside.









Background


     2. AS was born in late August 1980 and  is  a  national  of  Iraq.  He
        arrived in the United Kingdom in  February  2002  and  applied  for
        asylum which was refused, on  12th  April  2002,  although  he  was
        granted four years Exceptional Leave to Remain (ELR).


     3. In 2002 the  appellant  met  SM,  a  British  citizen.  They  began
        cohabiting in mid 2003 and married on 23rd October 2004. They  have
        four children A born in 2005, Z born in 2006, L born in 2010, and R
        born in 2011. Both L and R were conceived and  born  after  AS  was
        served with the notice of intention to make a deportation order.


     4. On 24th February 2006 the appellant was convicted of  rape  and  on
        2nd June 2006 sentenced to five years imprisonment.  In July 2008 a
        decision was made to deport him from the United Kingdom. The appeal
        against the decision was dismissed on 19th August 2008 and a signed
        deportation order served on 11th August 2009.  The  appellant  was,
        however, not removed  and  further  representations  were  made  in
        August 2009 in support of an application to revoke the  deportation
        order which was refused on 27th October 2009.


     5. Further and more detailed representations were then made  supported
        by independent reports from experts which led to a  further  asylum
        interview and the issue of a letter dated 25th January  2011  again
        refusing to revoke the deportation order.  The  appellant  appealed
        that decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  listed  for
        hearing on 18th March  2011  although  on  25th  January  2011  the
        respondent withdrew the decision. No further steps appear  to  have
        been  taken  by  the   Secretary   of   State   to   consider   the
        representations  and  so  on  23rd  April  2012   the   appellant's
        solicitors sent to the  respondent  a  Judicial  Review  Pre-Action
        Protocol letter which resulted in a further refusal to  revoke  the
        deportation order dated 30th May 2012. It was  the  appeal  against
        that decision which was considered by the Panel.


     6. In her sentencing remarks for the rape  offence  Her  Honour  Judge
        Cavell stated:


              Rape in any circumstances is always a very serious offence. It
   is no               consolation to your victim and  certainly  no  excuse
   that you did it because               you had had too much to drink.   It
   is quite plain on the facts that you were              determined to  get
   your victim over into your presence. It was the early           hours  of
   the  morning.   You  persisted  and  persisted  and  eventually   because
   of your rather devious way of doing it she came and trapped in  the  back
     of a car you abused her, you forced yourself upon her, grabbing her  by
   the            head for oral sex and finally you admitted on the  day  of
   the trial, raping            her.  She was struggling,  she  was  plainly
   very much distressed and your             reaction was  to  tell  her  to
   shut up.  There is some  evidence  afterwards  that             you  were
   saying  you  were  sorry  and  I  only  hope  that   was   genuine.   Had
   you contested the matter in front of a jury the  proper  sentence  in  my
          judgment would have been six years. You pleaded  guilty  at  trial
   therefore           your victim did not have to attend court  I  am  told
   and certainly did not            have to undergo  the  ordeal  of  giving
   evidence.   But having said that she          would not have  known  that
   until the morning and therefore she would              have been  waiting
   for trial knowing she would have to relive the ordeal to             give
   evidence but certainly you are entitled to a  limited  degree  of  credit
     for that plea late in the day as it came.   I find  that  the  comments
   reported            in the pre-sentencing report troubling. Your  lawyers
   on your behalf                   confess they  do  not  understand  them.
   What I propose to do is to discount           the  sentence  by  less  of
   course than if you had pleaded guilty at the earlier            stage but
   to reduce the six yours to one of five years imprisonment.


     7. AS was also ordered to register under the  Sex  Offenders  Act  for
        life. There was no appeal against conviction or sentence.


     8. The Pre-sentence report, dated  25th  May  2006,  [page  36-41  A's
        bundle in appeal IA/05694/2011] records that AS's version of events
        directly conflicted with that of the victim which is  reflected  in
        his maintaining a not-guilty plea until trial. The circumstances of
        the offence are recorded as follows:


              AS said that after finishing work that day,  he  met  up  with
   [J], the victim's            husband and a fellow countryman. [J] and his
   partner (the victim) were             invited to bring their child  to  a
   birthday party that was to be held at the               defendant's  home
   later that evening.  A barbecue and alcohol were  going                to
   be provided.  Throughout the  evening,  [J]  and  AS  drank  spirits  and
   champagne which resulted in [J] falling asleep due to  his  intoxication.
          Arrangements were made for him to stay at the defendant's flat and
   the            victim returned home with their two year old son.


              In the small  hours  of  the  following  morning,  the  victim
   received a                   telephone call which registered to  be  from
   [J's] phone.  The victim was              surprised to hear AS, who began
   to tell the victim that [J] had been having            affairs with other
   women and was also  involved  in  heavy  gambling.   She              was
   informed that if she wanted  all  of  the  information,  then  she  would
   need to return to the flat at 5.00am so that he could  meet  her  outside
   and            tell her.  Shortly afterwards, the victim rang AS and said
   that she was            upset and so unable to sleep so  she  would  come
   over then.  He agreed to              meet with his victim  upon  arrival
   and disclose the situation. The victim             put clothes  over  her
   pyjamas and drove to the flat, parking by the side of           AS's car,
   outside  his  home.  She  then  phoned  him  to  state  her  arrival   so
   that he could meet with her and disclose information.


              AS says that he came down and asked her to get out of her  and
   into his            which, he says, she did. When  challenged  about  him
   physically forcing           her into the back  of  the  car,  he  denied
   doing so. He then said that  as  he              began  to  disclose  her
   partner's infidelities, she began to cry and so he put                his
   arm around her.  In contradiction to the victim, he says that they  began
          to kiss and perform foreplay on each other.  AS told  me  that  at
   that point,             even though she was crying and telling no, as she
   was wearing a short              skirt, make up and lipstick and had also
   parked in a dimly lit area, he took           this as an indication  that
   she wanted to have sex with him.   When  I                challenged  him
   about his victim wearing pyjamas under the clothing, he               was
   not able to explain his justification for her wearing a short  skirt.   I
     challenged him with regard to his statement to the victim that "she was
              English so should be used to it". He denies saying this but it
   was evident             throughout our interview that he  holds  negative
   attitudes towards                women.


              The defendant owns no responsibility for the  offence  against
   his  victim,              blaming  her  "coming  onto  him"  although  he
   acknowledges that she was             distressed at the time due  to  his
   revelations about her partner.  His                explanation is that he
   admit[s] to doing wrong but only  because  he  had              sex  with
   another  woman  while  his  wife  was  in  bed   and   8   and   a   half
   months pregnant.


     9. There is reference in to the report to the effect upon  the  victim
        and further details, including the forced removal  of  the  victims
        hijab during the incident, which need not be set-out at  length  as
        they can be read in the report if  required.  At  section  2.6  the
        author states:


                2.6    Lifestyle and Associates


              The nature of his offence and also the betrayal of his  friend
   shows that AS           is prepared to  manipulate  others  in  order  to
   secure sexual gratification.              This offence was  premeditated,
   evidenced by the way that he lured his              emotionally  overawed
   victim into a position where  she  could  be  raped.             AS  also
   exploited  his  friend's  vulnerability  when  under  the  influence   of
   alcohol in order to access his partner.  Additionally, by committing this
              offence, he deceived his own wife who was 8 and a half  months
   pregnant            at the time and asleep near to where the offence took
   place.


    10. In section 2.9 it is stated:




              2.9 Thinking and Behaviour


               By  committing  this  crime,  AS  has  shown  that  he  lacks
   consequential                 thinking  skills  and  is  unable  to  give
   appropriate consideration to how his          behaviour may have impacted
   upon his victim and others.  He has given              an  indication  of
   his attitude towards women and their role within  society              as
   being objects of  immediate  sexual  pleasure  for  him  rather  than  an
     individual who can voice her wishes to reject his advances.  Whilst  in
          prison or the community, should his sentence be long enough (three
   years          in the community of twelve months or more in  prison),  he
   will have the           opportunity to  undertake  offence  focused  work
   that will assist him in               exploring the factors that  enabled
   him to commit a sexual offence.  During             that  time,  he  will
   learn  skills   in   order   to   appreciate   how   his   attitude   and
   actions affect others and, hopefully, be able to moderate  his  behaviour
     accordingly and to reduce any future risk of similar offending again.


    11. The risk of re-offending was stated to be low but the risk level of
        serious harm is high. Those at risk are stated to  be  women  as  a
        result of sexual attack.  The risk is said to be the greatest  when
        AS is under the influence of alcohol, when he wants  sexual  access
        to another woman  other  than  his  wife.  Risk  is  likely  to  be
        increased when he can convince another woman he has information  to
        disclose that is pertinent to their well being.


    12. At pages 3-35  of  the  same  bundle  is  the  OASys  report,  also
        completed in 2006, which summarises the assessment of risk [section
        10 of report,  page  32  of  bundle]  and  concludes  that  in  the
        community AS is a low risk to the public and children  but  a  high
        risk to a known adult. High risk  is  defined  as  there  being  an
        imminent risk of serious harm. The potential event is  more  likely
        than not to happen imminently and the impact would be serious.


    13. The original bundle contains two letters  dated  July  and  October
        2010 and a  further  risk  assessment  report  form  the  Probation
        Services dated 9th December 2010 [pages 42 to 51  of  the  original
        bundle]. The author of the report is described as being a Probation
        Officer and Programme Facilitator in the West of Midlands  Regional
        Sexual Offending Unit. At page 3, section 1.4 is a summary  of  the
        offence. At section 3.1 is an examination of Dynamic  Risk  factors
        in which the following is stated:




              3.1 BELIEVING MEN SHOULD DOMINATE WOMEN


              [AS] acknowledged that his culture in  Iraq,  determines  that
   'men are in             control'.  During  the  Induction  Programme,  he
   identified, as part of his Pro            offending Thinking, that  if  a
   woman is educated she is entitled to share              opinions  because
   she   can   contribute   to   the   household   expenses   and   she   is
   equal to a man.  An uneducated woman should take  care  of  the  children
     and the household tasks.


              During the Post Treatment Meeting, AS admitted  that,  at  the
   time of his             offending, he felt shocked and  betrayed  because
   the victim's partner had              raped him and that he  was  hurting
   so badly. He felt like a weak person          who was  unable  to  defend
   himself, but he did not want his abuser to get              away with the
   abuse  he  had  inflicted.  He  wanted  the  victim  to   be   aware   of
   her partner's actions so she would leave him. However, when she  did  not
     believe what AS had told her, he said he told himself:  "I'm  going  to
   get            him back. If I can't  get  him,  I  will  get  the  person
   closest to him."


    14. The author of the report notes AS  continued  to  deny  any  sexual
        motivation for the attack but had made the following statement:  "I
        raped an innocent person and friend who didn't deserve it  and  I'm
        sorry deeply in my heart and I know what I've done."


    15. I note, however, the Pre-sentence report records AS's case as being
        that the sex was consensual with  no  mention  of  any  element  of
        revenge or he himself being a victim of a similar experience at the
        hands of the real victim's partner.


    16. The report dated 9th December 2010 outlines the courses  undertaken
        by AS [AS's original bundle, page 48, section 3.1 of report].  AS's
        belief that men dominate women was identified  as  a  dynamic  risk
        factor and in section 4.2 it is recorded:




              4.2 AS  has  completed  the  Better  Lives  Programme  and  he
   participated in              all sessions. He related  particularly  well
   to the Wheel of Life and he was           able to determine how  his  new
   thinking about himself and his family fits             into each  of  the
   Goods. He was able to identify an affective Keep safe Plan            and
   he has his wife and her family in his support network.


               I  would  assess  that  this  Programme  has  addressed  AS's
   Treatment Needs.


    17. In section 5, [AS's original bundle, page 50] headed  Current  Risk
        Assessment it is recorded:


              "In my judgment, AS is managing his risk and  he  has  changed
   aspects of              his thinking behaviour  related  to  the  dynamic
   risk factor outlined in this              report.  This is  evidenced  by
   his work on both the Induction and Better              Lives Programmes.


              AS is assessed on EOASYS as being at a medium risk of harm  to
   a known              in  the  community.  I  believe  that  the  existing
   protective factors outlines           above will  enable  him  to  reduce
   this risk level in the future."


    18. Situations or events said to raise risk are  said  to  be  (a)  any
        breakdown  in  his  family  situation,  (b)  coping  with  negative
        thoughts and feelings if he is prevented from securing  employment,
        (c) any situation where he is left feeling emasculated and wants to
        regain power, (d) feelings of revenge and being able to gain access
        to a potential victim. [AS's original bundle, page 51, section 6.2]


    19. Possible warning signs are said  to  be  (a)  abusing  alcohol  and
        socialising  with  friends   rather   than   meeting   his   family
        commitments, (b) ruminating about other people's behaviour  towards
        him, which could result in  his  wanting  to  take  revenge.  [AS's
        original bundle, page 51, section 6.3]


    20. AS also provided in his original bundle [pages 53-96] a report from
        David  Thornton,  PhD,  headed:  Scoring  Guide  for  Risk  Matrix,
        2000.9/SVC. It is dated February 2007. Risk Matrix 2000 (RM2000) is
        said to be a statistically derived risk classification process  for
        males over the age of 18  who  have  been  convicted  of  a  sexual
        offence. AS relies upon pages 55, 63 and 67 of the report  and  the
        proposition that although a significant  number  of  those  in  the
        medium risk category re-offence, the major (nearly three  quarters)
        do not offend against new victims.


    21. AS's appeal against the decision to deport him, at which the  above
        material would have been considered, was dismissed by  the  AIT  on
        19th August 2008.


    22. AS's chronology refers to a reference to the Children's Champion by
        UKBA seeking advice in splitting the family on 28th September  2008
        and a record of the Childrens Champion's reply to UKBA on 4th  June
        2009, noted in a bail summary dated 22nd June 2009,  that  'if  the
        subject has no changes in circumstances they  support  the  Judge's
        ruling to deport AS'.


    23. Rather than agree  to  co-operate  with  the  deportation  process,
        further representations were made by AS in July 2009 and after  the
        signing of the deportation order and his re-arrest for the purposes
        of removal on 19th August 2009, an application  was  made  for  the
        order to be revoked by his representatives on that same day -  only
        eight days after the order was signed.


    24. Further expert evidence was commissioned from a Consultant Forensic
        Clinical Psychologist Ian Stringer, dated 6th  November  2009,  and
        reports from Renee Cohen an Independent Social Worker. The first is
        dated 13th August 2009 and the second 14th  March  2011.  There  is
        also a report by Birmingham City Council prepared at the request of
        UKBA dated 7th December 2011.


    25. Having set out the account provided by AS  Ian  Stinger  states  at
        page 21 of his report:


              Thus AS's account carries a number of problems:


                 . He has changed his account of his motivations. It is  not
                   possible to discriminate between accurate and  inaccurate
                   account.
                 . Cultural expectations of the role of woman  in  Iraq  and
                   English society suggest his  account  of  perceiving  the
                   victim as 'easy' because of her manner of dress,  make-up
                   and  behaviour,  suggest  he  misunderstood  the   social
                   context.
                 . He stated he only drank heavily on the night he  sexually
                   assaulted the victim. His account to me suggests  he  had
                   consumed alcohol on this night out with J to  be  unaware
                   he himself was being  assaulted.  This  suggests  AS  has
                   consumed large amounts of alcohol on two known occasions,
                   both times resulting in sexual  activity.  This  suggests
                   his alcohol consumption may have been problematic.


                Overall, from a  psychological  perspective,  AS's  account
                appears partially unsubstantiated and somewhat erratic  and
                varies from time  to  time.  His  English  language  skills
                appear adequate. Psychometric results from this  assessment
                suggest he has no limitations of ability or capacity  which
                might functionally relate to either his  offence  behaviour
                or his erratic account.


    26. In relation to an issue identified in the later 2010 assessment  of
        being of concern, AS  believing  men  should  dominate  women,  Ian
        Stringer, on page 26, writes:


               Distorted  Attitudes:  An  earlier  account  by  AS  of   his
   motivation in his            offence suggested his victim was 'fair game'
   because she wore lipstick, a              short skirt and sat  in  a  car
   with  him.   Observations  note  "[AS's]  attitudes                toward
   women...their  role  within  society  as  being  objects   of   immediate
   sexual pleasure for him rather than an individual who can voice her  wish
          to reject his advances".  This suggests an important  motivational
   factor in           AS's assault was a difference  in  expectation.    In
   this case the most obvious            explanation is that the  difference
   arises from culture ('Culture' being the           social environment  in
   which people make meaning of their existence by             reference  to
   shared stories, traditions, and experiences. Bruner, 1990).


              An Asian Muslim psychiatric colleague  informs  me  that  AS's
   account of              the victim is  a  widely  held  view  by  men  of
   western   women   through                   Islamic   culture   (personal
   conversation, Dr Fernando, 22/10/2009).


    27. Ian Stringer accepts he is not an expert in  trans-cultural  sexual
        offenders attitudes but when  examining  common  factors  found  in
        abusive males in relationships found AS has nine low risk  factors,
        four medium risk factors and two high risk factors,  identified  as
        traditional sexual ideology and alcohol use, which are said  to  be
        from a psychological perspective the most salient factors requiring
        treatment.


    28. Ian Stringer refers  to  the  difficulties  in  assessing  risk  of
        reoffending which he states on page 35 he cannot estimate as  being
        other than 50:50. In his conclusion, page 40, he states:




              AS has committed a serious sexual assault,  and  admitted  his
   guilt.                  Psychological and risk assessment  are  extremely
   difficult  in   this   case                  because   of   the   limited
   applicability of  assessment  tools  which  derive  from              our
   society,  not  AS's  Arab/Islamic   society.   Lack   of   uncorroborated
   information  about  his  personal  history  is  a  further   barrier   to
   assessment.


              Arising from these difficulties, it is not possible to make an
   accurate                 assessment  of   recidivistic   risk,   as   the
   applicability of known actuarial              factors to AS's culture  is
   not known.  Because of this it is not possible to            say  whether
   the  factors  are  either  applicable  -  not   applicable   -   or   the
   degree of risk which AS poses at this time.


    29. Renee Cohen's reports also raises a number of issues.  The first is
        that AS is not the natural father of T although T believes  he  is.
        T's biological father is SM's first husband who is stated  to  have
        left before T's second birthday.


    30.  Ms  Cohen  found  evidence  of  a   significant   and   meaningful
        relationship between AS and the children and between AS and SM. The
        children are said to be emotionally  dependant  upon  AS  as  their
        father to whom they are attached and that AS is a  good  father  to
        them.


    31. Ms Cohen states that in her opinion T believes AS is his father and
        that if AS were to be deported it would be extremely difficult  for
        T and potentially emotionally very damaging for him. On  the  final
        page of the report dated 13th August 2009, Ms Cohen  sets  out  her
        conclusions as follows:


          The following points need to be taken into consideration:


                 . It is my opinion that there is no doubt  whatsoever  that
                   family life exists between AS and his three children,  T,
                   A and Z and his wife SM.  It is my opinion that AS  is  a
                   loving and responsible father who plays a crucial role in
                   the life of his children.  The children and his wife have
                   emotional interdependent relationships with him which are
                   mutual and reciprocal.
                 . It is my opinion that if AS were to be deported  to  Iraq
                   that would destroy family life for each  member  of  this
                   family. SM will be a much less effective  parent  without
                   her husband and she is likely  to  become  depressed  and
                   stressed which will  have  a  negative  effect  upon  her
                   functioning as a parent.
                 . It is my opinion that if AS  were  to  be  deported  thus
                   separating him from his children, that is almost  certain
                   to have a damaging impact upon the emotional  development
                   of  all  three  children.  T  in  particular   would   be
                   devastated to be separated from his father and when he is
                   told the truth about his  parentage,  the  loss  of  both
                   "fathers" is likely to  have  an  even  further  damaging
                   impact upon him. There is evidence  that  those  children
                   who are brought up without proper contact with  a  father
                   are amongst the  most  troublesome  in  our  communities.
                   (Please see Appendix A & Appendix B)
                 . It is my  opinion  that  it  is  neither  reasonable  nor
                   feasible to expect SM and the  children  to  relocate  to
                   Iraq in order to continue their family life with AS.   It
                   is my opinion that it would be utterly against  the  best
                   interests of all three children to be uprooted  from  all
                   that is familiar (including close ties with grandparents,
                   aunts, uncles and cousins); all that is safe  and  secure
                   to be placed into an alien environment which is likely to
                   be neither safe nor secure.
                 . It is my opinion that  it  is  not  at  all  possible  to
                   continue family life at a distance by keeping in  contact
                   via  modern  means  of  communication.  That   is   quite
                   different from  sustaining  meaningful,  significant  and
                   dynamic relationships which requires regular and face  to
                   face contacts and which underpins good psychological  and
                   emotional development and mental health.
                 . It is my opinion that SM's parents and her  siblings  and
                   their children need to be taken into account with  regard
                   to the prospect of the family relocating to Iraq.  It  is
                   my opinion that Ms LM would not be  able  to  bear  being
                   separated from her daughter and her grandchildren. It  is
                   my opinion that T in particular has  an  extremely  close
                   bond with his grandparents and if he were to be separated
                   from them that is likely to have an emotionally  damaging
                   impact upon him.


    32. Ms Cohen's second report refers to AS undertaking the Sex  Offender
        Group Programme. It maintains the position set  out  in  the  first
        report that the best interest of the children require AS to  remain
        in the United Kingdom.


    33. The report by Birmingham Social services [AS's  appeal  bundle  for
        FTT appeal, number 3, pages 357-387], commissioned at  the  request
        of UKBA and written after a home visit on 7th December 2011, states
        there are no concerns regarding the children's  health  or  welfare
        and records that AS has attended the Sex Offender  Management  Unit
        and is considered a medium risk due to his  offence  although  they
        have no concerns regarding him. He is  not  considered  a  risk  to
        children and he has  thirteen  more  years  on  the  sex  offenders
        register.  It  was  noted  that  the  children  have  an  excellent
        relationship with both parents and how positive T's relationship is
        with his father.


    34. The most recent report before the First-tier Panel was one prepared
        by Dr Sarah Newth a Consultant Child and  Adolescent  Psychiatrist.
        It is dated 31st July 2012 and is to be found at pages  398-410  of
        bundle 3. The  conclusions  are  set  out  in  the  report  and  at
        paragraph 10.12 of the determination of the First-tier Tribunal. It
        notes that T has in the past been a well adjusted young man with no
        mental health  issues  but  since  becoming  concerned  about  AS's
        possible deportation he has felt low in mood  at  times.  Dr  Newth
        states that in her  opinion  T  is  suffering  from  an  adjustment
        disorder as defined in DSM IV. If his father  is  deported  she  is
        concerned that "this bright and talented young man will become more
        angry and show his distress as adolescent boys often do by becoming
        confrontational, finding it hard to avoid getting into  fights  and
        getting into trouble despite the best efforts of his  mother".  She
        continues in the following paragraph:


          Deportation would be a permanent separation from someone who he is
              dependant upon both emotionally and practically. It  would  in
   effect be a             bereavement. He has already  as  described  above
   had two very significant              separations from his  birth  father
   and stepfather and  a  third  separation  would  be          yet  another
   serious set  back  for  him.  Three  serious  setbacks  within  12  years
   would be likely to affect his ability to build  trust  relationships  and
   make it             harder for him to build up enduring relationships  as
   he enters adolescence and        adulthood. He  is  currently  developing
   into a teenager and needs a male role         model to enable him to sort
   out his development and adult identity.


    35. The existence of family life between the children and  AS  and  the
        nature and quality of that family life as identified in the  expert
        reports are preserved findings.



Discussion



    36. This is an appeal against the refusal  to  revoke  the  deportation
        order signed on the  11th  August  2009.   The  provisions  in  the
        Immigration Rules relating to the revocation of a deportation order
        are set out in  paragraph  390  of  the  Rules  which  specifically
        states:


          390.    An application to revocation of a deportation  order  will
   be considered in             the light of all the circumstances including
   the following:


              (i) The grounds on which the order was made;


              (ii)     Any representations made in support of revocation;


              (iii)    Interests of the community, including the maintenance
   of effective                 immigration control;


               (iv)      Interests   of   the   applicant,   including   any
   compassionate                         circumstances.


    37. Paragraph  390A   states  that  where  paragraph  398  applies  the
        Secretary of State  in  assessing  the  application  will  consider
        whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it would
        only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
        maintaining the deportation  order  will  be  outweighed  by  other
        factors.


    38. The grounds on which the order was made are set out above.  AS  was
        convicted of rape and his deportation is said to  be  conducive  to
        the public good.


    39. The submissions made in support of revocation focus, primarily,  on
        the effect on the children but also upon his wife SM. I accept this
        is a family splitting case and that it cannot be expected  that  SM
        or the children will return with AS to Iraq. The family dynamics at
        the time of the appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  of  a
        close nit family unit living together and meeting the needs of  the
        children. It is submitted deportation is disproportionate in  light
        of the effect upon the children and in particular T, as set out  in
        the reports.  Reference is made to the opinion of both Ms Cohen and
        Dr Newth that indirect contact is not an adequate  replacement  for
        the physical day to  day  contact  the  children  have  with  their
        father.


    40. To enable me to  assess  the  interests  of  the  community  it  is
        necessary to bring the factual matrix that exists in this family up
        to date at this stage of the determination. Miss Rutherford in  her
        skeleton argument refers to the fact that the family dynamics  have
        altered recently with AS leaving the family home in  December  2012
        as a result of  his  having  been  imprisoned  for  an  offence  of
        harassment.  In his witness statement dated 4th May 2013 AS states:


              1.  I confirm that S and I are still committed to one  another
   but  we                        cannot  currently  live  together.  I  was
   convicted of sexual harassment                of my sister-in law and was
   sentenced to 16 weeks in prison on 28th                December  2012.  I
   very much regret what happened. I feel terrible                 about it.
   I  have  apologised  to  S  frequently   and   am   desperate   to   make
   it up to her and her family if  they  give  me  a  chance.  I  just  want
          everything back to normal.


              2.  I was released on 1st February 2013. Since then S's family
   have been               so shocked and angry that they have prevented  me
   from returning to                live with her (they all live in the same
   area)....


    41. The reference to S is clearly to SM, AS's  wife.  He  was  sent  to
        Stockton-on-Tees initially but on 10th April relocated to the  West
        Midlands to allow him to be near the children who he sees  twice  a
        week or more if possible. The family do not co-habit.


    42. In his oral evidence AS admitted to sending  text  messages,  cards
        and photographs which must have been of a sexual nature in light of
        the conviction. He claims he did this as he has been sitting in the
        house and he just  'lost  his  head'.  He  clearly  associated  his
        inability to work as a factor in his re-offending.  AS  stated  the
        time he spent in Stockton-on-Tees was a 'wake  up  call',  although
        when asked why the conviction for the rape offence  and  five  year
        sentence was not a 'wake up call', he claimed  he  made  a  mistake
        when he was first convicted. He has devoted the last four years  to
        his family and that he did not know what happened to make  him  re-
        offend. He claims if he was able to work things will  be  different
        and mentioned plans to set up a barbers shop in the UK.


    43. SM in her evidence is clearly aware of both offences and  indicated
        that all she is aware of in relation to the recent offence is  that
        AS sent cards, texts and sexual DVD's.  SM is clearly devoted to AS
        and her family and spoke of them as being a close  family  able  to
        cope on their own. She spoke of the family  being  on  a  list  for
        house swap in the Birmingham area so they may live together  again.
        When asked in cross examination whether the fact there has  been  a
        second conviction for an offence of a sexual nature was of  concern
        to her, SM stated this time AS was depressed. She had told  him  to
        go to see the GP but he did not.


    44. Paragraph 390A refers to 398 which is a rule applicable if a person
        is claiming deportation would be contrary to the  UK's  obligations
        under Article 8 ECHR as  AS  is  in  this  case.  As  he  has  been
        convicted of an offence for which he has  been  sentenced  to  more
        than four years his deportation is stated to be conductive  to  the
        public good [398(a)].  The  Secretary  of  State  has  to  consider
        whether 399 or 399A applies  and,  if  not,  it  will  only  be  in
        exceptional circumstances that the public interest  in  deportation
        will be outweighed by other factors.


    45. Neither paragraphs 399 or 399A apply as they are only relevant  for
        those falling within 398 (b) or (c) which  AS  is  not.  The  issue
        under  the  Rules  is  therefore  whether  there  are  'exceptional
        circumstances' meaning that the public interest in deportation will
        be outweighed by other factors.


    46. On the side of AS is his devoted wife and children. I accept  there
        is evidence of a strong family unit and that the best interests  of
        the children will be met by all four children being brought  up  by
        their mother and father (biological or step) in  the  family  unit.
        The loss of such a unit and the splitting  of  the  family  if  the
        foreign national criminal is deported cannot in itself be  said  to
        be exceptional as that is the effect of removing part of the whole.
        I accept that if AS is removed the best interests of  the  children
        will be met by them continuing to  reside  in  the  UK  with  their
        mother. Although SM refers to the distress she will feel I  do  not
        find it proved that her standard of parenting  will  fall  below  a
        level that will place the children at risk. It  will  be  difficult
        for her but SM acknowledges the existence of her own family and the
        support they give to the  children,  as  reflected  in  Ms  Cohen's
        report.


    47. The children will be distressed if they lose their father from  the
        family and the experts refer to three periods of such loss  for  T.
        There is now, of course, four as a result of AS's further offending
        of a sexual nature. On the one hand AS  claims  he  should  not  be
        deported as his family need him and mean the world to him,  yet  on
        the other he claims that for reasons he cannot explain,  but  which
        he indicates may have been because he was bored and unable to work,
        he jeopardises all he claims to be the dominant factor in this case
        by offending and being imprisoned again at a time he was aware  his
        appeal against the refusal to revoke the deportation order had  not
        been resolved.


    48. I accept there will be emotional  hardship  and  distress  for  the
        children and particular for T who has been diagnosed  as  suffering
        from Adjustment Disorder. There is reference to  potential  effects
        upon T but inadequate reference to any published works relating  to
        how long such a condition will last. Will T be affected permanently
        or until he accepts the situation, with  help  if  necessary?  Will
        there  be  lingering  feelings  and  if  so  are  they  a   natural
        consequence of the situation and/or likely not to be severe  enough
        to require additional attention or treatment?  The  evidence  fails
        to identify whether there is  a  recognised  treatment  regime  for
        Adjustment Disorder and focuses on removing  the  potential  cause,
        AS's deportation, rather than what is available to assist T  if  AS
        is removed. For example in terms of therapy the removal of AS  will
        not disrupt other important elements of T's social support such  as
        his mother and grandmother who he is stated to be  very  close  to.
        Has work been undertaken to assess T's range and  effectiveness  of
        coping skills, learning better ways of dealing with stress and  any
        feeling of anger feel, etc?  Whilst I accept there is a possibility
        of T becoming aggressive a lot of what may occur may also  be  part
        of his adolescence and transition  from  man  to  boy.  The  report
        refers to the separation having similar effects  as  a  bereavement
        for which counselling and other support is available.


    49. I accept T and the other children may not have a father  figure  as
        unfortunately a substantial number of children in the  UK  do  not,
        but it has not been shown on the evidence that the effect  will  be
        such that AS must be allowed to remain at all  cost.  Although  the
        language of Ms Cohen's report is emotive,  describing  'devastating
        consequences for the children' I find it has not been  proved  that
        any consequences are such as to prove that on  the  facts  of  this
        case exceptional circumstances have been shown to exist  such  that
        the appeal must be allowed under the Rules.


    50. As Miss Rutherford indicated in her submissions, that fact AS fails
        under the Rules is not determinative as he may be able  to  succeed
        under Article 8 ECHR. I accept this submission as under  Article  8
        domestic case law there is no test of  'exceptional  circumstances'
        although this term is referred to in Strasbourg jurisprudence  from
        time to time.


    51. When considering Article 8 issues it is necessary to considered the
        questions set out by Lord Bingham in paragraph 17 of the  judgement
        in the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 are which are:
        (1) Will the proposed  removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
        authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
        his private or (as the case may be) family life?
        (2) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity
        as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
               (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
        (4) If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society
        in the  interests  of  national  security,  public  safety  or  the
        economic well- being of the country, for the prevention of disorder
        or crime, for the protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
        protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
        (5) If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
        public    end sought to be achieved?


    52. Both advocates accepted that the only issue under Article 8 ECHR is
        one of proportionality. For AS his case is  that  relating  to  his
        wife and the children which I have set out above.  It is  submitted
        the best interests of the children are the determinative factor and
        that the deportation order cannot be sustained and must be revoked.


    53. In relation to the  Secretary  of  State's  case,  the  offence  AS
        committed is one that has a high  degree  of  revulsion  associated
        with it. The circumstances of the offence are a further  cause  for
        concern for the reasons set out in the pre-sentence report.  In  RE
        (Turkey) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 249 the Court of Appeal  said  that
        the public interest dictated that rape was a crime that caused much
        revulsion and  in  these  circumstances,  only  the  most  pressing
        compassionate circumstances could outweigh the need to remove.


    54. An additional element in this case  is  AS's  recent  offence.   He
        claims he 'lost  his  head'  and  stated  he  would  avoid  further
        offending by working. AS's replies are a further cause for  concern
        as they continue to demonstrate a lack of insight into his  conduct
        and possible avoidance of  responsibility.  The  re-offending  also
        demonstrates that AS chose to ignore all he allegedly took on board
        and learned on the Sex Offender Programme or  that  such  work  has
        failed. I note the offence involved a known female (his  sister  in
        law and SM's sister) which is a category  identified  as  being  at
        high risk of sexual offending from him in the reports.


    55. AS's representatives refer to the  delay  in  this  matter  in  the
        papers and the fact that the deportation order was only  made  when
        they threatened JR.  In Yousuf (Somalia) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 394
        the Court of Appeal said that the amount of time  the  Home  Office
        allowed to pass before serving a deportation order did  not  create
        any kind of legitimate expectation that the claimant would  not  be
        deported, but it did mean that the Home Office, and, in  turn,  the
        Tribunal, had to consider a period in which, unlike most  deportees
        who had offended, the  claimant  had  been  able  to  show  himself
        capable of living a law abiding life.  In  this  case  AS  had  the
        opportunity to prove he was capable of not offending and  that  his
        family is as important to him as he claims. Despite  all  that  has
        been said on his behalf  it  is  AS  who  is  responsible  for  the
        situation in which he now finds himself.


    56. ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] 2
        AC 166  demonstrates that the interests of a child  affected  by  a
        removal decision are a matter of substantial importance,  and  that
        the court must proceed on  a  proper  understanding  of  the  facts
        relevant to  those  interests.  I  have  therefore  considered  the
        evidence relating to these children with great care and having done
        so find  that,  whilst  of  great  importance,  they  are  not  the
        determinative factor. I accept that the fact future contact will be
        indirect  is  not  the  best  option  for  the  children  following
        separation, but this is the only practical way to maintain ties and
        all that may be available following deportation in the  absence  of
        visits. I accept that exclusion for ten years and the loss of AS as
        a father figure is a foreseeable consequence  of  deportation  with
        the disruption and related issues identified in the reports. But AS
        is a convicted rapist who has shown his removal  is  necessary  for
        the protection of female members of the public to  prevent  further
        criminal acts of a sexual nature and  to  deter  others  from  such
        acts. I find the Secretary of State has discharged  the  burden  of
        proof upon her to the required standard  to  show  the  refusal  to
        revoke the deportations order is proportionate.


Decision

    57. The First-tier Tribunal Panel materially erred in law. I  have  set
        aside the decision of the original Panel. I remake the decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    58. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


          I continue that  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure               (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 14th June 2013












