
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13697/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31st January 2014                          |On 6th June 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                         olabowale ayodele ogunsanya

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Ikegwuruka (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse to issue  him  with
    a residence card was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Prickett
    ("the judge") in a determination promulgated on 1st August 2013.

2.   The judge determined  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  documentary
    evidence before him, in the light of the appellant's indication in  his
    notice of appeal that he did not require a hearing.   In  refusing  the
    application, the  Secretary  of  State  first  considered  whether  the
    appellant had shown in his  application  that  he  was  entitled  to  a
    residence card as the family member of an EEA  national  present  here,
    exercising treaty rights.  In this context, she  found  that  no  valid
    marriage certificate had been produced and that the certificate  relied
    upon by the appellant was insufficient  to  make  out  his  case.   The
    Secretary of State went on to consider whether  the  appellant  was  an
    extended family member, as a person in a durable relationship  with  an
    EEA national.  The  appellant's  application  was  considered  in  this
    context under Regulation 8(5) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").  She  found  that  the
    appellant had failed to provide evidence that he fell within Regulation
    8(5) and she declined to exercise discretion under Regulation 17(4)  of
    the 2006 Regulations.

3.   In  determining  the  appeal,  the  judge  took  into  account  bundles
    prepared by the parties.  The appellant's bundle included  a  statement
    from him, made on 16th July 2013 and a statement from his partner, made
    on the same date.  The appellant's case that he was  a  family  member,
    falling within Regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations,  was  advanced  in
    reliance upon a customary marriage conducted by proxy in Nigeria.   The
    judge found that  the  appellant  and  his  wife  were  indeed  married
    according to customary law.  He was not, however,  satisfied  that  the
    appellant and his wife were in a durable relationship, for the purposes
    of Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.  He  went  on  to  make  an
    Article 8 assessment, finding that family life  between  the  appellant
    and his wife was not  shown,  in  the  light  of  his  adverse  finding
    regarding the claimed durable relationship.  The  judge  accepted  that
    the appellant had established private life ties in this country, albeit
    in the knowledge that he had no right to remain here  permanently.   He
    concluded  that  the  adverse  decision  amounted  to  a  proportionate
    response.

4.   An application for permission to appeal  was  made  by  the  appellant,
    through his solicitors.  It was contended, first, that as the customary
    marriage was accepted by the judge, it was irrational  and  thereby  an
    error of law to  require  "more  evidence  on  the  durability  of  the
    relationship".  In a second ground, it was contended that even  if  the
    judge properly went on to consider whether a durable  relationship  was
    shown, there was ample supporting evidence in  the  appellant's  appeal
    bundle. The appellant would not have taken out a joint  life  insurance
    policy with another person unless the person was his wife and the joint
    life policy showed the relationship between them.  In a  third  ground,
    it was contended that the judge's Article 8 assessment was flawed.  His
    conclusion that no family life was shown between the appellant and  his
    wife was irrational, in the light of his acceptance that  the  marriage
    had occurred.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on 21st August 2013.  The  appeal  was
    then listed for hearing in November 2013, before Deputy Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Davey.  Judge Davey found that the judge's reasoning  fell  short
    of what was required in relation to Regulation 7 and Regulation 8(5) of
    the 2006 Regulations.  The judge failed,  in  particular,  to  consider
    whether  a  valid  customary  marriage,  meeting  the  requirements  of
    Nigerian law, had a substantial impact upon the application made by the
    appellant for a residence card.  So far as Regulation 7  is  concerned,
    he considered that remaining to be considered was whether a valid proxy
    marriage had taken place which met the requirements of  the  law  here.
    He noted that the appellant's wife,  a  Portuguese  national,  did  not
    attend, apparently through illness.  An important question was  whether
    the marriage in Nigeria was recognised under Portuguese law.

6.   Judge Davey adjourned the hearing, directing that  the  parties  should
    provide such evidence  as  they  chose,  particularly  in  relation  to
    whether the customary  marriage  was  a  recognised  marriage  for  the
    purposes of Portuguese law.

Submissions Made on Behalf of the Parties on 31st January 2014

7.   Mr Ikegwuruka said at the outset that although the appellant  had  been
    able to obtain a letter from a local authority  in  Nigeria,  regarding
    the status of the customary marriage he relied upon, he had been unable
    to obtain evidence from lawyers in Portugal, regarding  recognition  of
    the marriage according to the law of that country.  He accepted, in the
    light of Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC) that
    the appellant was unlikely to succeed in  showing  that  the  customary
    marriage, conducted by proxy, was one recognised in Portuguese law.

8.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the evidence  of  the  claimed
    the durable relationship was insufficient.   Mr  Ikegwuruka  said  that
    even if the appellant could not succeed under Regulation 7 of the  2006
    Regulations, a decision was required from the Secretary of State  under
    Regulation 8(5).  At paragraph 9 of the determination, the judge  found
    that he was not satisfied, on the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  a
    durable relationship was shown.  The second ground in  support  of  the
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  relied
    upon here.  The evidence showing the relationship was before the First-
    tier Tribunal and the judge erred in  law  in  failing  to  relate  his
    findings to the evidence before him.

9.   Mr Ikegwuruka said that the error was shown in paragraph 9, in line  9,
    for example.  The judge referred to "new water bills" in  joint  names.
    This was evidence that the parties were  living  together.   There  was
    also an account statement from Santander  which  should  have  led  the
    judge to find that  a  durable  relationship  existed.   The  documents
    contained in the appellant's bundle included bills in joint names, over
    a period of two or three years.

10.  Mr Deller said that so far  as  durable  relationship  was  shown,  the
    reasoning of the judge did indeed appear largely in paragraphs 9 and 10
    of the determination.  The critical question was whether  he  erred  in
    law in this  context.   The  appeal  was  determined  without  an  oral
    hearing.  The judge had to assess durable relationship, on the basis of
    the documentary evidence before him.  The analysis in paragraphs 9  and
    10 was thorough and the judge's findings were open to him.

11.  In a brief response, Mr Ikegwuruka said that the joint  life  insurance
    policy  taken  out  with  the  appellant's  spouse  showed  a   durable
    relationship.  The purpose of the policy would  be  defeated  if  there
    were no such relationship.  The judge  ought  to  have  considered  the
    evidence in the round.  His failure to do so revealed an error of law.

Findings and Conclusions

12.  The judge determined  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  documentary
    evidence before him, as the appellant did not require an oral  hearing.
    The bundle of documents prepared on his behalf was carefully considered
    by the judge, as paragraphs 9 and 10 of the determination show.

13.  The appellant's wife was not present at the hearing before Judge  Davey
    in November 2013 and she was not present before the Upper  Tribunal  in
    January 2014.  The appellant's case is still borne  by  the  bundle  of
    documents relied upon before the First-tier Tribunal.

14.  So far as Regulation 7 of the 2006  Regulations  is  concerned,  it  is
    readily apparent that the absence of  any  evidence  showing  that  the
    customary marriage conducted by  proxy  in  Nigeria  is  recognised  in
    Portuguese law is fatal to the appellant's case that he is entitled  to
    a residence card as the family member of an EEA national present  here,
    exercising treaty rights, in the light of Kareem [2014] UKUT 00024.  At
    paragraph 17 of the determination in that case, the Upper Tribunal held
    that the question of whether there is a marital relationship is  to  be
    examined in accordance with the laws of the Member State from which the
    Union citizen obtains nationality and from which that  citizen  derives
    free movement rights.  There is no evidence before the  Upper  Tribunal
    showing that the marriage relied upon is recognised in the law  of  the
    Member State from which the appellant's wife  obtains  nationality  and
    from which she derives free movement rights.

15.  So far as Regulation 8(5) is concerned, Mr  Ikegwuruka  contended  that
    the judge erred in law in failing to properly assess the evidence.   Mr
    Deller, on the other hand, submitted that paragraphs 9 and  10  of  the
    determination show a careful assessment  of  the  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

16.  It is clear from those paragraphs  that  the  judge  had  in  mind  the
    contents of the appellant's bundle and the particular documents showing
    the names of both the appellant and his wife at  303  Gurney  Close  in
    Barking.  The judge was perfectly entitled to  conclude  that  the  few
    letters giving both names, including the letters from Aviva dated  30th
    April 2013, fell short of showing, on a balance of probabilities,  that
    a  durable  relationship  existed.    Contrary   to   Mr   Ikegwuruka's
    submission, I find that the judge did weigh all  the  evidence  in  the
    round.  He was entitled to draw attention to the absence of photographs
    showing the appellant and his wife together or  with  friends  and  the
    absence of letters or statements from those who knew the appellant  and
    his wife, confirming that they have lived together, as claimed.

17.  Having considered  the  competing  submissions,  I  conclude  that  the
    judge's findings in relation to durable relationship were open to  him,
    in the light of the evidence.  I find that no error  of  law  has  been
    shown in this context.

18.  No submissions were made on  the  appellant's  behalf  with  regard  to
    Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention  and  Judge  Davey  noted  in
    November 2013 that no substantive challenge was  made  albeit  that  an
    issue was raised regarding the judge's assessment.  Paragraphs  11  and
    12 contain the judge's reasoning in this context.  He was  entitled,  I
    find, to conclude that family life was not shown, in the light  of  his
    adverse findings regarding durable relationship.   So  far  as  private
    life ties are concerned, there was little evidence  before  the  judge.
    The appellant's bundle included  several  certificates  issued  to  the
    appellant, including a degree certificate  dating  from  October  2009.
    The judge noted the absence of evidence regarding the appellant's entry
    into the United  Kingdom  and  his  status  since  then.   His  witness
    statement includes a very brief mention of a private  life  established
    with his community, in the last paragraph of the but  there  is  little
    else.  Taking into account the paucity of  evidence  regarding  private
    life ties, the judge was entitled to conclude that although  Article  8
    was engaged, the adverse decision was a proportionate response.  He did
    not err in law in concluding as he did.

19.  Although the submissions made  by  both  parties  were  concerned  with
    whether or not the judge erred in law in relation  to  Regulation  8(5)
    and the appellant's claim to  be  in  a  durable  relationship  with  a
    Portuguese national, and although  Judge  Davey's  determination  shows
    that he was concerned largely with Regulation 7 and the status  of  the
    customary marriage, he adjourned the appeal so that the decision  could
    be remade.  I have not been persuaded  that  there  is  any  reason  to
    disturb the judge's  assessment  of  the  durable  relationship  claim.
    Remaking the decision leads to a similar conclusion.  As noted  earlier
    in this determination, the evidence before the Upper  Tribunal  remains
    the appellant's bundle, as  it  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Weighing together the two witness statements and the  small  number  of
    documentary items recording the names of both  the  appellant  and  his
    wife at the premises in Barking, I conclude that a durable relationship
    has not been shown, on a balance of probabilities.   Overall,  what  is
    surprising is the lack of photographic or similar evidence showing  the
    appellant and his wife together and the absence of supporting evidence,
    capable of being properly tested, from friends who know them both.  The
    appellant was perfectly entitled, of course,  to  choose  to  have  his
    appeal determined without a hearing,  with  the  consequence  that  the
    claims made in the witness statements could not  be  tested  in  cross-
    examination, but, nonetheless, he can have been in no  doubt  that  his
    relationship was in issue.  Directions were sent to the parties by  the
    Upper Tribunal in August 2013, advising them to prepare  on  the  basis
    that if the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge were  set  aside,
    any further evidence, including supplementary oral evidence,  could  be
    considered  when  the  matter   came   before   the   Upper   Tribunal.
    Notwithstanding the centrality of the issue, the evidence  relied  upon
    by the appellant has remained confined to what was put before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

20.  The net result is the same, in any event.  The appellant has failed  to
    show, on a balance of probabilities, that he  falls  within  Regulation
    8(5) of the 2006 Regulations, as a person  in  a  durable  relationship
    with an EEA national.   There is no good reason to disturb the  judge's
    Article 8 assessment but remaking the decision in this context leads to
    a similar outcome.  No family life has been shown and there  is  almost
    no detailed evidence of the appellant's private life ties.  No case was
    advanced  on  his  behalf  that  he  meets  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules  in  this  context  (under  paragraph  276ADE).   The
    educational certificates and other parts of  the  documentary  evidence
    show that he has been present in the United Kingdom for some years  but
    there is, again, no detail shown in them regarding any particular  ties
    or associations.  It appears that the appellant has  spent  periods  of
    time here studying and he would have done so in the full knowledge that
    he had only limited leave.  There is nothing to show that he has ceased
    to have ties with his country of nationality.   Overall,  I  find  that
    Article  8  is  engaged  (the  threshold  of   engagement   being   not
    particularly high), that the decision to refuse to  issue  him  with  a
    residence card was in accordance with the law and that the decision was
    a proportionate response.

21.  In summary, the appellant has not succeeded in showing that he  was  or
    is entitled to a residence card under the 2006 Regulations.  His  claim
    to be a family member falling within Regulation 7 fails in the light of
    Kareem.  There is no good reason to disturb or set  aside  the  judge's
    findings  in  relation  to  Regulation  8(5),  regarding  the   durable
    relationship claimed with his Portuguese wife.  In any event,  remaking
    the decision leads to a conclusion that the evidence does  not  show  a
    durable relationship.   I  also  conclude  that  the  appellant  cannot
    succeed under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

DECISION

Appeal dismissed.

ANONYMITY

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

