
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: IA/13333/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On June 9, 2017                 |On June 13, 2017                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               MR MUDASSIR ALI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Brown, Counsel, instructed by Arshed & Co
Respondent  Mr McVeetie (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I do not make an anonymity order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

    2. The appellant claimed to  have  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  a
       student visa on September 24, 2010. On June 20, 2012 his  leave  was
       curtailed  and  on  September  24,  2013  he  was   encountered   by
       immigration officers attempting to marry a Polish national.  He  was
       arrested and a  marriage  interview  took  place.  No  charges  were
       brought and on October 25, 2013 the appellant married  and  he  then
       submitted an application for a residence card as the  spouse  of  an
       EEA national.


    3. The respondent refused that application arguing the marriage  was  a
       marriage of convenience. The appellant appealed that decision  under
       Regulation 26 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 and  section
       82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


    4. His appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Scobbie  on
       May 28, 2014 who considered the appeal on the papers. In a  decision
       promulgated on June 9,  2014  he  found  the  decision  was  not  in
       accordance with the law primarily because the respondent  failed  to
       provide the record  of  interview  from  September  24,  2013.   The
       respondent appealed that decision and former Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Bruce found there  was  an  error  in  law  and  remitted  the
       decision back to the First-tier Tribunal.


    5. The appeal was listed before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  White
       on March 25, 2015 and he adjourned the appeal and  gave  directions.
       The matter was then relisted before him on  September  2,  2015  and
       again the appeal had to be adjourned. A transfer  order  was  signed
       due to the Judge's illness and the appeal was listed  afresh  before
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Heynes  on  June  21,  2016.  In  a
       decision promulgated on August 16, 2016 he dismissed the appellant's
       appeal.


    6. Permission to appeal was originally refused by Judge of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Kimnell on December  8,  2016  but  following  renewed
       grounds of appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Grubbfound  it  arguable,  on
       February 20,. 2017, that there was an error in law on the basis that
       the minute of  the  interview  was  insufficient  to  discharge  the
       respondent's burden of proof.

    7. The matter came before me on the above date.


Submissions


    8. Mr Brown adopted his grounds of appeal and submitted that the  Judge
       erred in finding the respondent had satisfied the evidential  burden
       of proof  placed  on  them  in  Papjorgii  (EEA  spouse-marriage  of
       convenience) Greece UKUT 00038 (IAC). He pointed to  the  fact  that
       the respondent stopped the appellant marrying in September but  then
       took not steps to stop them marrying a month later.  At  a  previous
       appeal there was criticism of the respondent for failing to  provide
       the interview transcript and when the case came before  Judge  White
       he had adjourned the case for the transcript.  That  transcript  was
       not before  Judge  Heynes  and  as  the  minute  was  challenged  he
       submitted the respondent had not demonstrated  the  marriage  was  a
       marriage  of  convenience  and  therefore  Judge  Heynes  erred   by
       requiring the appellant to show the marriage was genuine. He invited
       me to remit the matter once again back to the First-tier Tribunal.


    9. Mr McVeetie adopted the Rule 24 response dated  March  8,  2017  and
       argued that the respondent only had to  show  on  balance  that  the
       marriage was one of convenience. The  Judge  had  concerns  about  a
       witness and had regard to the  events  surrounding  the  appellant's
       arrest in 2013 and was entitled to place weight on the  minute.  The
       interview record was not available but the Judge made  his  findings
       on the evidence presented to him. The respondent  was  not  able  to
       prevent a marriage taking  place  although  she  had  the  right  to
       intervene. He accepted the Judge's findings on the appellant and his
       wife's language skills may have been in error but was not  an  error
       in law because of the earlier finding. He agreed that if  there  was
       an error in law the case should be remitted back to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.


Findings


   10. Incredibly this is an appeal  that  dates  back  to  an  application
       originally submitted in November 2013. The  appellant's  appeal  has
       been before a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on  no  less  than  three
       occasions. The first decision was set aside, the second  appeal  was
       not concluded due to the illness of the Judge and the third  listing
       has been appealed. If I find an error in law then this  appeal  will
       appear before a fourth First-tier Judge.

   11. Missing at each of the previous hearings was  the  interview  record
       that took place in September 2013. It is this interview that led the
       respondent to conclude the marriage was a marriage of convenience.


   12. It is trite law following the decision of of Papajorgji that it  is
       for the respondent, as the maker of the allegation,  to  demonstrate
       on the balance of probabilities that the marriage is  a  marriage  a
       marriage of convenience. It is only if the  respondent  demonstrates
       this that the burden  of  showing  the  marriage  was  genuine  when
       entered into transfers to the appellant.


   13. The Judge recognised this principle at paragraph [7] of his decision
       and he also noted that the Court of Appeal stated  in  Rosa  v  SSHD
       [2016] EWCA Civ 14 that if the respondent adduced  evidence  capable
       of  pointing  to  the  conclusion  that  the  marriage  is  one   of
       convenience the evidential burden shifted to the  appellant  and  at
       paragraph [15] of his decision the Judge reminded  himself  of  this
       principle.


   14. The Judge then considered the evidence noting the respondent  relied
       on a case record sheet and he set out the content of that sheet. The
       marriage interview has not be produced and it is this fact  that  Mr
       Brown relies on to argue  that  the  Judge  erred.  He  submits  the
       Judge's approach in  paragraphs  [20]  to  [21]  was  defective  and
       amounts to an error in law.


   15. The  Judge  had  concluded  the  evidence  adduced  was  capable  of
       discharging the respondent's burden  of  proof.  He  considered  the
       report and summarised the officer's concerns as:



        a. The appellant and EEA national gave different  accounts  of  how
           they met.

        b. The appellant was  unable  to  spell  the  EEA  national's  name
           properly.

        c. The EEA national claimed to have a close relationship  with  the
           appellant's sister-in-law but was unable to give the name of the
           three-month old child.

        d.  The  appellant  pronounced  the  name  of   his   mother-in-law
           phonetically and not as he would have heard it spoken.

        e. The appellant mispronounced  the  name  of  the  EEA  national's
           brother.

        f. The interviewing officer was not satisfied the appellant's level
           of  English  would  be  sufficient  to  converse  with  the  EEA
           national.

        g. They gave different accounts of their post  wedding  plans  with
           the appellant stating they  intended  to  stay  a  few  days  in
           Glasgow and the EEA national stating they had to return home  to
           look after the dog.

        h. The EEA national could not remember the name of the  appellant's
           parents.

        i. The EEA  national  claimed  they  had  a  physical  relationship
           whereas the appellant stated they did not.

        j.  The  appellant  could  not  give  any  details  about  the  EEA
           national's friend despite the fact she lived in the same house.

        k.  Male called Javed Iqbal was present at  the  wedding.  The  EEA
           national did not know his name and neither she nor the appellant
           could give a credible explanation why he was present.


   16. Mr McVeetie accepted at  today's  hearing  that  the  Judge  wrongly
       placed weight on the comment that they may be unable to converse  in
       English especially as he had been here attending college  where  his
       lessons were in English. However, he submitted that this  error  was
       not material  because  the  Judge  had  ample  other  evidence  that
       demonstrated the respondent satisfied his burden of proof.


   17. One of Mr Brown's argument on the absence of the interview  is  that
       after the interview they were released  and  no  charges  were  ever
       brought and they were then not prevented from marrying. In  essence,
       he challenges the relevance of the interview and if  the  respondent
       had no basis upon which to challenge the marriage itself then  there
       was no burden for the appellant to meet.


   18. I have considered the  grounds  of  appeal  very  carefully  and  in
       particular paragraphs [7] to [12] of those grounds. Whilst Mr  Brown
       used the words "purportedly had taken  place"  when  describing  the
       interview, the grounds do not appear to take issue with anything  in
       that  minute  except  the  English  point.  The  statements  of  the
       appellant  and  witness  put  some  of  the  discrepancies  down  to
       pronunciation.


   19. I am  told  by  Mr  McVeetie  that  the  interview  is  not  on  the
       respondent's file and I  am  satisfied  that  if  it  has  not  been
       produced by now, despite being asked for by the Tribunal,  then  the
       chances are it will never will be. The  Judge  who  dealt  with  the
       appeal would have been aware there was no interview  record  and  he
       dealt with the case on the evidence before him.


   20. Mr Brown's submission appears to be that that unless  the  interview
       record is produced then the respondent could never meet the  burden.
       He asked that the  decision  be  set  aside  and  if  necessary  the
       immigration officer be summonsed to attend in  the  absence  of  the
       record.


   21.  Mr  McVeetie's  response  is  that  the  respondent  only  has   to
       demonstrate on the balance of probabilities that it was  a  marriage
       of convenience. That presumption  then  becomes  rebuttable  by  the
       appellant.


   22. The Judge erred with regard to his approach over the language spoken
       by the appellant and the EEA national but on its own this would  not
       be sufficient to negate the other evidence when considering  whether
       the respondent had demonstrated on the balance of probabilities that
       it was a marriage of convenience.


   23.  I  am  satisfied  the  evidence  adduced  was  sufficient  for  the
       respondent to satisfy his burden of proof. On the issue  of  whether
       the respondent satisfied the burden of proof I find no error.


   24. Mr Brown's argument is that the Tribunal should have seen the  whole
       interview because that may have shown the parties answered  most  of
       the questions correctly and this  could  alternatively  be  used  to
       rebut the burden placed on the appellant. That is a valid  point  to
       make and is something that the Judge dealing  with  the  appellant's
       appeal would have had to grapple with.


   25. It is the second ground of appeal that  causes  me  concern.  Having
       satisfied myself the Judge was  entitled  to  find  the  burden  had
       shifted  he  then  had  to  consider  whether  the   appellant   had
       demonstrated on the balance of  probabilities  that  it  was  not  a
       marriage of convenience. At paragraph [21] of his decision the Judge
       erroneously (accepted by Mr McVeetie) made  a  finding  about  their
       ability to speak to each other in a common language. Whilst this was
       not the only reason for rejecting  the  appellant's  submission  the
       Judge returned to this issue again in  paragraph  [26]  and  made  a
       negative finding. Mr McVeetie did not argue the Judge's approach was
       correct.


   26. I find myself drawn to the conclusion that it is on  the  assessment
       of whether the appellant satisfied the burden placed  on  him  there
       was an error in  law  because  this  finding  infected  the  Judge's
       assessment.


   27. Sadly, I find myself having to remit this matter back yet  again  to
       the First-tier Tribunal under Part 3, Section  7.1  to  7.3  of  the
       Practice Statement.  I  remit  it  because  oral  evidence  will  be
       required and full assessment is needed.


   28. As I am remitting the matter I do not preserve any of  the  findings
       and I do not seek to  impose  my  view  of  whether  the  respondent
       satisfied the burden of proof on any Judge re-hearing this appeal.


   29. Mr Brown wanted a witness summons for the author of the case record.
       Mr McVeetie indicated the person still works for the  respondent.  I
       am uncertain how much further the witness would take matters bearing
       in mind the interview was  in  September  2013  as  it  appears  the
       original interview record is missing.


   30. Mr McVeetie confirmed the individual continues to be employed by the
       respondent and it may assist the Tribunal if the respondent  obtains
       a witness statement from the individual concerned and serves  it  on
       both the Tribunal and the appellant's representatives.


   31. I make it clear the fact the notes are  missing  does  not  mean  no
       weight should be attached to  the  record  provided.  Ultimately  it
       would be a matter for the Judge hearing the appeal  to  decide  what
       weight to attach to the absent record having regard to  all  of  the
       available evidence.

   32. I direct that any additional evidence should be served on  both  the
       Tribunal and other party in accordance with the  current  Procedural
       Rules.


   33. If the appellant wishes the case worker who  prepared  the  note  to
       attend then an approach should be made to the respondent  and  if  a
       witness summon is needed the Tribunal  should  be  informed  in  the
       usual manner.

DECISION

   34. The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo
       hearing.

   35. If an interpreter is required then the appellant's solicitors should
       notify the Tribunal not less than seven  days  before  the  remitted
       hearing date.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
