
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13531/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th November 2016                 |On 23rd November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             ms viviene e ifeme
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss K Rahman (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Nigeria, who was born  on  29th
    July 1986.   She  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent  dated  21st  January  2014,  rejecting  her
    application for a variation of leave to remain  in  the  UK  under  Her
    Majesty's Armed Forces Concession outside the Rules.  The Appellant had
    also relied on  family  and/or  private  life  established  in  the  UK
    pursuant to Article 8.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull  at
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant had entered the  UK
    to study real  estate  management  at  postgraduate  level  for  twelve
    months.  She graduated in 2013.  She  has  a  brother  who  is  in  the
    British  Army.   In  February  2012,  accordingly,  she  attended   her
    brother's passing out parade, and this motivated her to join the  armed
    forces herself.  She then made an application to join the British  Army
    in August 2012.  There is a three stage  mandatory  assessment  process
    which the army carries out.  The Appellant participated  in  the  first
    two of these mandatory processes.  She participated in the "recruitment
    battery test" and she participated  in  the  "physical  pre-development
    test" and in both cases she attained the grade of Distinction.  She was
    unable to complete the third test because her visa was about to  expire
    and the army would not let her take the third test.

 4. A recruiter agent by the name of K T Woodhouse, was assigned to her  in
    the circumstances, and this agent wrote a letter  to  the  Home  Office
    asking them to extend her visa because her application with  the  armed
    forces was on the verge of being approved.  On 13th December 2012,  she
    made her application to the Home Office.  She did not hear anything for
    over twelve months.   She  persisted  in  contacting  the  Home  Office
    regularly.  In July 2013 the army wrote to her that new rules in policy
    had come into force.  Under the new rules, she had to have lived in the
    UK for at least five years in order to join the army.   The  Appellant,
    however, had applied to join the army before the  new  rules  had  come
    into force.  She expected a decision from the Home Office prior to  the
    change in the new rules.   However,  given  that  her  application  was
    pending for seven months before the new  rules  came  into  force,  the
    Appellant simply withdrew her application because of the delay  in  the
    Home Office in responding to her application.

 5. Before Judge Phull, there was evidence that the Appellant's brother was
    in the British Army and was based in Germany.  Her brother submitted  a
    letter of support for the Appellant's application.  He was Nigerian  by
    birth but joined the army in 2010 and now had  a  UK  residence  permit
    since 2011.  The judge also heard evidence  how  the  Home  Office  had
    taken a very long time to make a  decision,  after  the  Appellant  had
    passed her first two tests, and notwithstanding the appointment  of  an
    assigned recruiter by the name of K T Woodhouse, and  even  though  she
    had approached her MP who wrote a letter to the Home Office  about  the
    delay (paragraph 13).

 6. The Appellant's main argument before  the  Tribunal  was  that  if  the
    Appellant's application had  been  timeously  determined  by  the  Home
    Office then a different rule in policy would have applied  rather  than
    the latest one and her visa would have been extended and she would  now
    have been in the army (paragraph 14).

 7. The submissions by Counsel before the Tribunal were that the Respondent
    Secretary of State had  failed  to  apply  its  policy  fairly  to  the
    Appellant because she had applied for  an  extension  of  her  visa  in
    December 2012.  At the  time  of  this  application  the  Armed  Forces
    Exemption Policy, found at paragraph 3, chapter 15, section  1  of  the
    Immigration Directorate Instructions of April 2009, was in force.  This
    is the policy that should have been applied  to  the  Appellant.   From
    11th July 2013 the eligibility to enlist in the  armed  forces  changed
    requiring Commonwealth nationals to demonstrate  that  they  held  five
    years' residence in the UK at the time of their initial application  to
    enlist.  Secondly, and  even  though  the  policy  of  11th  July  2013
    required a five year residence period, there  were  exceptions  to  the
    requirement  of  five  year  residence.   Judge  Phull  noted  in   her
    determination that, "The Appellant has submitted a letter from the army
    dated well before 11th July 2013 to show that she did have confirmation
    of a training place for the third part of her test to  join  the  army"
    (paragraph 17).

 8. In her determination of the appeal, Judge Phull noted  that  the  rules
    here were not a complete code because they did not  fully  address  the
    private and family life issues arising in a case such  as  the  present
    (see paragraph 25).  She found the Appellant to be a  credible  witness
    giving her evidence in a candid and frank manner.  She held that  on  a
    balance of probabilities,  the  Appellant  completed  her  postgraduate
    studies in 2012 and she graduated in 2013.  She  had  established  ties
    with her educational institution, tutors and peers.  She  also  applied
    to join the British Army in August 2012 whilst she was still  studying.
    The judge observed that,

         "During the course of her application she attended tests  with  the
         army and liaised with the army recruiter.   I  find  she  satisfies
         that during her stay in the UK she  has  established  some  private
         life ties, such as to engage Article 8 of the ECHR" (paragraph 28).



    The judge then went on to  hold  that  the  failure  to  refer  to  the
    applicable policy in the decision letter meant that the decision  could
    not be in accordance with the law (paragraph 29).  The judge went on to
    consider the armed forces policies of 2009 and 2015.   Under  the  2009
    policy  the  Appellant  would  have  been  eligible  to  apply.    More
    importantly, however, under the Armed Forces Exemption from Immigration
    Control Policy, dated 27th November 2015, it was clear that there  were
    exceptions to the requirement of five  years'  residence,  and  one  of
    these was evidence from the Ministry of  Defence  dated  11th  July  of
    either "a written valid job offer; confirmation of her training  place;
    a confirmed date to attend an assessment centre; a  confirmed  date  to
    attend  a  psychometric  test   ..."   (see   paragraph   31   of   the
    determination).

 9. Given that it was not  in  dispute  that  the  Appellant  had  made  an
    application for leave to remain under  the  Respondent's  Armed  Forces
    Exemption Policy of April 2009, which was in  force  on  13th  December
    2012, the judge held that, not  only  did  the  Appellant  satisfy  the
    exemption policy in this  regard,  but  also  satisfied  the  exemption
    policy after the policy's amendment on 11th July 2013,

         "Because she had prior to 11th July 2013,  a  confirmation  of  her
         training place to attend  an  assessment  centre  and  had  already
         successfully sat and passed the British recruitment battery test, a
         pre-development  assessment  and  passed  an  interview  with  K  T
         Woodhouse the Army Recruiter for Commanding Officer.  A letter from
         K T Woodhouse of 26th November 2012  supports  the  fact  that  the
         Appellant had undertaken and passed the two tests (page 12  of  the
         Appellant's bundle)" (see paragraph 32 of the determination).

10. The judge ended with  the  observation  that  although  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State argued that the army had withdrawn  the  policy  the
    fact was that the Respondent did not make a decision on the Appellant's
    application until 21st January 2014, several months after the 11th July
    2013 policy came into force and that, "The refusal  however  failed  to
    consider the 2009 policy or the exemption grounds contained in the 2015
    policy, under which the Appellant's application also falls"  (paragraph
    35).

11. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

12. The grounds of application state that the Appellant would not have been
    entitled to leave to  remain  under  the  armed  forces  policy  and  a
    reliance upon Article 8 was misconceived because Article 8  was  not  a
    general  dispensing  part  and  there  is  nothing  special  about  the
    Appellant's case here.

13. On 26th August  2016,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted.   It  was,
    however, granted with the observation that,

         "It appears  that  the  Respondent  delayed  consideration  of  the
         Appellant's original application, made as  long  ago  as  2012,  by
         which time different Regulations applied and on the basis of  those
         different Regulations it was  said  the  Appellant  no  longer  met
         them".

    Nevertheless, the Respondent's claim was arguable that the  policy  did
    not apply until the Appellant had in fact enlisted and to  that  extent
    the decision by the Tribunal below was flawed.

The Hearing

14. At the hearing before me on 4th November 2016, Mr Mills,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent as a Senior Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
    made the following three submissions.  First, the applicable policy  at
    the time of the decision was the  2013  policy  requiring  five  years'
    residence.  This was not the Home Office's policy but the  Ministry  of
    Defence's.  When the policy changed on 11th July 2013 it  stood  to  be
    implemented.  Second, the Appellant did not have a job  offer  even  at
    the date of the application.  The letter from Sergeant  K  T  Woodhouse
    simply confirms that the Appellant's  application  is  currently  going
    through its normal process.  There  is  no  job  offer.   There  is  no
    confirmation of training taking place.   The  judge  wrongly  concluded
    that the decision was flawed because there had been a failure to  apply
    the 2009 or 2015 policy.  Third, the judge was also one  to  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8  because  when  people  come  to  the  UK  on  a
    temporary visit it is perfectly reasonable to expect them to  leave  at
    the end of that visitor and at paragraph 20 the judge does not  address
    this point.

15. Mr Mills asked me to make a finding of an error of law,  to  set  aside
    the decision, and to remit it back to the First-tier Tribunal.  He also
    stated that given that the Appellant  had  now  completed  five  years'
    lawful residence in this country, she could make an  application  again
    in any event.

16. For her part, Miss Rahman submitted that there was  no  error  of  law.
    This was for two reasons.  First that the Appellant succeeded under the
    Armed Forces  Exemption  from  Immigration  Control  Policy.   This  is
    because of a letter of 11th July which highlighted the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had undergone training and had attended an assessment centre.
     She had already successfully sat and passed  the  British  recruitment
    battery test, a pre-development assessment, and  passed  her  interview
    with K T Woodhouse,  who  was  the  army  recruiter  for  a  commanding
    officer.  This was expressly referred to by the judge a  paragraph  32.
    Second, as far as Article 8 was concerned, the judge had made a finding
    of fact that the Appellant had established  ties  with  an  educational
    institution, her tutors, and her peers, since 2011  over  a  period  of
    four years, and that her attendance at tests with the army and the army
    recruiter.  It was in this respect that the balance  of  considerations
    fell in favour of the Appellant in consideration of the proportionality
    question.

No Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  It is clear that the refusal  letter  makes  no  reference
    whatsoever to any of the applicable policies.  Mr Mills submitted  that
    there was no policy applicable  at  the  date  of  the  decision.   The
    website for the MOD does not show the 2009  policy.   Miss  Rahman  had
    submitted that, even if the policy could not be  found,  it  must  have
    been in effect, because there cannot be a void on the part of the  MOD,
    at a time when the recruitment process was under way, and  people  were
    applying to join the army, such that some policy  or  other  must  have
    been in effect.

18. What is important, is that the letter from Sergeant K  T  Woodhouse  of
    26th November 2012 does confirm that the Appellant  was  undergoing  an
    assessment process, and had completed two stages of that, but the third
    stage could not be completed because the Appellant's leave would expire
    in four months.  This is important because, as the  judge  pointed  out
    (at paragraph 31) the Armed Forces Exemption from  Immigration  Control
    Policy dated 27th November 2015 refers to an  exemption  as  one  where
    there is a valid job offer, confirmation of  a  training  place,  or  a
    confirmed date to attend an assessment centre, or a confirmed  date  to
    attend a psychometric test, and these requirements  were  fulfilled  by
    the Appellant if a reasonable and sensible approach  is  taken  to  the
    interpretation of the policy.

19. Moreover, it is not without significance that there was several  months
    delay in the making of the decision against the Appellant, during which
    time the applicable policy changed, although the relevant policy at the
    time of the application would have been the 2009 policy.   Paragraph  3
    of the 2009 policy states that, "A person admitted in another  capacity
    (e.g. visitor, student) who wishes to join HM Forces should be  advised
    to contact them directly - enlistment is  entirely  a  matter  for  the
    armed force concerned".

20. Miss Rahman drew my attention to this provision at paragraph 37 of  her
    skeleton argument.  In this respect, had there been a timeous decision,
    and the Appellant's visa been extended by an early decision, enlistment
    would have continued because the  armed  forces  were  already  in  the
    process of doing so, having seen the Appellant go  through  two  tests,
    where she emerged with a  Distinction,  and  where  she  only  had  one
    remaining test to undergo.

21. As far as Article 8 is concerned, the judge considered  the  Article  8
    rights of the Appellant in the context of the fact that  the  Appellant
    had been in the UK for four years and "has  established  ties  with  an
    educational institution, tutors and peers",  such  that  "she  attended
    tests with the army and liaised with  the  army  recruiter"  (paragraph
    28), and this was a matter that the judge did consider in  the  context
    of  paragraph  117A-C  of  the  2002  Act,  where  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control is set down as being in the public  interest.   The
    judge observed of the Appellant that, "She made an in time  application
    and her leave therefore continues under Section 3C and I find that  her
    private life ties have been established while she has had lawful  leave
    in the UK" (paragraph 34).  The judge was  entitled  to  come  to  this
    conclusion.

Notice of Decision

22. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

23. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd November 2016

