

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/13461/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 1st June 2016                          | On 6th June 2016                |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                              MD ZAKIR HOSSAIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Appeared in person, not represented.
For the Respondent:     Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant, who is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  has  been  granted
      permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Quinn who, following a hearing on 5 October 2015, dismissed his appeal
      against a decision of the respondent, made on 16 March 2015 to  refuse
      to vary his leave by way of a further grant of  leave  as  a  student.
      That application was  refused  under  paragraph  245ZX(h)  of  HC  395
      because, if the leave sought had been  granted,  the  appellant  would
      have spent more than 3 years studying on courses below  degree  level.
      The judge dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds  also,  finding
      that the claim advanced under article 8 of the ECHR was not made out.


   2. The essential facts are not in dispute. The history of  leave  granted
      and studies undertaken by the appellant is as follows:


        a. London Trinity College - CAT, NQF  Level  4  from  29/9/2010  to
           28/2/2012 ;
        b. Seven Oaks College - Diploma in Business Studies from  16/7/2012
           to 15/11/2013;
        c. London Regal College - NQF Level 5 Business  and  Administrative
           Management from 15/7/2013 to 31/5/2014.

      The application with which we are  now  concerned  was  for  leave  to
      remain in order to undertake a course at Level 5 (Diploma in  Business
      management) which, again, is a course below degree level. As a  matter
      of arithmetic, completion of that course would  have  had  the  result
      that the appellant would have been studying at below degree level  for
      more than three years.

   3. Paragraph 245ZX provides, so far as is relevant to this appeal:


           245ZX. Requirements for leave to remain


           To qualify for leave to remain as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
           under this rule, an applicant must meet the requirements  listed
           below. If the  applicant  meets  these  requirements,  leave  to
           remain will be granted. If the applicant  does  not  meet  these
           requirements, the applicant will be refused.


           Requirements:
           ...
           (h) If the course is below degree level the grant  of  leave  to
           remain the applicant is seeking must not lead to  the  applicant
           having spent more than 3 years in the UK as  a  Tier  4  Migrant
           since the age of 18 studying courses that  did  not  consist  of
           degree level study.
           ...
      It is plain beyond doubt, indeed, it is not in dispute,  that  on  the
      basis of the leave previously granted, the appellant cannot meet  that
      requirement of the applicable rule.


   4. The grounds upon which the appellant sought and was granted permission
      to appeal were that as each of his three previous attempts to complete
      courses were thwarted by the decision of the respondent to revoke  the
      sponsor licence of the colleges at which, successively, he was seeking
      to study, principles  of  common  law  fairness  demanded  that  those
      periods of leave should not be taken into account for the purposes  of
      245ZX(h). This is  because,  had  the  respondent  not  revoked  those
      sponsor licences, the appellant would have been able to  complete  his
      courses.


   5. In  advancing  his  case  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  the  appellant
      explained that his ambition was to study at a  British  university  to
      obtain a degree that would equip him on return to Bangladesh to embark
      upon what was likely to be a promising career, equipped  with  a  much
      respected UK degree. He has, of course, invested a  very  considerable
      sum of money, as well as some important years  of  his  life.  If  not
      granted further leave to  realise  his  academic  ambitions,  he  will
      return to Bangladesh  empty  handed,  despite  that  very  significant
      investment in terms of time and resources.

   6. Having heard from the appellant I have no hesitation in accepting that
      his experience has been as he has described. For the avoidance of  any
      possible doubt, there is no suggestion that he contributed in any  way
      to the circumstances that gave rise to  the  decision  to  revoke  the
      sponsor licences of the three colleges at which he attempted to secure
      the qualifications he needed to seek admission to a university and the
      basis upon which to apply for leave to study at graduate level. It has
      to be recognised though that it was his choice of  colleges,  informed
      by financial considerations, that has put him in the position in which
      he now finds himself.


   7. In granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Zucker
      said:


                 "It is arguable that whilst the judge recognised  that  the
                 issue of fairness was raised he did not  adequately  engage
                 with it nor make adequate findings [see paragraphs  25  and
                 26]"


      At paragraphs 25 and 26 of his decision the judge said this:


           "The Respondent had acted in accordance with the Rules  and  the
           Rules stated quite clearly "if the applicant does not meet these
           requirements, the applicant will be refused.


           I did not think that the Respondent's decision was irrational or
           unfair in the circumstances."


   8. It is, with respect, not altogether easy to see what further  findings
      should be demanded of the judge. The requirements of  the  rule  could
      not be more clear. It is  the  policy  of  the  respondent,  expressed
      through this immigration rule, that  those  seeking  to  acquire  sub-
      degree level qualifications should be allowed no more than 3 years  to
      do so. A person who does not manage to achieve that is on notice  that
      further applications for leave are to be refused. Although the context
      was  somewhat  different,  it  is  illuminating  to  have  regard   to
      observations made by Sharpe LJ recently in SSHD v  KG  (India)  [2016]
      EWCA Civ 477 in finding that the judge who had allowed  an  appeal  in
      that case, even though the strict requirements of  the  rule  had  not
      been met, although by a very small margin:


           "...was to ignore the plain and ordinary  meaning  of  the  rule
           which the respondent was required to comply with. More generally
           however, this  failed  to  have  regard  to  the  importance  of
           certainty and consistency which underpins the effective and fair
           operation of the Points Based Scheme as  between  one  applicant
           and another; and the requirement, of which those attributes  are
           an important part, that the Scheme must be workable....."


      Of course, the application made by  this  appellant  was  not  refused
      because he failed to secure the requisite number of points demanded by
      the rule but the point in play is analogous. Sharpe LJ continued:


           "As Lord Bingham of Cornhill said, when giving  the  opinion  of
           the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords  in  Huang  [2007]
           UKHL 11 [2007] 2  AC  167  at  paras  6  and  16,  rules  to  be
           administratively  workable  require  that  the  line  be   drawn
           somewhere; he pointed to the general administrative desirability
           of applying known rules if a system of immigration control is to
           be workable, predictable, consistent and  fair  as  between  one
           applicant  and  another,  and  also  to  the  damage   to   good
           administration and effective control of a system is perceived by
           applicants internationally to be unduly porous, unpredictable or
           perfunctory."


   9. That is precisely the position with this appeal. The appellant, as  we
      have seen, arrived in the United Kingdom on  13  November  2010,  well
      over 4 years ago as at the date of the  decision,  to  pursue  studies
      that he, and  all  other  prospective  students,  were  told  must  be
      completed within 3 years. While it  is  impossible  not  to  entertain
      considerable sympathy for  the  appellant,  for  the  reasons  I  have
      already given, there was no unfairness suffered such as to impugn  the
      decision to refuse yet further leave to remain, and  the  decision  of
      the judge to  dismiss  the  appeal  against  that  refusal  is  simply
      unassailable.


  10. In granting permission, First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker detected  the
      possibility of an arguable challenge that had not been raised  in  the
      grounds, that being that the appellant had not been offered "a 60  day
      letter". That, it must be assumed, is a reference to the policy of the
      respondent that applies in circumstances where a  pending  application
      for further leave falls to be refused because the college at which the
      applicant seeks leave to study has its sponsor licence  revoked  after
      the application for  leave  has  been  submitted  but  before  it  was
      decided. The applicant in those  circumstances  is  provided  with  an
      opportunity to find an alternative college and, if he or she  by  that
      time has no leave remaining, is offered a further 60 days in which  to
      do so. But that is concerned with an entirely  different  question  of
      fairness and does not erode  in  any  way  the  applicability  of  the
      mandatory requirement of 245ZX(h) that, regardless of  anything  else,
      leave is not to be granted if the result would be that  the  applicant
      had spent more than 3 years in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 Migrant.
      The grant of leave would achieve precisely the opposite  of  what  was
      intended by the rule.


  11. The First-tier Tribunal judge dismissed the appeal also on  article  8
      grounds. The  grounds  for  seeking  permission  to  appeal  raise  no
      specific challenge to that and nor could they as any such  ground  was
      unarguable and bound to fail.


  12. For these reasons the appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  must  fail.  The
      First-tier Tribunal judge made no error of law and there is  no  basis
      at all upon which to disturb his decision.

   Summary of decision:

  13. First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn made no error of law and his  decision
      to dismiss the appellant's appeal is to stand.


  14. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


   Signed                         Date:       2 June 2016
   [pic]
   Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
