
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13946/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 1 July 2015                      |On: 13 July 2015                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mr Ayodeji Hameed Aweda Lawal
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson, counsel (instructed by Perera and
                    Co Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department and to the respondent as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria, born on 27 June 1979. He entered
    the UK illegally in  1999.  His  partner,  Mrs  Temipope  Enioa  Alabi,
    entered the  UK  as  a  visitor  in  2004.  The  claimant  commenced  a
    relationship with her.

 3. She gave birth to their children, Mosunmola, on 1 March 2006 and Ola on
    31 July 2008.

 4. The claimant then married a Portuguese national  on  15  May  2009.  In
    September 2010 the Secretary of State refused  his  application  for  a
    residence card as the family member of that  national.  His  subsequent
    appeal in October 2010 was heard and dismissed on 14 January  2011.  He
    became appeal rights exhausted on 26 January 2011.

 5. The claimant thereafter reunited with Ms Alabi, his ex partner.

 6. On 2 December 2011 he made a human rights application with  his  family
    as his dependants.

 7. Subsequently, his partner gave birth to Fawas on 6 July 2012.

 8. On 15 August 2012, the Secretary of  State  refused  his  human  rights
    application with no right of appeal.

 9. In March 2013 his solicitors lodged an application  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant and his family  pursuant  to  paragraph  276ADE  and  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM of the immigration rules as well as under Article 8 of  the
    Human Rights Convention.

10. On 24 April 2013, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  second  human
    rights application with no right of appeal. That was followed by a pre-
    action protocol  letter  on  behalf  of  the  family,  with  particular
    reference to Mosunmola who was born in the UK and was 7  years  old  at
    the date of application in 2013.

11. After further information was requested and supplied,  his  application
    was refused on 12 March  2014.  The  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    application under paragraph 276ADE (vi) and EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  and
    refused the children under paragraph 276ADE (iv).  Regard  was  had  to
    s.55 of the UK Borders Act 2007 as well as Article 8.

12. The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Easterman on 9 October
    2014. He adjourned the matter, being concerned that  the  claimant  had
    been issued an in country right of appeal whilst the remainder  of  the
    family were issued an out of country right of appeal, even  though  the
    March 2013 application was made on behalf of all  five  family  members
    who were the subject of the decisions.

13. Following the pre-action protocol letter requesting an in country right
    of appeal for all, in the event that the  reconsidered  decision  again
    refused their application, only the claimant  was  issued  with  an  in
    country right of appeal [11].

14. Mr Easterman directed that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  consider
    whether there has been an error in the current position and whether all
    should have had an in country right of appeal  "which  they  appear  to
    have  accepted  is  the  correct  course  in  relation  to  the   first
    appellant..." [11].

15. In her reply dated 6 January 2015, the Secretary of State noted that it
    was only the claimant who made a human rights application and his  wife
    and children are named  as  his  dependants.  They  have  not  made  an
    application for human rights in their own right, but as the  dependants
    of the lead applicant. They are liable for  administrative  removal  on
    that basis. As they had not submitted an application in their own right
    as individuals, they are not entitled to their own in country right  of
    appeal but are considered to be  dependants  in  the  claimant's  case.
    Accordingly, it was considered that the Secretary of State  had  served
    the correct notices on all family members [12].

16. At the hearing before the First tier Tribunal, it  was  submitted  that
    all the family members were entitled to an in country right  of  appeal
    in accordance with s.92(4) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 in compliance with s.113(1) of that Act. They had made a claim
    to the respondent that to remove them would be unlawful. They had  made
    claims on a number of occasions supported  by  written  representations
    from their solicitors.  The  representations  listed  all  five  family
    members. All of them should therefore have been  given  an  in  country
    right of appeal. That particularly affected Mosunmola where the case is
    at its strongest as she would have no right of appeal until she  leaves
    the UK. The family's appeal should be dealt with together, as a  whole,
    failing which this would not be in accordance with the law. There would
    be 's.55 related issues' [13].

17. The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that it was  not  possible
    to determine the case of all five when only one claimant was before the
    Tribunal. If the Judge were to  find  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law, that would force the respondent to  act  [14].
    No submission was made to that effect however. Nor has there  been  any
    attempt to bring judicial review proceedings against the refusal by the
    Secretary of State to grant the remaining family members an in  country
    right of appeal.

18. Judge Veloso decided to proceed on the basis that there was a valid  in
    country appeal before her in respect of the five  relatives  [15].  She
    records that the Home Office Presenting Officer acknowledged  that  the
    Secretary of State's statement of 6 January  2015  was  wrong  in  law,
    having earlier submitted that it was impossible to determine  the  case
    of all five.

19. Judge Veloso was satisfied that the written representations of 6  March
    2013 from the solicitors made it clear that  all  five  family  members
    were making an Article 8 claim which was again made clear in  the  pre-
    action protocol letter dated 24 May 2013. The application  form  listed
    the  claimant  before  her  as  the  main  applicant  as   its   format
    specifically requires.

20. She was thus satisfied that she  had  jurisdiction  to  hear  all  five
    appeals in accordance with s.92(4) of the 2002 Act. In any  event,  she
    stated that even if wrong,  she  would  have  to  have  regard  to  the
    decision by the House of Lords of Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39, where she
    is required to deal with all four relatives "as part  of  this  appeal"
    [15].

21. The Home Office Presenting Officer before Judge Veloso stated that  she
    relied on the reasons for refusal letter. In  previous  determinations,
    the Judge found that the claimant had entered into a sham marriage with
    an EEA national, which showed a blatant disregard for  the  immigration
    rules and that  should  be  the  starting  point  with  regard  to  his
    credibility [18].

22. It was conceded that Mosunmola had been in the UK for over seven years.
    However, it was not conceded that it would not be reasonable to  expect
    her to leave the UK. She had not been in the UK for  seven  years  from
    the age of four, which was stated to be a  significant  period  in  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision in Azimi (Moayed) [2013] UKUT 197. She relied
    on MK (India) [2011] UKUT 475 where the child in that case was  removed
    despite the fact that she was 12 years old, having been in the  UK  for
    seven years.

23. Submissions were also made with regard to Article 8. The  whole  family
    had Nigerian nationality. The claimant and his partner  had  family  in
    Nigeria. None of the children was a British citizen with the  right  to
    remain. It was reasonable for them to follow their parents and  it  was
    in their best interests to remain with them. With regard to s.117B, the
    claimant's partner had been on Child Benefit since 2014 and the  family
    had established a family life in the UK when their stay in this country
    "was illegal" [19].

24. Before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, Mr Richardson, who also  appeared
    on their behalf before the Upper Tribunal, submitted that the issue  of
    the "reasonableness" of expecting Mosunmola to  leave  the  UK  was  in
    issue.  With  regards  to  Article  8,  outside  the  rules,  this  was
    ultimately the same test "via s.117B(6)." She is a qualifying child and
    her parents have a relationship with her. It is unreasonable to  expect
    her to leave the UK and it is  not  in  the  public  interest  for  her
    parents to return.

25. The starting point, he submitted, is to look at Mosunmola  "which  fits
    with s.55" of the 2007 Act. Mosunmola had been in the UK for over seven
    years. She  had  been  in  school  for  six  years.  She  has  received
    educational and health support. It is advantageous for her to remain in
    the UK, particularly with regard to her hearing problem. The claimant's
    immigration history, although not good, fell short of  criminality  and
    could not be visited on the children.

26. The Judge directed herself on the basis that "the  appeals  before  me"
    [22] were presented under paragraph 276ADE for Mosunmola,  outside  the
    immigration rules for the claimant,  his  partner  and  the  two  other
    children.

27. She stated that in considering Article 8, she must follow the two stage
    approach referred to in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 [24].

28. If the claimant and his family do not succeed under the rules, she must
    first consider whether their case  should  be  considered  outside  the
    rules. If there are grounds warranting  such  consideration,  she  must
    then have regard to the five steps set out in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27,
    and have regard to Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, namely s.117A to D [24].

29. Judge Veloso found that Mosunmola succeeded under the  rules  and  that
    the claimant, his  partner  and  the  other  children  succeeded  under
    Article 8 [29].

30. Mosunmola was born in the UK on 1 March 2006 and has been present  here
    for close to nine years at the date of hearing. It was over seven years
    at the date of application. In addition,  the  two  children,  Ola  and
    Fawas had been present for over six and a half and two and  half  years
    respectively as at the date of hearing.

31. She found that it was accepted by the Secretary of State that Mosunmola
    comes within  paragraph  276ADE  (1)  (iv).  She  then  considered  the
    reasonableness of expecting her to leave the UK.  In  that  regard  she
    noted that Mosunmola was not a British citizen and did not have a right
    to  education  here.  The  English  language  is  used  in  educational
    institutions in Nigeria and state education is  free.  She  found  that
    Mosunmola would not have linguistic problems if she left the UK to live
    in Nigeria.

32. On the other hand, Mosunmola was now  nine  years  old.  She  had  been
    living in the UK for over seven years at the date of  application.  She
    had never been to Nigeria and had  never  experienced  its  educational
    system. She had done her entire schooling in the UK. She has done  well
    here. She has made many  friends  and  many  have  written  letters  of
    support.

33. The Judge found from the letters of support that  she  had  established
    strong bonds with the UK and that  her  removal  would  cause  a  major
    upheaval in her life and impact on her academically and socially [33].

34. The Judge had regard to the claimant's sham marriage,  but  noted  that
    this should not  be  held  against  Mosunmola,  having  regard  to  the
    "seventh principle" enunciated in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74.

35. Judge Veloso found on the balance of  probabilities  after  considering
    all the evidence in the round, that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect Mosunmola  to  leave  the  UK.  She  therefore  succeeded  under
    paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) of the rules [35].

36. It was conceded that neither the claimant, his partner  nor  the  other
    children satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  and  no  other
    paragraph had been referred to or relied on [36].

37. The Judge then found that there  were  sufficient  grounds  to  warrant
    consideration of Article 8 outside the immigration rules on account  of
    the particular circumstances  of  this  case.  The  very  fact  of  the
    claimant and his partner being the parents of Mosunmola  has  not  been
    considered within the immigration rules which impose a  requirement  of
    "sole responsibility".

38. She applied the Razgar steps and found that the claimant,  his  partner
    and Mosunmola had established private life  during  their  almost  nine
    years and over six and a half years living here. This was through their
    work, school, interaction within the local community and friends. Fawas
    to a much lesser extent in the light of his vey  young  age  [38].  The
    family has lived as a family unit.

39. She considered the public  interest  element  and  proportionality  and
    applying s.117A and s117B, she had regard to the  length  of  time  the
    family had been living here although  without  leave,  apart  from  the
    initial six months or so in respect  of  the  claimant's  partner.  The
    entire family speak English and have integrated  into  their  community
    over the years.

40. She had regard to s.55 of the 2007 Act and the welfare of the  children
    as a primary consideration. She referred to EV  (Philippines)  at  [34]
    and [35]. Whilst there is free education  in  Nigeria  in  the  English
    language, she found that Ola had never been  to  Nigeria  and  had  not
    experienced the education system there. He has  been  in  this  country
    some months short of seven years; he had set down some roots  including
    outside of his immediate family circle. Fawas is not of an age to  have
    yet established a life of any independence from his parents.

41. Mosunmola fell within the rules, which in Article 8  terms  amounts  to
    close to nine years and that in the  circumstances,  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect her to leave the UK.  She  found  that  all  three
    children's best interests is to remain with their parents [41].

42. She had regard to the fact  that  the  claimant  and  his  partner  had
    established private  life  at  a  time  when  they  knew  they  had  no
    immigration status. They also took up  employment  without  permission.
    This however rendered them financially independent.

43. She had regard  to  the  reliance  on  Child  Benefit  from  2014.  The
    employment here provided them with skills that they could take back  to
    Nigeria to assist them in finding employment and in their being able to
    accommodate their family [42]. They also  have  family  in  Nigeria  to
    support them. The key element in  the  balance  with  regard  to  their
    particular case, however, is s.117B(6) to the effect that as  claimants
    are not liable to deportation, the public  interest  does  not  require
    their removal as there  is  no  issue  regarding  the  genuineness  and
    subsistence of their parental relationship with Mosunmola.

44.  She  found  that  the  whole  family  returning   to   Nigeria   would
    disproportionately affect Mosunmola's private life having regard to the
    letters of support and correspondence from the  school  (regardless  of
    the fact that she complies with the immigration rules).

45. Removing the family without her  would  disproportionately  affect  her
    family life with her parents, on whom she remains dependent, and  would
    affect her family life with her siblings. She also gave some weight  to
    the medical evidence in this case which  referred  to  high  levels  of
    depression and anxiety in both the claimant and  his  partner,  "around
    the immigration status." [42]

46. Accordingly she found that the claimant and his partner's removal would
    be disproportionate as would Ola and  Fawas's  removal,  as  they  were
    entirely dependent on their parents.

47. On 1 June 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan granted the  Secretary
    of State permission to  appeal.  He  noted  that  it  seemed  from  the
    decision as a whole that the only appeal before the Judge was  the  one
    in respect of the claimant, Mr Lawal. His family members  were  treated
    by the Secretary of State as dependants  in  that  appeal  and  not  as
    having separate rights of appeal.

48. He found that it is clear from the determination that  the  Judge  made
    findings in respect of the claimant's dependants on the basis that they
    had a right of appeal. However, no  separate  decisions  were  made  in
    respect of the claimant's family members. Accordingly, the only  person
    to have had a right of appeal in the UK was Mr Lawal. In the event, the
    Judge might have  erred  by  creating  a  jurisdiction  by  giving  the
    claimant's  family  members  a  right  of  appeal  when  there  was  no
    immigration decision in respect of any of them.

49. He allowed all grounds to be argued.

50. Mr Avery relied on the Secretary's  permission  grounds.  He  submitted
    that judicial review should in the circumstances have  taken  place  as
    apart from Mr Lawal, the remaining family members only had a  right  to
    appeal once they left the UK.

51. The Judge should have acceded to Ms Lush's submission that if she  were
    to find that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law,  this
    "would force the respondent to act." However, it was not a  route  that
    was taken. The Secretary of State had indicated that the  other  family
    members were dependants on Mr Lawal's case.

52. The Judge was not entitled to allow the appeal of Mosunmola  under  the
    Immigration Rules on an in country basis.  Accordingly,  the  issue  of
    jurisdiction is important and has affected the  outcome  of  the  whole
    appeal. The Judge focused on a person who was not an  appellant  before
    her, wrongly allowing her appeal under the rules. Then she "hanged  the
    remaining claims" under Article 8 on that decision. This could  not  be
    done if there was no right of appeal in the first place.

53. He submitted that Mosumola's interests had  to  be  considered  in  the
    context of her father's appeal.

54. He further  submitted  that  the  Judge,  having  considered  the  best
    interests of the children, should have gone on to consider the issue of
    reasonableness  in  the  context  of  the  status   of   the   parents,
    consistently with EV (Philippines), supra. Although EV was referred to,
    it was not properly given effect to or taken into account.

55. He also submitted that the analysis in relation to  s.117B  was  flawed
    and that the Judge failed to consider the best interests of  the  child
    and the issue of reasonableness having regard to s.117B(6). In allowing
    the appeal under Article 8, the Judge  failed  to  set  out  Article  8
    considerations within the context of the Immigration Rules and to  give
    the appropriate weight. The  assessment  was  one  sided  and  did  not
    mention the parents' conduct in consideration of Article 8.

56. With regard to s.117B(vi), he submitted that the Judge had not  engaged
    with  other  parts  of  s.117  or  properly  looked  at  the  issue  of
    reasonableness. There was a deficiency regarding  the  public  interest
    considerations.

57. Finally, he submitted that the  finding  [35]  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect  Mosunmola  to  leave  the  UK  having  regard  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the rules  was  unsupported  by  any  proper
    reasoning.

58. He submitted that the Secretary of State's appeal should be allowed and
    that the decision should be  re-made  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    because a root and branch approach was required in its re-making.

59. Mr Richardson on behalf  of  the  claimant  referred  to  his  Rule  24
    response. In his oral submissions, he accepted that Mosunmola  did  not
    have a right of appeal in the UK. There should have been a finding that
    their removal decisions breached the rights of all of them and on  that
    basis should have allowed only the claimant's appeal. Nevertheless,  he
    submitted that the Judge's approach did not result in a material error,
    having regard to the ultimate findings, because the Secretary of  State
    "invited" the Judge to consider the family members as dependants in the
    case and did  so  in  writing  as  set  out  at  paragraph  12  of  the
    determination. That meant that the outcome of their appeals depended on
    the outcome of the claimant's appeal.

60. Accordingly their human rights had to be assessed at the same  time  as
    the claimant's, otherwise the Secretary of State's acceptance that they
    were to be considered as his dependants would be meaningless.

61. Moreover, the Judge correctly held that she had to look  at  the  human
    rights considerations with regard to all the family members. The  Judge
    therefore correctly found that the claimant's solicitors  had  made  it
    clear that all five family members were making an Article 8 claim [15].

62. The removals affected the human rights of all five family  members  and
    it was upon that basis that the appeal of the claimant was allowed.

63. He submitted that if the Secretary  of  State's  proposition  that  the
    family members should  be  treated  as  dependants  on  the  claimant's
    appeal, the challenge to the Judge's decision "is  at  best  academic."
    (paragraph 8 of the rule 24 response).

64. The Judge had to have regard to the human rights of all family members,
    as recognised in Beoku-Betts, supra.

65. The Judge was accordingly correct to  assess  the  human  rights  of  a
    family as a whole whether or not the dependants themselves had a  valid
    right of appeal in country. That was because  the  decisions  had  been
    made on the same date to remove the whole family.

66. Insofar as the contention that the Judge failed properly to assess  the
    reasonableness of the  children  leaving  the  UK,  and  in  particular
    failing to have regard to the immigration history of the parents in any
    such assessment, the Tribunal had regard in paragraphs 32, 34 and 40 to
    factors militating against the claimant and his  family.  She  assessed
    the issue of reasonableness in the context of the  immigration  history
    of the parents.

67. Given the findings on reasonableness of  relocation  for  Mosunmola,  a
    qualifying child, under s.117B(6) there  was  no  need  to  assess  the
    proportionality in the parents' cases as  it  was  not  in  the  public
    interest to remove them.

68. The Judge at paragraph 37 properly found  that  there  were  sufficient
    grounds warranting consideration of Article 8 outside the rules.

69. In reply, Mr Avery submitted that with regard to s.117B, the Judge  was
    compelled  to  attach  little  weight  to  private   life   formed   in
    circumstances of this case.

70. Moreover, the Judge should have considered the best  interests  of  the
    children in the context of the status of their parents.  This  was  not
    done.

    Assessment

71. It was not in dispute before the First-tier Tribunal that it  was  only
    the claimant who had an in country right of  appeal.  It  was  accepted
    that none of the other family members had such  a  right,  having  been
    served with administrative removal notices entitling them  to  have  an
    out of country appeal only. The rest of the family  had  not  made  any
    application for human rights in their own right.

72. Accordingly, there was only one appellant who had a  valid  in  country
    appeal before the Judge, namely the claimant.

73. The respondent  had  noted  that  the  other  family  members  had  not
    submitted any applications in their own right as individuals  and  were
    accordingly not entitled to an in country right of appeal.

74. The Secretary of State accepted however that they were to be considered
    as dependants on the claimant's case.

75. No attempt had been made to  judicially  review  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 6 January 2015 set out in her response to  the
    direction of First-tier Tribunal Judge Easterman.

76. I find that the decision of Judge Veloso to proceed with the hearing on
    the basis that all five relatives had a valid in country appeal  before
    her was incorrect. That was not cured by  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer's acknowledgement  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  statement
    contained in the response dated 6 January 2015 was  wrong  in  law.  No
    attempt had been made to set aside that supposedly unlawful decision.

77. In the event, as submitted by Mr Richardson, the Judge did  acknowledge
    that if she were wrong about that she would proceed and deal  with  all
    five relatives, having regard to the decision of Beoku-Betts.

78. Mosunmola was not an appellant in her own right as there  had  been  no
    separate immigration decision relating to her, and the  fact  that  she
    had not appealed against that decision meant she was  not  entitled  to
    succeed under the immigration rules as an appellant.

79. Submissions had also  been  made  to  the  Judge  by  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer with regard to the Court of Appeal decision  in  EV,
    supra. It had been contended [19] that it would be reasonable for  them
    to follow their parents and it was in their best  interests  to  remain
    with them.

80. The Judge also had regard to Mr Richardson's submissions under s.55  of
    the 2007 Act. Their best interests would not be served by her  removal.
    Masunmola had been in the UK for over seven years; had been  to  school
    for six years; the UK is the only country she knows; this is where  she
    is getting educational and health support. It was thus advantageous for
    her to remain here particularly with regard to her hearing problem.

81. It was also submitted that removal was unreasonable, not only for  her,
    but it was not in the public interest for  the  parents  and  was  also
    unreasonable for the other two children [20].

82. In considering the issue of reasonableness of her departure  the  Judge
    took account of the fact that she was not a British citizen and did not
    have a right of education here. She also noted that English is used  in
    educational institutions in Nigeria and that such education is free.

83. On the other hand she was born here and had lived here for  over  seven
    years. She had never been  to  Nigeria  and  had  not  experienced  its
    educational system. She is doing well here and has  made  friends.  The
    Judge had regard to the strong letters of support and the bonds she had
    formed here. She concluded that the removal would cause major  upheaval
    in her life and impact on her academically and socially.

84. On that basis, the Judge concluded that it would not be  reasonable  to
    expect her to leave the UK having regard to  the  provisions  of  s.276
    ADE(1)(iv) of the rules. In considering s.55 of the 2007 Act and noting
    that the welfare of the children is a primary consideration, the  Judge
    had regard to EV and noted with regard to Ola that she was born in  the
    UK and had never been to Nigeria. She  had  not  experienced  education
    there. She had set down some  roots  including  those  outside  of  the
    immediate family circle. She found that Fawas was not of an age to have
    established a life of independence from his parents.

85. Again, having regard to the considerations under s.55, the Judge  found
    that with regard to Mosunmola, it would not be reasonable to expect her
    to leave the UK. She found that all  three  children's  best  interests
    were to remain with their parents [41].

86. When dealing with s.117B(vi) of the 2002 Act,  the  Judge  did  not  in
    terms have regard  to  s.117B(vi)(b),  namely  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

87. I have had regard to the approach required to be undertaken as set  out
    in EV and in particular to paragraph 35 and 37, as well as the comments
    of Lord Justice Lewison at paragraph 49, where he stated  that  in  the
    real world, the appellant is almost always the parent who has no  right
    to remain in the UK. The parent thus relies on the  best  interests  of
    his or her children in order  to  "piggyback"  on  their  rights.  Lord
    Justice Lewison  noted that in the case before the court of appeal,  as
    no doubt in many others, the Judge made two findings about  their  best
    interests:

      a) The best interests of the children are  obviously  to  remain  with
         their parents; and

      b) It is in their best interests that education in the UK is not to be
         disrupted.

88. At paragraph 58, Lord Justice Lewison stated that the assessment of the
    best interests of the children must be made on the basis that the facts
    are as they are in the real world.  If  one  parent  has  no  right  to
    remain, but the other parent does, that is the background against which
    the assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,
    it is the background against which the assessment is conducted.

89. Thus the ultimate question will be, is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to follow the parents with no right to remain in the  country  of
    origin?

90. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make any  proper  and
    reasoned  assessment  as  to  reasonableness  following  the   approach
    mandated in EV notwithstanding submissions that she had  received  from
    the presenting officer set out at paragraph 19.

91. The Judge had regard to that authority at paragraph 41, stating  simply
    that in the  circumstances,  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect
    Mosunmola to leave the UK. She found that  all  three  children's  best
    interests would be to remain with their parents.

92. Although the Judge referred to paragraphs 34 and 35 from  EV,  she  did
    not have regard to or grapple with the significance of paragraph 58  of
    Lord Justice Lewison's judgment.

93. In this case neither  parent  had  a  right  to  remain.  That  is  the
    background against which the assessment had to be conducted.

94. The ultimate question that had to be decided was whether  it  would  in
    those circumstances be reasonable to expect the child to follow parents
    who had no right to remain here.

95. I have had regard to the guidance of Pill  LJ  in  AJ  (India)  v  SSHD
    [2011] EWCA Civ 1191 and in AM (s.117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT  0260.  The
    guidance of Pill LJ in AJ is reiterated at paragraph 37. There, LJ Pill
    when dealing with Baroness Hale's decision in ZH regarding the  welfare
    of children as an integral part of the Article 8 assessment, noted that
    the primacy of the interests of the child falls to be considered in the
    context of the particular family circumstances as well as the  need  to
    maintain immigration control.

96. There was no evidence before Judge Veloso that any interruption to  the
    education of Mosunmola  upon  return  to  Nigeria  would  be  any  more
    significant than that faced by  any  child  forced  to  move  from  one
    country to another. In this respect I have had regard to  the  approach
    by the Tribunal in AM, supra, at paragraph 39.

97. There was no evidence presented that the remaining children would  face
    any more significant problems than a move from the UK to Nigeria.

98. The Judge has made express findings that the employment of the claimant
    and the partner provided them with skills that they could take back  to
    Nigeria. That would assist them in finding employment.  They  would  be
    able to maintain and accommodate the family. They also have  family  in
    Nigeria to whom they could turn for support [42].

99. In the circumstances I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has  not
    properly assessed the reasonableness of the family's return to Nigeria,
    having regard to the approach in EV and other authorities.

100. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge involved  the
    making of material errors of law as set out herein. I  accordingly  set
    aside the decision. The parties agreed that in that event the  decision
    should be re-made by the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross.

101. Having regard to the fact that the whole of the decision will  have  to
    be re-made, following substantial evidence, I accept that  this  is  an
    appropriate case justifying remission.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and the decision is set aside. The claimant's appeal is remitted
    to Hatton Cross, where it will be re-made.  The time estimate  for  the
    appeal is a half day.

    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed   Date 12/7/2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


