
[pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/13341/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                 Azat Ananov
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris Counsel, Farani Javid Taylor Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Turkey born on 13 September  1987  appeals,
    with permission against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Anstis  promulgated  on  24  April  2015  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    appellant's application against a decision of the Secretary of State to
    refuse to issue a residence card on the basis  of  his  marriage  to  a
    Lithuanian citizen.

2.   The basis of the refusal  was  that  the  sponsor  was  not  exercising
    Treaty rights.  The appeal had previously  come  before  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal James at a hearing at Hatton Cross  on  31  October
    2014.  It appears that of her own motion the judge was concerned  about
    the  genuineness  of  the  marriage.   After  that  hearing  the  judge
    adjourned the appeal having noted that  the  respondent  had  confirmed
    that she wished to interview the parties to the marriage and verify the
    documents regarding employment and self-employment.

3.   Judge James gave directions which included that the respondent  was  to
    file and serve the notes of interviews of the appellant and the sponsor
    together with any verification report on the employment  issues  by  16
    January 2015 and that:-

         "The respondent is to also file and serve any amended or additional
         reasons for refusal by Friday 16 January 2015."

4.   No amended or additional reasons for refusal  were  served.   What  was
    served  was  the  notes  of  interview:  these  comprised  over   1,000
    questions.

5.   At the resumed hearing Judge Anstis considered  the  evidence  relating
    to the sponsor's  self-employment  and  accepted  that  she  was  self-
    employed and was exercising Treaty rights.  The judge however  went  on
    to consider whether or not this was  a  genuine  marriage  and  despite
    having heard evidence from both the appellant and the sponsor concluded
    that the marriage was not genuine.  She went on to say in paragraph 51:-



         "I consider that in providing the marriage  interview  transcripts,
         the respondent has shown that  there  are  'factors  which  support
         suspicions for believing the marriage is one  of  convenience',  so
         that it is then for the appellant to show the marriage is  not  one
         of convenience."

6.   It was on that basis that the judge  found  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.

7.   The grounds of appeal asserted that the respondent has  not  discharged
    the burden of proof upon her to  show  that  this  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience and in  any  event  had  not  submitted  the  interviewer's
    comments  on  the  marriage  -  the  decision  in  Miah  (interviewer's
    comments: disclosure: fairness) [2014] UKUT 515 was relied on.

8.   It was also asserted that:-

         "The appellant further raises the point raised before that  it  was
         not open to the IJ who adjourned the case to  raise  the  issue  of
         genuineness, when the respondent did not raise it and there was  no
         evidence to suggest at that point that genuineness was an issue."

9.   Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Perkins who first stated that he considered that the judge was entitled
    to consider every aspect of  the  application  -  he  referred  to  the
    determination in RM (Kwok On Tong: HC 395 paragraph 320)  India  [2006]
    UKAIT 00039 which stated that it was usually necessary for a judge  who
    wanted to take  points  not  raised  by  the  respondent  to  give  the
    appellant notice that  that  point  could  be  addressed.   He  stated,
    however,  that it appeared that the judge had thought the appellant was
    on notice as to the nature of  his  marriage.   However  Judge  Perkins
    referred to the determination in Miah and  stated  that  there  was  no
    "form ICV.4605" which had been disclosed and that it should  have  been
    or at least an explanation tendered for it not being disclosed.

10.  He gave a direction that  it  was  for  the  respondent  to  serve  any
    further evidence that might be necessary.

11.  I have considered the determination of the judge and in particular  the
    fairness of the judge raising a matter  -  as  it  is  alleged  in  the
    grounds of appeal - which had  been  raised  only  in  submissions  and
    therefore one on which the appellant had not been  put  on  notice.   I
    accept that it is, of course, the case  that  a  judge  can  raise  any
    material point but it is important that the appellant is  given  notice
    of that point and given the opportunity to respond thereto.  It appears
    that that had not happened.  More importantly, however, I consider  the
    fact that Judge James gave a direction that the respondent should  file
    and serve any amended or additional reasons for refusal  but  that  the
    respondent did not do so was a clear indication to the  appellant  that
    he would not have to deal with the issue of whether or not the marriage
    was genuine.  I therefore consider that the judge was not  entitled  to
    raise the further matter without  proper  notice  being  given  to  the
    appellant and that on that basis the decision of the judge in the First-
    tier was unlawful and therefore it is appropriate that it be set aside.



Decision

The decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

Directions

The direction given by Judge James on 31 October 2014  that  the  respondent
should file and serve any amended  or  additional  reasons  for  refusal  is
repeated: these further reasons should be served by 25 January 2016.

The appeal is remitted to  Hatton  Cross.   Time  estimate  two  hours.   No
interpreter.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

