
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13429/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24th June 2016                          |On 10th October 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           MR TSIBU ALBERT DANKWA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sandra Akinbolu (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Place, promulgated on 24th June  2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Nottingham on 12th June 2015.  In the determination, the judge  allowed
    the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State, subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana, who  was  born  on  24th  November
    1975.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  15th
    April 2015, to refuse to grant him a residence card, as confirmation of
    his right of abode in the United Kingdom on the basis of being a family
    member of an EEA national, namely, a Dutch national,  by  the  name  of
    Lydia Ohenba, whom the Appellant had married, as his wife.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is entitled to remain in the UK on the
    basis of his genuine and subsisting marriage with Ms Ohenba, as she  is
    an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that, although the Respondent Secretary of State had not
    accepted that the marriage was legally valid in Ghana, or been properly
    registered, this was a case where the Sponsor was  prepared  to  attend
    the ceremony in person and he was serious about the step he was taking,
    so that whatever the legalities of Ghanaian law, the judge went  on  to
    hold that the parties were validly married according  to  the  laws  of
    Ghana (see paragraph 43).  The judge also went on to  hold  that  there
    was a "durable relationship" under  the  EEA  Regulations  between  the
    Appellant and his Sponsor (see paragraph 44).

 5. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to  give  proper
    regard to the learning in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT
    00024 which was in the Respondent's bundle for the judge to consider.

 7. On 11th September 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

 8. A detailed Rule 24 response was subsequently entered by the  Appellant.



Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me, the Appellant was represented  by  Ms  Sandra
    Akinbolu and the Respondent was represented by Ms H  Aboni.   Ms  Aboni
    submitted that she relied on the Grounds of Appeal.  She would also say
    that the judge had wrongly said that the Respondent  has  a  discretion
    "under Regulation 12(2) to issue  the  Appellant  with  an  EEA  family
    permit" (paragraph 45).  This was because the  relevant  provision  was
    Regulation 17(4).

10. That aside, the main issue here was  that  the  judge  could  not  have
    allowed the appeal outright, even if he found there  to  be  a  genuine
    marriage or a durable relationship, because all that the judge could do
    was to allow the appeal to the extent that the  grant  of  a  residence
    permit would then fall to be determined by the Secretary of  State,  on
    the basis of findings made by the judge.  The judge could  not  himself
    or herself rule that a residence permit should be granted.

11. However, Ms Akinbolu submitted that she had  no  difficulty  with  this
    submission.  In fact, there was correspondence to the effect  that  the
    Appellant's side had attempted to avoid appearance at the oral  hearing
    today, because, once the judge had decided that  there  was  a  durable
    relationship between the parties, it was fully accepted that the matter
    then went back to the Secretary of State  to  decide  whether,  in  the
    exercise of her discretion, a residence permit should be granted.  That
    was duly issued.  Ms Akinbolu submitted that the necessity of having to
    come to this Tribunal meant that her side was in doubt of the costs  of
    the case today.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge involved  a
    making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of  TCE  2007)
    such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are that, as has
    been agreed between the parties in this appeal prior to coming to  this
    hearing, all that the judge could do was to make  a  finding  that  the
    marriage  was  a  genuine  marriage  and/or   there   was   a   durable
    relationship.  The judge could not say that  it  was  inappropriate  to
    refuse a permit.  That was a matter for the Secretary of  State.   That
    being so, the decision whether or  not  to  exercise  discretion  under
    Regulation 17(4) of the EEA  Regulations  is  one  that  falls  to  the
    Secretary of State and is a matter for her.

13. I have given consideration to the documentation  between  the  parties.
    When the Rule 24 response was filed on 12th October  2015,  a  covering
    letter from Bond Adams LLP (Solicitors) made it clear that  the  matter
    should be decided without a hearing.  On  14th  June  2016  they  wrote
    again, quite properly, to remind the Tribunal that this was the obvious
    course of action here, and attached also the Rule 24  response  at  the
    time.

14. This letter of 14th June 2016 came after Bond  Adams  LLP  (Solicitors)
    had written on 9th June 2016, a letter headed "Very Urgent" where  they
    submitted that

         "... our client accepts that the judge made an  error  by  allowing
         the appeal under Regulation 12 instead of Regulation 17(4)  of  the
         2006 Regulations (as  amended).   In  the  light  of  the  Rule  24
         response provided we request that the appeal can be allowed without
         the need of oral hearing  saving  client  time  and  cost  of  both
         parties".

15. On 21st June 2016 they wrote again to the Upper Tribunal reminding  the
    authorities that "our client is under  financial  difficulties  and  is
    unable to pay for the  hearing"  and  requesting  that  the  matter  be
    determined  on   the   papers   without   the   attendance   of   legal
    representatives and the Appellant.

16.  They  received  no  response  to  any  of  their  letters.    In   the
    circumstances, it is entirely right and proper that they be entitled to
    their costs.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original Tribunal.  I remake the decision as follows.  This  appeal
    is allowed to the extent that it is for  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State to determine under Regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations as  to
    whether to exercise discretion in order to issue a residence permit.

18. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 7th October 2016




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal,  and  because  a  fee  has  been  paid  or  is
payable, I have considered making a fee award and have decided to  make  the
fee award that has been paid or is payable  for  the  reasons  that  I  have
given above.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 7th October 2016


