
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/13907/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2015                      |On 11 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE mahmood


                                   Between

                             Miss Amritpal Kaur
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel instructed by Charles Simmons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Young.  The Appellant is a citizen of  India.   She
    had entered the United Kingdom on 16 February 2010.  There is  quite  a
    procedural history but the decision appealed against is  one  dated  16
    January 2013 but which it appears the parties agree was not  served  on
    the Appellant until a  letter  had  sent  that  out  on  20  May  2013.
    Therefore there was a delay of service of some four months.

2.    To  add  to  the  relatively  unusual  background  to  the  case,  the
    Respondent states that the Appellant appears to have sought to make  an
    application in connection with immigration as long as in December 2011.
     The Respondent says that the application was rejected and it was  said
    to be invalid.  By way of  a  letter  dated  19  January  2012  further
    matters were addressed. In that letter there is a section which says in
    part as follows:

         "Reasons why the Application is Invalid

         Where an application form has been specified in accordance with the
         Immigration Rules (HC 395), the application must  comply  with  the
         requirements set out in  paragraph  34A  of  these  Rules  and  the
         Immigration (Biometric  Registration)  Regulations.   The  relevant
         requirements are listed below and a cross in the box indicates that
         a requirement is not met."

    There are various boxes, but the second box is crossed and it  says  as
    follows:

         "Any section of the form which is designated as  mandatory  in  the
         application form and/or related guidance notes must be completed as
         specified.  (We have highlighted the relevant  specified  parts  on
         the form that have not been completed)."

3.    The difficulty in trying to decipher what has happened  in  this  case
    is that neither of the parties has produced the actual application form
    or of a copy it that the Appellant had  completed  in  respect  of  the
    application that she submitted in December 2011. It is  said  that  the
    Appellant did not retain a copy and the  Respondent  is  not  able  now
    after the years which have elapsed to be able to get it  either.  I  am
    told that the matter is complicated  because  other  applications  were
    made between December 2011 and 2013.

4.    In any event, it was against that complex background that  the  matter
    had come before First tier Tribunal Judge Young for consideration.  The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the evidence and the  submissions.
    There was extensive reliance by the Appellant upon a  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal comprising the President, Mr Justice Blake and an  Upper
    Tribunal Judge in Basnet (validity of application - respondent)  [2012]
    UKUT 00113 (IAC) and there was also reference in the  determination  to
    the  Administrative  Court's  decision  in  the  case  of  R  (on   the
    application of Kisuule) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2011] EWHC 2966 (Admin).  Those cases are referred to and  dealt  with
    by the First tier Tribunal, for example at paragraphs 23, 31,  38,  41,
    46, 49 as well as paragraph 51.

5.    This appeal really comes to this.  The Appellant says  that  the  form
    submitted by the Appellant ought  to  be  produced  by  the  Respondent
    because the issue which arises in this case is one which is  raised  by
    the Respondent.  The Appellant in her grounds of appeal, which  are  in
    some detail, says in part as follows.

6.    Ground 1, that the judge had erred in law in  placing  the  burden  of
    proof on the Appellant, this was said to be an error of law because  it
    was  the  Respondent  who  had  asserted  that  information  which  was
    mandatory was  missing  from  the  application  form.  That  there  was
    reliance on the case of Basnet and that therefore the burden  lay  upon
    the Respondent but the Respondent was  not  able  to  demonstrate  that
    there  was  any  missing  information  absent  from   the   Appellant's
    application form and it is said: "The Respondent  cannot  even  explain
    what  the  allegedly  missing   information   was.    Accordingly   the
    application should have been accepted as having been validly made."

7.    Ground 2 states that the judge erred in law in failing to  distinguish
    between  a  "mistake"  in  the  application  and   "missing   mandatory
    information" and that the Tribunal had  reached  a  conclusion  of  the
    facts which was not open to it.

8.    It is said in the grounds that the relevant  question  for  the  First
    tier Tribunal was not whether there was a mistake  in  the  application
    form but whether there was mandatory missing information rendering  the
    application invalid, and it is said in summary that  the  Tribunal  had
    conflated the issues of mistake and missing mandatory information.

9.     Having  considered  the  respective  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant and on behalf of the Respondent  and  having  considered  the
    Rule 24 reply I conclude that there is no material  error  of  law.   I
    come to this decision for the following reasons.

10.   Firstly, it is quite clear that  the  Appellant  accepts  she  made  a
    "mistake" and that is why she had returned the application form to  the
    Respondent.  This is not a  case  in  which  the  Appellant  states  no
    mistake was made.  It is therefore to have at the forefront that it  is
    accepted that a mistake was made.  As to  what  sort  of  mistake  that
    might have been, well the letter of 19 January in my judgment makes  it
    quite clear.  That states in the box which is ticked and which  I  have
    quoted from earlier that any section of the form which is designated as
    mandatory in the application form and/or  the  related  guidance  notes
    must be completed as specified.  Therefore it is clear in  my  judgment
    that the mistake which the Appellant refers to was pointed out  to  her
    as being a mandatory part of the  form  and/or  the  related  guidance.
    Therefore it follows that it was indeed a  mandatory  information  that
    was missing. The Appellant knew that because she had the tick box  form
    telling her that.

11.   Whilst of course it would be best evidence  if  the  actual  form  was
    available, I have ventured to  consider  why  there  ought  to  be  any
    expectation  that  the  Secretary  of  State  ought  to   produce   the
    application form and not the Appellant.  I accept that in the  ordinary
    case where there is  a  single  relatively  straightforward  procedural
    history that the Tribunal usually sees the application form as part  of
    the Respondent's bundle. However there has been a lot  of  water  under
    the bridge in terms of the years which have elapsed since that form was
    lodged with the Secretary of State and there have  been  other  further
    numerous applications which  the  Appellant  had  made.   So  in  those
    circumstances there is an explanation as to why the Respondent had  not
    retained the application form. In any event that  does  not  take  away
    from the Appellant the burden of proof which is placed upon  her.   She
    continues to have the burden of  proof  and  in  my  judgment  she  too
    therefore had an obligation to produce a copy of the application  form.
    She had failed to do that and therefore she had failed to make out  her
    case to the required standard that the missing information was not  the
    mandatory missing information that the Respondent had referred to.

12.   Returning to the determination of  the  First  tier  Tribunal,  it  is
    quite clear that the Tribunal dealt with these matters  in  a  detailed
    and comprehensive manner.  The Tribunal noted the documentation and the
    history at paragraphs 2  to  9  of  the  determination.   The  Tribunal
    carefully noted the submissions of the parties from  paragraphs  19  to
    30.  Whilst it is  true  that  directions  were  provided  for  further
    documentation from the Respondent, I agree with Mr Avery that  requests
    for compliance with directions does not somehow  shift  the  burden  of
    proof which remained at all times with the Appellant.

13.   The letter of rejection of 19 January  that  I  have  quoted  from  is
    specifically referred to at paragraph 34 of the First  tier  Tribunal's
    decision.  The First tier Tribunal it in its conclusions  at  paragraph
    38 onwards correctly identified the cases of Basnet and Kisuule and had
    correctly referred to what those cases have decided.  The Tribunal then
    applied the law and came to sustainable decisions in respect  of  them.
    I shall quote the following, first of all from paragraph 46:

         "46.     The difference between this case and the  Basnet  case  is
             that in Basnet the payment  detail  was  shredded  before  the
             application was returned to the Appellant.  So  there  was  no
             way in which the Appellant could point to the  fact  that  the
             Respondent was wrong.  In Basnet the fact that the onus was on
             the Respondent was based on the  proposition  that  the  party
             that  asserts  a  fact  should  normally  be   the   one   who
             demonstrates it; and because the Respondent is responsible for
             the procedure to be used in postal  cases,  and  the  features
             noted above prevent both the issue of a prompt receipt and  an
             opportunity to  understand  why  payment  was  not  processed.
             However in this case the Appellant is given the opportunity to
             know why the application  has  been  rejected  because  it  is
             returned to her with the particular passage highlighted.

         47.      Similarly in Kisuule there was able to be made  a  factual
             finding that  the  photographs  had  become  detached  in  the
             Respondent's offices.  Thus the Appellant in that  case  could
             point to the Respondent being wrong.

         48.      It seems to me that these cases  are  fact-sensitive.   If
             the Respondent asserts a failure and  it  is  found  that  the
             information for rejection can  only  be  demonstrated  by  the
             Respondent then the evidential onus will be on the Respondent.
              Alternatively if there is an assertion of failure  which  can
             be shown on the balance of probabilities to be wrong then  the
             application will be deemed valid.

         49.      In those circumstances I could not conclude that the  onus
             was on the Respondent in this case to demonstrate  the  reason
             for rejection when the information is  in  the  hands  of  the
             Appellant.  As is stated in Basnet 'normally' he who asserts a
             fact needs to prove it.  However where the information  is  in
             the hands of the Appellant i.e. in the application  form  that
             was returned to her then it seems to me that  the  onus  would
             still rest with the Appellant to demonstrate that contrary  to
             the Respondent's view all mandatory sections had in fact  been
             complete in the form."

14.   In the circumstances and  having  considered  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment in R (Iran) this application amounts to no more  than  a  mere
    disagreement with the First tier Tribunal's determination.  That was  a
    thorough and careful assessment of the case law, the factual matrix and
    the relevant principles. In the circumstances despite the best  efforts
    of Ms Reid, who has said everything that could be said on behalf of the
    Appellant, this application  is  rejected.  Accordingly  therefore  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law  and
therefore the appeal remains dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

