
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/13712/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On the 14th October 2016            |On the 27th October 2016            |

                                   Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                  Between:
                            MR RIZWAN AHMED SYED
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance (letter submitted)
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moore promulgated on the 21st April 2016,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against refusal of his application for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom, both under the Immigration Rules
    and on Human Rights grounds.

 2. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued, inter alia, that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge said at [14] that the Appellant had  not  submitted
    any witness statement in  support  of  his  appeal,  but  that  he  had
    submitted a statement to the Tribunal by means of recorded post with  a
    tracking number of KP440656042GB  on  the  7th  March  2016  which  was
    received by the Tribunal on the 10th March 2016. It is argued that  the
    Judge failed to thereby take account  of  that  evidence.   Within  the
    second ground it is argued that although he is a temporary  migrant  in
    the UK, neither the Respondent nor  the  First-tier  Tribunal  properly
    considered  the  reason  for  the  non-completion  of  the  Appellant's
    studies, and he questioned the fairness of the decision made given  the
    revocation of  the  sponsor's  licence  following  the  case  of  Patel
    (Verification of Sponsor Licence - Fairness) India  [2011]  UKUT  00211
    (IAC). In the third ground of appeal, it is argued  that  although  the
    Appellant was supported by family members in India,  the  basic  reason
    for them supporting him was that they were supporting  his  studies  in
    the UK.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  on
    the 19th September 2016, in which he found that there was a signed (but
    undated) document attached to the file running to 14  paragraphs  which
    was headed "Witness  Statement  of  the  Appellant"  and  that  it  was
    arguable in that in such circumstances the Judge failed to have  regard
    to material evidence when considering the appeal on the papers and that
    whilst consideration of  the  Appellant's  witness  statement  may  not
    ultimately have affected the outcome of the appeal,  justice  must  not
    only be done but also manifestly be seen to be done.  He said that  the
    other grounds stood or fell upon the arguable ground that the  Tribunal
    failed to have regard to the witness statement.  He  therefore  granted
    permission to appeal.

 4. The Appellant had sent a letter dated the  11th  October  2016  to  the
    Tribunal, which was received by the Upper Tribunal on the 12th  October
    2016, requesting that the appeal be  adjourned  or  considered  on  the
    papers, due to the fact that he was unable  to  attend  to  the  appeal
    hearing because he was suffering from severe  back  pain  and  what  he
    described as 'stressful mental depression'.  He stated that he  was  in
    the process of being further diagnosed and would submit a sick note and
    further investigation reports to the Tribunal as  soon  as  practically
    possible.  He did, however, submit evidence that he had attended  at  a
    walk-in clinic on the 10th October 2016, where he  had  received  a  15
    minute  consultation,  but   had   seemingly   also   been   prescribed
    Lansoprazole.

 5. However, despite the request for the adjournment, Mr Walker  on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State quite properly  conceded  that  in  fact  the
    adjournment was not necessary, and that in fact there  was  a  material
    error in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore, in  terms  of
    him having failed to consider the witness statement of the Appellant in
    reaching his decision, after I had shown him and he had considered  the
    document on the file referred to by Judge Kelly, which was a signed but
    undated statement of the Appellant running to 14 paragraphs, which  was
    entitled "Witness Statement of the Appellant".

 6. Although in this regard, within the Rule 24 response, it was argued  by
    the Secretary of State that the Judge had properly directed himself and
    that the decision would have been the same irrespective of any evidence
    given by the Appellant in a witness statement, in  circumstances  where
    the Appellant had been in the UK less than 7 years and his private life
    would have attracted little weight, and in  respect  of  which  it  was
    inconceivable that the Judge would have allowed  the  appeal  on  Human
    Rights grounds, having considered the statement, Mr Walker on behalf of
    the Secretary of State, did not rely on the Rule 24 reply and  conceded
    that the Judge's failure to consider the Appellant's witness  statement
    in this case did give rise in fact to a material error of law, and that
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore should be set aside and
    the case remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a  re-hearing  de
    novo  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moore.

 7. In light of the concession quite properly made by Mr Walker  on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State, I do find that regrettably, the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore does contain a material error  of  law,
    in that he quite clearly stated at paragraph 14 of  the  decision  that
    there was no witness statement from the Appellant, and  yet,  contained
    within the file, was a signed  statement  from  the  Appellant  himself
    running to 14  paragraphs,  which  explained  the  basis  on  which  he
    considered that he should be granted leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  I do not consider that it could be said that having failed to
    consider that document, that the decision  would  have  been  the  same
    irrespective, as to whether  or  not  the  Judge  had  considered  that
    document or not, and as quite properly conceded  by  Mr  Walker,  I  do
    consider that that does amount to a material error of law,  in  respect
    of  the  Judge  having  failed  to  consider  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement.  I  therefore  do  set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moore and remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal
    for re-hearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Moore.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Moore  does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside.  I allow the Appellant's appeal.

I make no Order in respect of anonymity, no such Order  having  been  sought
before me.

I remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing  before  any
First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore.

Signed
R F McGinty
Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGinty                                 Dated
14th October 2016
