
IAC-HX-MH/11-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13315/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 February 2015                   |On 29 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR S C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shilliday
For the Respondent:    Mr Miah


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr S C is a citizen of Tunisia born in 1988.

 2. He appealed against a decision of the Secretary of  State  made  on  28
    January 2014 to refuse to grant leave to remain  for  settlement  as  a
    spouse under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 3. Although in proceedings  before  me  the  Secretary  of  State  is  the
    Appellant, for convenience I  retain  the  designations  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, thus Mr S C is the  Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State the Respondent.

 4. The basis of the claim is that the Appellant should be granted leave to
    remain as he has a wife, six  stepchildren  and  a  UK  born  daughter.
    Removal would  amount  to  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
    private and family life.

 5. The history, in brief, is that he began a relationship with his partner
    'online' as she had been attempting to learn Arabic from his sister and
    he took over the online lessons. She visited Tunisia where she  married
    the Appellant in November 2010.  She gave birth to their child  in  the
    UK in August 2011.  The Appellant remained in Tunisia until  2012  when
    he left the country and travelled to Germany.  He attempted to have the
    German authorities gain permission for him to enter  the  UK  but  this
    failed.  He decided to enter the UK clandestinely but  was  intercepted
    on arrival on 2 September 2013.  At that point he claimed asylum.  This
    application was refused because he had earlier made an  application  in
    Germany and they had accepted responsibility for consideration  of  the
    claim.

 6. The Respondent refused the application.  She was not satisfied that  he
    and his spouse were lawfully married.  Further, the Appellant  did  not
    meet the eligibility requirements for leave  to  remain  as  a  partner
    under the Immigration Rules, in particular, that he was not in  the  UK
    with valid leave and he  had  not  completed  a  continuous  period  of
    limited leave of the required length.

 7. Also, paragraph EX.1. did not apply.   Nor  were  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE met.

 8. It was considered that the Appellant  could  keep  in  touch  with  his
    family by modern means of communication from Germany.  His spouse could
    visit as she had done  to  Tunisia  until  such  time  as  he  made  an
    application to join them.

 9. Having considered the best interests of the children it  was  concluded
    that they could carry on their normal routine with the support of their
    mother and grandparents as they did before the illegal arrival  of  the
    Appellant.  Although his departure to Germany might  create  disruption
    for a short time it should not do so long term.

10. He appealed.

11. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 13 October  2014  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Maxwell dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules but
    allowed it on human rights grounds.

12. His findings are at paragraphs [12] to [20].  He found (at  [14])  that
    the Appellant had failed to prove  that  he  was  married  as  claimed.
    However,  he  accepted  that  they  are  in  a  'relationship  akin  to
    marriage'.

13. He also found that  'there  is  a  parental  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and his daughter' and  that  he,  his  partner  and  her  six
    children from other relationships all live together in a single  family
    unit [14].

14. He further found, however, that it had not been shown  that  he  has  a
    parental relationship with his partner's other children, noting in that
    regard that several of these children continue  to  have  relationships
    with their natural fathers.  Also, the 'relatively short in duration of
    any relationship as between the children and the Appellant' [14].

15. The judge noted that it was accepted that the Appellant cannot meet the
    financial requirements of Appendix FM; indeed that his partner admitted
    that he entered the UK illegally because  she  does  not  earn  enough.
    Also that he has never had leave.

16. Moreover, that given the age of his daughter  he  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph EX.1.  Further, that he could not to  succeed
    under paragraph 276ADE [15].

17. The judge went on to note that the Respondent  considered  s55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and that he  himself  was
    required to consider s117 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

18. He noted s117B(6) and found that  the  Appellant  'has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his daughter who,  by  virtue  of
    s117D(1)(a) is a "qualifying child".' [17].

19. He went on: 'It has never been suggested by  the  Respondent,  that  it
    would be appropriate for the Appellant's spouse  and  her  children  to
    remove themselves to Tunisia to live with the  Appellant.   I  find  it
    would be inappropriate to expect them to do so.  It is unduly harsh and
    wholly unreasonable in the circumstances  of  this  case  to  expect  a
    family to be uprooted in this fashion and therefore  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the Appellant's child to leave the United  Kingdom
    with him' [18].

20. Thus, he concluded, (at [19]) removal would be disproportionate to  the
    public interest.

21. He emphasised that his decision was 'based solely on  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and his daughter.  His spouse  has  a  very  poor
    record  in  relationships  and  whilst  I  am   satisfied   that   this
    relationship between her and the Appellant is genuine and subsisting at
    present this is little guarantee that it will continue  to  subsist  in
    the future ...'.

22. The Respondent sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  on  16
    December 2014.

23. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Shilliday said  it  was  clear
    that the case failed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  issue  was
    Article 8.  It was clear, contrary to the  written  grounds,  that  the
    Appellant's child is a 'qualifying child' under s117D.   Also,  it  was
    not challenged that it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  Appellant's
    partner and children to remove themselves  to  Tunisia.   However,  the
    judge's conclusion that where, as in this case,  the  Appellant  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  qualifying  child  and  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK,  was  not,
    as the judge had found, determinative.  Whilst the public  interest  in
    such a situation does not require removal, such does not mean that  the
    public interest is defeated.   In other words, it does not overrule all
    the other considerations to which regard had to be  given  under  s117.
    Mr Shilliday asked me on the facts found to set aside the decision  and
    remake it by dismissing it.

24. In reply Mr Miah did not dispute that the case could not succeed  under
    the Rules. However, he submitted that the analysis under Article 8  was
    sound, in particular that a strict reading of s117B(6)  suggested  that
    it was determinative.  Even if it was not the judge had looked  at  the
    facts and taken all the  evidence  as  to  the  family  situation  into
    account and reached a decision on  the  evidence  he  was  entitled  to
    reach.  He invited me to uphold the decision.

25. In considering this matter there  is  no  dispute  that  the  Appellant
    cannot satisfy the Rules for leave as a partner not  least  because  he
    has never had leave and  cannot  meet  the  financial  requirements  of
    Appendix FM.

26. As for Article 8, whilst the judge did make reference to  s117,  in  my
    view he erred, having found  that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child  and  that  it
    would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  UK,  in
    concluding that such was determinative  in  the  consideration  of  the
    proportionality exercise.

27. The relevant part of the Immigration Act 2014 reads 'Section 19 Article
    8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations.  After  Part  5  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 insert - Part 5A Article 8
    of the ECHR: Public Interest Considerations'.

28. It continues:

         '117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -



             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

               a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
                  117B,and...' [my emphasis]



          3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the

             question of  whether an interference with a person's right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2).

    117B Article  8:  public  interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
    cases'...[my emphasis]

29. There follow six sub-sections which relate necessary considerations  in
    respect of the public interest.  The sixth, s117B(6) states:

         'In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.'

30. In this case it is accepted  that  the  Appellant's  child,  a  British
    citizen, is a 'qualifying child', there is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship and that it would not be reasonable to expect the
    child to leave the UK.

31. It is clear that there  is  a  tension  between  s117B(6)  'the  public
    interest does not require ...' and 117A(2(a)  'the  tribunal  must  (in
    particular) have regard (a) in all cases, to the considerations  listed
    in section 117B'.

32.  In my judgment even though s117B(6) states that  the  public  interest
    does not require the Appellant to be removed, that provision, like  the
    best interests of the children, is not a 'trump card'.  It does not  of
    itself determine the outcome of this appeal. It is not, as drafted,  an
    exception to the other factors  in  s117B  which  requires  the  public
    interest to be had regard to 'in all cases' but the plain words must be
    taken to be what they say and  they  are  a  statement  of  the  public
    interest by Parliament in the situation set out there.  It  is  drafted
    differently from sub-sections (1)-(5) of 117B and what it says is  that
    where the person has a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child and it is not reasonable to expect the child to  leave
    the UK it is not in  the  public  interest  for  the  Appellant  to  be
    removed.  Whilst it is expressed in stronger terms in  respect  of  the
    public interest, a proper  reading  of  the  whole  of  s117  means  it
    nonetheless can be outweighed  by  other  factors.   It  is  however  a
    factor, one of considerable weight, to be weighed in the balance.

33.  The  judge  in  treating  s117B(6)  as  determinative  and  giving  no
    consideration to the other s117 factors, indeed, from my reading of the
    determination, to any  other  matters  in  considering  proportionality
    misapplied the law and in doing so materially erred. The  determination
    is set aside to be remade.  There is no challenge to  the  facts  found
    and it was agreed there was no need for a further hearing.  No  further
    submissions were made.

34. There is clearly family life between the Appellant and his partner  and
    child.  It was not  argued  for  the  reasons  given  by  the  previous
    Tribunal that the step children are of relevance he being found not  to
    have a parental relationship with them. Removal  would  interfere  with
    respect for that family life such that the seriousness threshold is met
    and Article 8(1) is engaged.  Any interference is  in  accordance  with
    the law and is necessary in a democratic society, in the  interests  of
    the economic wellbeing of the country.  The question  is  whether  such
    interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be
    achieved.

35. The main issue is proportionality. A couple cannot choose  the  country
    in which they wish to live.  As indicated the Appellant cannot  satisfy
    the Immigration Rules in respect of leave to remain as a  partner,  not
    least because he  has  never  had  leave  having  entered  the  country
    illegally and he cannot meet the financial requirements. His failure to
    meet the Rules must weigh significantly against the  Appellant  in  the
    balancing exercise.

36. Further, I find it to be a very weighty factor  against  the  Appellant
    that he deliberately sought to evade  immigration  control  because  he
    could not satisfy the Rules.  Such shows a blatant  disregard  for  the
    laws of this country.

37. Turning to s117 to which I must  have  regard,  as  indicated,  I  give
    considerable weight in favour of the Appellant in respect of s117B(6).

38. I must consider the best  interests  of  the  Appellant's  child  as  a
    primary consideration. Their child is  a  British  citizen  and  it  is
    accepted that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to live in
    another country. She cannot  be  blamed  for  the  Appellant's  blatant
    disregard for the laws of this country and that when family  life  with
    her was created nothing had been  put  in  place  to  ensure  that  the
    Appellant could be part of it.  Nonetheless  she  is  very  young.  Her
    mother  was  clearly  the  primary  carer  from  her  birth  until  the
    Appellant's arrival more than two years later. It may well be  that  in
    an ideal world her best interests would be for her to be brought up  in
    her country of origin  with  both  her  parents.  However,  many  young
    children are successfully brought up by one parent, often  the  mother.
    There is no suggestion  that  the  wellbeing  of  the  child  has  been
    adversely affected by the physical absence of the Appellant for most of
    her young life. In my judgement if the presence of her father is in the
    best interests of the child, it is outweighed by countervailing factors
    including the need to maintain firm and fair  immigration  control  and
    his dreadful immigration history committed with the  knowledge  of  his
    partner (s117B(1) 'The maintenance of effective immigration controls is
    in the public interest').

39. In this case as the Appellant's partner and child are not  required  to
    leave the UK I do not see why they cannot carry on their normal routine
    much as they did before his  unlawful  arrival  in  September  2013.  I
    cannot see from any of the  material  before  me  that  by  removal  to
    Germany, who have accepted responsibility for his  asylum  claim,  such
    would result in a long term  adverse  effect  on  their  wellbeing  and
    prospects. There is nothing to indicate that the child's welfare  would
    suffer.

40. I see no reason why she and their child cannot keep in touch by  visits
    to him. In that regard she visited him in Tunisia. Also, the three  can
    keep in touch by modern means of communication pending  the  resolution
    of his claim. There is nothing to stop him reapplying for entry  should
    he gain refugee status or otherwise satisfy the Immigration Rules.

41. The other aspects of s117 need to  be  considered  and  other  relevant
    factors.  It is not evident that the Appellant is able to speak English
    (s117B(2)). Also his partner is  not  working  and  on  benefits,  thus
    reliant on the State. She is not financially independent nor  would  he
    be (s117B(3)).

42. Whilst his relationship with his qualifying partner was established, it
    seems, online most of it has been played out while, as they  were  both
    aware, he has been here unlawfully. In such circumstances I  accord  it
    less weight than had his conduct been lawful.

43. Looking at the circumstances in the round in conducting  the  balancing
    exercise I conclude that  any  interference  is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate end of immigration control.  The appeal fails.

Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  shows  an  error  of  law.   That
decision is set aside and remade as follows:

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
