
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13482/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th September 2014                          |On 26th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                           mrs Rianne Schestowitz
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born on 24th August 1978.
     The Appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  as  a  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national on 9th September 2013 with entry  clearance  valid  from  22nd
    July 2013 until 22nd January 2014.  She submitted  an  application  for
    leave to remain as a spouse on 20th January 2014 and  that  application
    was refused on 28th February 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Narayan sitting at Stoke on  the  papers  on  29th  April
    2014.  In a determination promulgated on 13th May 2014 the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed.

 3. On 22nd May 2014 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Those grounds contended:

      i) that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
         Appellant's appeal against the decision to remove her;

     ii) that the judge had failed to deal with her  entitlement  to  remain
         under the 2006 Regulations;

    iii) had failed to consider whether her husband's status  as  a  student
         counted towards the five years during which the Appellant's husband
         had exercised treaty rights; and

     iv) had failed to consider Article 8 beyond the Immigration Rules.

 4. On 27th June 2014 Immigration Judge Lever granted permission to appeal.
     He concluded that it was arguable that  the  Appellant's  husband  may
    have been exercising treaty rights in one form or  another  during  the
    years that he was working on his thesis and that it was also  the  case
    that the judge had made no reference  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.

 5. On 4th July 2014 the Secretary of State filed a response to the Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  Those grounds oppose the appeal stating  that
    the judge had considered the evidence in some detail at paragraph 17 of
    his determination and concluded on the basis of that evidence that  the
    Appellant had not established on a balance of  probabilities  that  her
    spouse was exercising treaty rights for the relevant duration  of  time
    and that that was a finding open to the judge and that it was  for  the
    Appellant to make her case and provide the necessary evidence.  Further
    it was contended as to Article 8 that it was clear that the  judge  had
    dealt with this to the extent that was necessary under the guiding case
    law at paragraph 20 and 21 of his determination.  The Rule 24  response
    maintained  that  there  was  no  material  error   of   law   in   the
    determination.

 6. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me today,  firstly  to
    determine whether or not there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    her instructed Counsel Ms Khan.  Ms Khan is familiar with  this  matter
    having been the author of the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr
    Harrison.

Discussions/Submissions

 7. Mr Harrison starts by submitting that if the evidence  was  not  before
    the judge and that there was  no  representative  present  to  put  the
    evidence because the appeal was dealt with on the papers then it is not
    reasonable to criticise the judge so far as his findings are concerned.
     However Mr Harrison concedes three factors.

      i) the Appellant's husband is definitely a European;

     ii) that the Appellant and her husband are married;

    iii) that the Appellant's husband is working.

    He points out that it was the Appellant who sought  to  appeal  on  the
    papers rather than to seek an oral hearing  and  that  it  is  for  the
    Appellant to show that her husband was exercising  treaty  rights.   He
    submits there is no material error of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 8. Ms Khan takes me to the Grounds of Appeal.  She submits that there  was
    no requirement for the Appellant to submit a formal  application  under
    the Regulations and that where the facts quite  clearly  give  rise  to
    rights of residence under the 2006 Regulations they  should  have  been
    considered  by  the  Tribunal.   She  specifically  refers  me  to  the
    Respondent's ECI guidance on residence cards which states:

         "An application form, EEA2, is available for use when applying  for
         a residence card.   However,  an  application  cannot  be  rejected
         because  the  form  has  not  been  used  or  has  not  been  fully
         completed."

 9. She also refers me to  extracts  from  the  authority  of  Alarape  and
    Another (Article 12, EC Regulations 1612/68) Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  413
    (IAC) and submits that the current application  was  completed  without
    the assistance of legal representatives and she submitted the documents
    in relation to the  appeal  similarly  without  legal  representatives'
    assistance and that it was incumbent upon the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    to consider the Appellant's rights under the Regulations and  that  his
    failure to do so amounts to a material error of law.  Ms  Khan  submits
    that as removal directions had been set it was incumbent upon the judge
    to give due consideration as to whether or not the Appellant's  husband
    was exercising treaty rights and that whether he was or was not  was  a
    matter of fact.  The fact that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not
    consider the issue of removal directions is in her view  sufficient  in
    any event to show that there is a material error of law.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. I have some sympathy with the position in which the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge found himself as all he had before him were the papers and he did
    not have the benefit  of  oral  submissions  or  any  other  additional
    documents that might have been provided had  the  Appellant  instructed
    solicitors.  Having said that there are two specific factors  which  of
    themselves constitute material errors of law.  Firstly  the  judge  has
    failed to  spot  that  removal  directions  have  been  issued  by  the
    Secretary of State.  He has dismissed the appeal  without  even  giving
    due reference to it.  He should have done and that is a material  error
    of law.  Certainly it would have been appropriate for him to set  aside
    the  removal  directions  in  the  present   circumstances.    Secondly
    following Alarape it is incumbent for a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
    address whether or not an Appellant was entitled  to  an  EU  right  of
    residence under Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68 and such circumstances
    in law apply in this case and it would have been  appropriate  for  the
    judge to have looked at this on his own motion and his failure to do so
    amounts to a material error of law.

Findings on Remaking of the Decision

13. It is appropriate therefore to look at the factors in this appeal as at
    today's date.  Mr Harrison advises he has no further representations to
    make.  It is accepted by the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  Notice  of
    Refusal that the Appellant's husband was exercising treaty  rights  and
    that he has been in employment since 2011.  A bundle of  documents  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge including wage slips and contracts
    of employment.  The judge had the benefit of a statement  of  the  main
    terms of employment that the Appellant's husband  Mr  Schestowitz  held
    with Sirius Corporation Limited, wage slips showing clearly that  there
    would be no recourse to public funds by the Appellant and a letter from
    Sirius confirming that the Appellant's husband is a permanent full-time
    member of staff and has been  employed  with  the  company  since  24th
    February 2011.

14. All the Appellant needs  to  show  is  that  at  the  present  time  Dr
    Schestowitz is exercising treaty rights.  He is employed as  a  support
    engineer by Sirius.  He is exercising treaty rights  and  documentation
    is available to show  this.   In  such  circumstances  the  Appellant's
    appeal is  allowed  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.  The decision is remade allowing  the  appeal  of
    the  Appellant  under  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006.

16. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
