

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/13766/2014
      ia/13767/2014
      ia/13768/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|On 10 September 2014                          |On 30 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                              CHILUNGA CHIZEMA
                                MUMBA CHIZEMA
                               FUNGAI CHIZEMA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellants:        Mr D Byrne, instructed by McGill & Co.,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants, a brother and two sisters, are citizens of Zimbabwe now
    aged 31, 32 and 36, who arrived in the UK on visit visas  on  different
    occasions between 2001 and 2002.  They appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against a  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  C  Grant-
    Hutchison, promulgated on 29 May 2014, dismissing their appeals against
    refusal of applications made on 5 October 2009 on the  basis  of  their
    private life in the UK.

 2. The essence of the grounds is as follows :

         The Judge afforded inadequate weight to the substantial  period  of
         residence in the UK shown by the appellants.  Each came to  the  UK
         when teenagers and now are ... in their 30's.


         ... the length of residence and the transition to adulthood results
         in removal having a greater impact with  respect  to  psychological
         and moral integrity and identity under Article 8 ECHR ... there has
         not  been  adequate  consideration  of  the  appellants'  developed
         identities ...

 3. On 17 June 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb  granted  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Although this aspect was  not  raised  in
    the grounds, he thought that the judge focused on paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Rules, but these were applications made long before  9  July  2012.
    That provision  was  therefore  not  applicable  on  the  authority  of
    Edgehill  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  402  and  this  arguably  led  to
    proportionality being assessed on a wrong footing. He  also  considered
    that the judge arguably erred in relation to EB (Kosovo) v SSHD  [2008]
    UKHL 41 in regarding the respondent's delay of 4 and half years as  not
    reducing the weight to be given to immigration control.

 4. The first appellant arrived here with a visit visa  in  June  2002  and
    remained without leave on its expiry.  On 5 October 2009 he applied for
    his case  to  be  considered  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.  Mumba, the  second  appellant,  also  entered  the  United
    Kingdom  on  a  visit  visa.   She  then  made  a  successful   in-time
    application for leave to remain as a student and was granted successive
    periods of leave until 31 August 2006.  She too made application  on  5
    October 2009 for consideration  of  her  case  on  Article  8  grounds.
    Fungai, the third appellant also entered on a visit  visa  in  December
    2001 and she too was granted leave to remain  as  a  student  but  only
    until 23 October 2002.  She too  joined  the  applications  made  on  5
    October 2009 based on her private life.

 5. The respondent rejected the applications for reasons given in a  single
    letter dated 4 March 2014 and on the  same  date  gave  notice  of  her
    decisions to remove the appellants pursuant to s.10.

 6. The accompanying reasons letter explains that the circumstances of  the
    appellants were considered with reference to Appendix FM and  paragraph
    276ADE.  There was also a separate Article 8 consideration, however  it
    was concluded that there  were  insufficient  factors  to  justify  the
    appellants remaining outside the Rules.  In  reaching  this  conclusion
    the Secretary of State accepted that:

    (i)    None of the appellants is known to have a criminal record.

    (ii)   The appellants have remained beyond their respective periods  of
         leave to remain.

    (iii)  The applications have been outstanding since October 2009.

 7. In a detailed determination, the judge set out the evidence before  her
    regarding  the  circumstances  of  each  appellant  and  reached  these
    findings:

    (i)    The appellants' parents live in Zimbabwe and they are in contact
         with them.

    (ii)   Each had left Zimbabwe when an adult and lived together  in  the
         United Kingdom as they had done in Zimbabwe.

    (iii)  It was not accepted the appellants  did  not  have  cultural  or
         social ties to Zimbabwe.

    (iv)   The appellants did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE
         (vi).

 8. The judge then turned her attention  to  Article  8.   After  directing
    herself in accordance with R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new rules -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC) she concluded that:

        "After applying the requirements of the Rules, only if there may be
        arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside them  is
        it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on  to  consider  whether
        there are  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
        under them."

 9. She considered this approach was confirmed in the petition of MS v SSHD
    [2013] CSIH 52 p1053/12.  The judge then proceeded with a  freestanding
    Article 8 assessment and after directing herself  as  to  the  familiar
    Razgar steps, proceeded to make her findings on the proportionality  of
    the interference that she  considered  would  arise  in  the  event  of
    removal to the Secretary of  State's  aim  of  maintaining  immigration
    control.  The  circumstances  of  each  of  the  appellants  were  then
    analysed. The judge chronicled their activities here since arrival  and
    the connections that they had established.   She  thereafter  made  her
    findings in terms that:

    (i)    Simply because the appellants have not  been  able  to  keep  in
         contact with their parents did not mean to say that  they  did  not
         care, having regard to the assistance their father's friends in the
         United Kingdom had provided.

    (ii)   It  was  noted  that  the  appellants  have  been  described  as
         hardworking and that as a result they will prosper.  There  was  no
         reason why they would not find work in  Zimbabwe.  The  second  and
         third appellants have qualifications.

    (iv)   There was no  reason  why  the  financial  assistance  that  the
         appellants had been receiving could not continue at  least  in  the
         short term until they have re-established themselves  in  Zimbabwe.
         The appellants' mutual support could also continue there.

    (v)    There was no obligation on the United  Kingdom  to  provide  the
         appellants with career opportunities and a better economic  outlook
         than they would have in Zimbabwe.

    (vi)   After expressing doubts about the evidence of  the  role  of  Mr
         Brett in Mumba's life, the judge was not convinced that the parties
         were as established in their relationship as made out.  Even if she
         were wrong and they do have a genuine relationship,  there  was  no
         reason why Mumba could not make a proper application from  Zimbabwe
         to return as his partner.

    (vii)  There was nothing in  the  relationships  between  Chilunga  and
         Fungai and Mr Brett beyond  their  common  relationship  to  Mumba.



10. Finally the judge turned to the issue of delay.   The  argument  before
    her  was  that  there  had  been  excessive  delay  in  processing  the
    application that had raised  the  appellants'  expectations  especially
    after reminders had been sent.  She directed herself in accordance with
    EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41 and concluded that the appellants had
    not been disadvantaged by  the  delay.   She  did  not  accept  in  the
    circumstances of the case that there had been prolonged and inexcusable
    delay which would reduce the weight normally  given  to  the  need  for
    firm, fair and consistent immigration control.

11. We return to the grounds of challenge.  Those on  which  permission  to
    appeal was sought do not raise anything of substance.  Despite what  is
    asserted the judge gave weight  to  the  length  of  residence  in  her
    comprehensive reasons for concluding that interference with the private
    lives of the appellants was proportionate.  There is no basis on  which
    it can be argued that there had been an inadequate consideration of the
    appellants' circumstances taking account of this  carefully  considered
    determination.

12. We turn to the additional points  raised  by  Judge  Gibb  in  granting
    permission, on which we are grateful to Mr Byrne for his argument.   We
    do not consider however that Edgehill has a material  bearing  on  this
    case.  The question addressed by Jackson LJ at part 3 of  his  judgment
    was as follows:

         "Is it lawful to reject an Article 8 application made before 9 July
         2012 in reliance upon the applicant's  failure  to  achieve  twenty
         years' residence, as specified in the new Rules?"

13. He clearly explains at [33]:

         "Accordingly, my answer to the question posed in this part  of  the
         judgment  is  'no'.   That  answer  is  subject  to  one  important
         qualification.  A mere  passing  reference  to  the  twenty  years'
         requirement  of  the  new  Rules  will  not  have  the  effect   of
         invalidating the Secretary of State's decision.  The decision  only
         becomes unlawful if the decision maker relies upon Rule 276ADE(iii)
         as a consideration materially affecting their decision."

14. Jackson LJ  then  applied  this  principle  to  the  decisions  in  the
    individual cases.  As to the first appellant  his  view  was  that  the
    Upper Tribunal fell into error in treating the  requirement  of  twenty
    years in the new rule as  a  relevant  consideration.   Had  the  Upper
    Tribunal not made that error it  was  far  from  clear  it  would  have
    reached  the  same  decision  and  thus  the  case  was  remitted   for
    reconsideration.

15. The second appellant was less successful.  Unlike the  first  appellant
    he had not achieved fourteen years.  She had lived here for eight years
    when she made her application and nine years five months when the Upper
    Tribunal made its decision.  He observed:

      "... it is clear that both the Secretary of State  and  the  Tribunals
           would have made precisely the same decision whether or not  they
           had regard to the new Rules."

16.  In  our  view  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  was  correct  to  consider  the
    appellants' cases  under  the  new  Rules;  there  would  have  had  no
    complaint had it been established that  the  appellants  could  succeed
    under these provisions.  She then correctly proceeded  to  examine  the
    circumstances on a freestanding Article 8 basis.  It  is  clear  to  us
    from her reasoning that she found they could not succeed on  Article  8
    grounds not because they had not been here for twenty years but because
    she  considered  the   interference   that   would   arise   would   be
    proportionate.  She took proper account of how the appellants had spent
    their time in the United Kingdom, their periods of lawful and  unlawful
    residence and also the circumstances they would encounter on return.

17. Accordingly we are not persuaded that  the  proportionality  assessment
    was conducted on an incorrect footing.

18. The final additional point raised by Judge Gibb relates to  the  delay.
    We consider that the  judge  correctly  addressed  herself  as  to  the
    principle she was required to apply and reached a conclusion rationally
    open to her on the evidence.

19. We conclude that the judge made findings open to her  on  the  evidence
    correctly directed herself as to the principles  she  was  required  to
    apply and reached a permissible conclusion on  proportionality  without
    legal error.






Signed                                             Date 30 September 2014

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson







