

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/13209/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28th March 2014                            |On 25th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIS

                                   Between

                               MR MICHAEL TATE
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss B Poyner, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 10th January 1961.  The
    Appellant claims to have come to the United Kingdom in  September  1974
    to join his mother and to have  continually  resided  in  this  country
    thereafter.

2.    On 21st October 2008 the UK Border Agency wrote  seeking  reasons  why
    the Appellant should not be deported from the United Kingdom  following
    his conviction on 13th August 2008 at Harrow Crown  Court  for  assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm, criminal  damage  and  handling  stolen
    goods and a sentence of 15 months imprisonment, and in particular  were
    there any reasons why the  Appellant  would  fall  within  one  of  the
    exceptions to automatic deportation  under  Section  32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.  On 1st April 2009 the Secretary of  State  concluded
    that the Appellant did  not  fall  within  any  of  the  exceptions  of
    automatic deportation in Section 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007 and  did
    not accept the Appellant's human rights claim.  The Secretary of  State
    also rejected the application made on 26th June 2006 for settlement  on
    the basis of long term residency.

3.    On 11th February 2011, the  Secretary  of  State  made  a  Deportation
    Order under Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act  1971.   On  3rd  March
    2011 and 4th May 2012 the Appellant's  legal  representative  submitted
    fresh representations on the  Appellant's  behalf  that  constituted  a
    fresh  claim  under  the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights.  The
    Secretary of State noted that they were submitted after the Deportation
    Order was obtained and therefore they were treated as an application to
    revoke the signed Deportation Order.  That application was  refused  on
    28th May 2012.

4.    The Appellant's appeal was  heard  before  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Elek sitting with a lay member on 12th August 2013  at  Taylor
    House.   In  a  determination  promulgated  on  27th  August  2013  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on both immigration and  human  rights
    grounds.

5.    On 5th September 2013 application was made for permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contended

   i) A failure by the First Tier Tribunal Judge to give adequate reasons
      and an irrational finding that the Appellant has ties to Jamaica.
  ii) That there is an error of law in the findings on Article 8.
 iii) That the findings of the Tribunal regarding the expert evidence of Dr
      Winton are irrational and failed to consider all the evidence.

6.    On 18th  September  2013  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baker  granted
    permission to appeal.  In granting permission Judge  Baker  noted  that
    the decision was following evidence from the Appellant, his sister, his
    half brother and a primary care mental health team worker  as  well  as
    submissions from both representatives and a report from the  Georgetown
    Law Human Rights Institute on the deportation of Jamaicans with  mental
    health problems.  Judge  Baker  noted  that  the  grounds  asserted  at
    paragraph 23 that the Tribunal had made no reference to that  objective
    evidence which was before them  and  that  the  determination  did  not
    appear to address the report which is arguably highly material.

7.    In granting permission the  Judge  noted  that  paragraph  22  of  the
    ground had merit and that it  was  arguable  that  although  the  Panel
    plainly addressed Dr Winton's report, it was arguable that  the  impact
    of the Appellant's likely failure to take medication and relapse in his
    mental health condition, having regard particularly to medical  records
    of his time spent in Brook House Immigration  Removal  Centre  and  the
    psychotic symptoms recorded there, were not addressed.  The Judge noted
    that whilst the Panel had  taken  into  account  the  previous  Judge's
    findings at paragraph 73 of the earlier determination, that no evidence
    had been presented to that Panel in  relation  to  his  alleged  mental
    health problems and that it was plain that  there  was  a  considerable
    amount of more current evidence before the Panel which post dated those
    findings.  Judge Baker considered that it was arguable that not  having
    regard specifically to the background evidence  relied  on  as  to  the
    current position in supporting those with  mental  health  problems  in
    Jamaica, and in not addressing the detail of  the  psychiatric  report,
    there was arguably a material error  of  law  in  the  conclusion  that
    notwithstanding the content of that report which had not been  explored
    by the Panel, the Appellant was not at an increased risk of suicide due
    to a real risk of ceasing to  take  medication  for  lack  of  personal
    support.

8.    On 17th October 2013 the Secretary of State responded to  the  grounds
    of appeal under Rule 24.  That  response  opposed  the  appeal  and  in
    summary submitted that the Panel directed themselves appropriately  and
    that they were entitled to conclude on the basis of the  evidence  that
    they cited that the Appellant had retained  social  and  cultural  ties
    with Jamaica.  The Rule 24 Response contended that  the  principles  in
    Maslov were not directly applicable as the grounds would seem to  imply
    because the Appellant in this case never  acquired  lawful  status  and
    also the crimes he committed were committed as an adult.  Further,  the
    Judge not having referred to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    offended since December 2007 did not indicate that he was not aware  of
    this, or that the proportionality exercise  under  Article  8  was  not
    flawed as a result, and that the Judge was entitled  to  conclude  that
    the Appellant could not establish a case under Article 3 or  Article  8
    on the basis of his health.

9.    It was on that basis that the matter came before me on  15th  November
    2013 purely for the determination as to whether  or  not  there  was  a
    material error of law in the decision of the First Tier Tribunal.   The
    Appellant appeared by his instructed Counsel Miss Poyner.  Miss  Poyner
    has considerable experience of this matter.  She  appeared  before  the
    First Tier Tribunal and she is  also  the  author  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal.   The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office  Presenting
    Officer Mr Avery.

10.   I found that there were material errors of law in this  determination.
     I accepted Miss Poyner's submission that there had been a  failure  by
    the First Tier Tribunal to give  adequate  reasons  and  an  irrational
    finding that the Appellant had ties to Jamaica.  Firstly, the  Tribunal
    failed to analyse the guidance  given  in  paragraphs  123  to  125  of
    Ogundimu and the approach adopted  at  paragraph  19  was  wrong.   The
    reasons given to the Tribunal at paragraph 19 of the determination  for
    finding that the Appellant had ties to Jamaica appeared to be:-

            a) He maintains the speech patterns of Jamaica.
            b) He wore a black hat.
            c) He maintains contact with his sister who is also of Jamaican
               heritage.
            d) His mother returned to Jamaica although she now  resides  in
               the USA.
            e) His sister has returned to visit Jamaica.

11.   I agreed with the submission made by Miss Poyner that it was an  error
    of law for the Tribunal to draw such conclusions as to whether  or  not
    the Appellant's speech or dress sense is Jamaican, where  they  do  not
    have the expertise themselves or  evidence  before  them  to  draw  the
    conclusions, and certainly there was no  reason  given  for  concluding
    that the Appellant's black hat was Jamaican.  Further or alternatively,
    I accepted that Jamaican speech and dress did not  equate  to  cultural
    ties.  The evidence before the Tribunal was that the Appellant's sister
    and half brothers are British Nationals, who are residing in the United
    Kingdom, that his sister has only occasionally returned to Jamaica  due
    to the expense and that his mother has for many years  now  resided  in
    the USA.  It was an error of law to  equate  the  Appellant's  sister's
    ties to Jamaica to his own.

12.   Further, I was satisfied that the  analysis  of  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Winton had not been fully considered in the determination and that  had
    it been done so, the  Tribunal  may  well  have  come  to  a  different
    determination. Dr Winton's view is  that  the  Appellant  has  suffered
    psychotic symptoms that are most likely to be due to schizophrenia.  He
    has explained that many of the descriptions  given  are  indicative  of
    chronic psychosis  or  provide  evidence  that  he  is  suffering  from
    schizophrenia.  I think Miss Poyner is correct, but when looked at  the
    conclusions at paragraph 17 of the  determination,  the  Tribunal  have
    failed to have regard to the fact that Dr Winton's report  recalls  the
    Appellant as being forgetful with fluctuating  or  poor  attention  and
    concentration and was wandering off the point and  displaying  impaired
    memory.  Further, there seems to have  been  a  lack  of  consideration
    whatsoever by the Tribunal to the report of Georgetown Law Human Rights
    Institute on the deportation of Jamaicans with mental health  problems,
    and a lack of reference to the objective evidence which Mr  Avery  does
    not challenge was before the Tribunal.

13.   I therefore concluded that the Tribunal had not given due  and  proper
    consideration to all the medical evidence that was before them, and  as
    such the decision was unsafe and should be set aside.

14.   Whilst it was agreed with the legal representatives that  if  I  found
    an error of law that the Appellant would not be  asked  to  attend  the
    rehearing and that it would be dealt with by way of  submissions,  save
    for  any  useful  additional  medical  evidence  that  the  Appellant's
    instructed Solicitors sought to adduce, I note that the Appellant is in
    attendance.  I am also considerably assisted in this matter by the fact
    that both Mr Avery  and  Miss  Poyner  who  appear  before  me  on  the
    rehearing, both appeared before me  when  I  heard  submissions  as  to
    whether or not there was a material error of law.

The Up to Date Law

15.   Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT  00060  (IAC)  is
    authority for the following propositions: -


   1) The expectation is that it  will  be  an  exceptional  case  in  which
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal should be granted where the
      lodging of the application for permission is more than 28 days out  of
      time. Where, in such a case, a judge is minded  to  grant  permission,
      the preferable course is to provide an opportunity to  the  respondent
      to make  representations.  This  might  be  achieved  by  listing  the
      permission application for oral hearing.


   2) The introduction of the new Immigration Rules (HC 194) does not affect
      the circumstance that when considering Article 8 of the  Human  Rights
      Convention "for a settled migrant who has lawfully spent  all  or  the
      major part of his or her childhood and youth in  [this]  country  very
      serious reasons are required to  justify  expulsion."  The  principles
      derived from Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 546 are still be applied.

   3) Paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules conflicts with the Secretary
      of State's duties under Article 3 of the UN Convention on  the  Rights
      of the Child 1989 and section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
      Immigration Act 2009. Little weight should be attached  to  this  Rule
      when consideration is being given to the assessment of proportionality
      under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

   4) The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' in paragraph  399A
      of the Immigration Rules imports a concept  involving  something  more
      than merely remote or  abstract  links  to  the  country  of  proposed
      deportation or removal. It involves there being a connection  to  life
      in that country. Consideration of whether a person has  'no  ties'  to
      such a country must  involve  a  rounded  assessment  of  all  of  the
      relevant circumstances and is not to be limited to  'social,  cultural
      and family' circumstances.

Submissions

16.   Mr Avery is brief in his  submission.   He  states  that  it  was  the
    original contention of the Secretary of State that  the  Appellant  had
    ties to Jamaica.  He accepts that the Appellant does  not  have  family
    any longer in Jamaica, noting that he has two siblings  in  the  United
    Kingdom and a son in the USA.  Consequently,  providing  the  Appellant
    therefore meets the Immigration  Rules,  it  is  not  necessary  to  go
    further, and that the definitive case law indicates it is not necessary
    to go on to consider the relevant medical  evidence.   He  acknowledges
    the length of time that the Appellant has been in  the  United  Kingdom
    and indicates that in such circumstances it is merely a matter  for  me
    to decide whether or not the Rules are met.

17.   Miss Poyner in response merely refers to her previous submissions  and
    her grounds for appeal.

Findings

18.   Under the Immigration Rules paragraph 399A(a) applies where  a  person
    claims that their deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's
    obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention and has made
    an application for revocation of a Deportation  Order  on  that  basis.
    That paragraph states

      (a)  The person has lived continuously in the United  Kingdom  for  at
    least 20 years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
    decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he  has  no  ties
    (including social, cultural or family), within the country to which  he
    would have to go if required to leave the United Kingdom ...

19.   Reference has also been made in submissions to  me  and  above  within
    this determination, to the leading authority of  Ogundimu  (Article  8-
    new Rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  00060  (IAC).  There  are  important
    extracts  within  that  determination  which  are  relevant  to   these
    proceedings.  They are to be found at paragraphs 110 to 113 and gives a
    far more detailed and concentrated analysis of the word  ties.   It  is
    not necessary  within  this  determination  to  recite  those  specific
    paragraphs other than to say that I  have  fully  read  and  considered
    them.

20.   Paragraph 111 defines the natural and ordinary  meaning  of  the  word
    "ties" and paragraph 112 states the consideration of whether  a  person
    has no ties to a country must involve a rounded assessment of  all  the
    relevant circumstances and is not to be limited to social cultural  and
    family circumstances.  Paragraph 113 goes on to note that  whilst  each
    case turns  on  its  own  facts,  the  circumstances  relevant  to  the
    assessment of whether a person has ties to the country  to  which  they
    would have to go if they were to leave the United Kingdom, must include
    a number of factors which are set out therein.
21.   In this matter, the Appellant has lived in this country for 38  years,
    having arrived from Jamaica at the age of 14.  He was aged  52  at  the
    date of decision.  I have detailed submissions from both parties and it
    is accepted by Mr Avery that the Appellant  does  not  have  family  in
    Jamaica.  Paragraph 113 of Ogundimu does not limit ties to family.   It
    does set out other criteria namely

    . The length of time a person has spent in the country to which he would
      have to go if he were to be required to leave the United Kingdom,
    . The age that the person left that country.
    . The exposure that person has had to the cultural norms of that country
    . Whether that person speaks the language of the country
    . The extent of family and friends that that person has in  the  country
      to which he is being deported  or  removed  and  the  quality  of  the
      relationships that person has with those friends and family members.


22.   The Appellant  arrived  from  Jamaica  at  the  age  of  14.   He  has
    consequently spent, save for those first few years of his life, all his
    life in the United Kingdom.  Whilst he  may  well  still  possess  some
    cultural connection in that being of Jamaican origin  he  is  aware  of
    cultural aspects of his country no family member  resides  in  Jamaica.
    He has sisters and half brothers who are British Nationals  who  reside
    in the United Kingdom, and  his  son  resides  in  the  United  States.
    Further, he has developed an  extensive  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom following his lengthy period of residence, and I also give  due
    consideration to his acknowledged mental health problems which  in  the
    past have caused him to be sectioned under the Mental Health Act.    Dr
    Winton's report is both revealing and helpful.

23.   In such circumstances, I find that there is very clear  evidence  that
    the Appellant does not have ties with Jamaica i.e. the country he would
    be required to return to if he was asked to leave the  United  Kingdom.
    For all the above reasons, (and I am very grateful for  the  assistance
    provided by Mr Avery in this matter) I accept that this is an Appellant
    who does not have those relevant  ties,  and  therefore  he  meets  the
    requirement of paragraph 399A(a)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
    Appellant's appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

Decision

24.   The Appellant's appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

25.   The First Tier Tribunal  did  not  make  an  Order  pursuant  to  Rule
    45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
     No application is made to vary that Order and none is made.

Signed:     D N Harris            Dated:  30 June 2014

D N Harris
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
