
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13067/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 September 2014                       |On 3 October 2014          |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                               MR KEVIN OKEKE
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr C Emezie a
           solicitor from Dylan Conrad Kreolle
          For the Respondent: Mr S Walker a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who  was  born  on  2  September
      1964. He has been given permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beale ("the FTTJ") who dismissed  his
      appeal against the respondent's decision of 19 February 2014 to refuse
      to grant him  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  outside  the
      Immigration Rules on human rights  grounds  under  paragraphs  276ADE,
      322(1) and Appendix FM of HC 395  and  under  Article  8  outside  the
      Rules.


   2. The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant was seeking  leave
      for a purpose not covered by the Immigration Rules, he  did  not  meet
      the requirements of paragraph 276ADE Appendix FM in  relation  to  his
      family or private life and the decision  did  not  breach  his  rights
      under Article 8.


   3. On 29 June 2004 the appellant arrived in the UK with  entry  clearance
      as a student and was granted leave to enter on  that  basis  until  31
      October 2007. On 10 October  2007  he  submitted  an  application  for
      further leave to remain as  a  student  which  was  granted  until  31
      October 2009. On 30 October  2009  he  submitted  an  application  for
      further leave to remain as a  Tier  1  Post  Study  Worker  which  was
      granted until 17 March 2012. On 16 March 2012 he submitted an in  time
      application for further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.


   4. On 27 March 2012 the respondent  wrote  to  invite  the  appellant  to
      arrange an appointment to collect his biometric details.  On  5  April
      2012 the appellant attended an appointment at a Post Office in Golders
      Green  having  paid  the  fee  of  �19.20.  Although   the   biometric
      information was successfully collected, there was a technical  problem
      with that data being transferred  to  the  respondent's  case  working
      system, the transfer  failed  and  the  application  was  rejected  as
      invalid on 16 June 2012. As a result the appellant  had  to  issue  an
      application for judicial review which was conceded by  the  respondent
      leading to a consent order on 19 November 2012.


   5. The rejection of his application by the respondent caused difficulties
      for the appellant who was not able to start the course  which  he  had
      planned to attend. Furthermore,  he  could  not  apply  for  a  course
      starting in September 2013 because under the Rules he could not make a
      Tier 4 application more than three months  before  the  start  of  the
      course. In the circumstances on 30 March 2013 the appellant applied to
      vary his application for Tier 4 limited  leave  as  a  student  to  an
      application for indefinite leave to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
      Rules. He said that in 2014 he would qualify for indefinite  leave  to
      remain on the basis of 10 years long  residence  and  that  discretion
      should be exercised in his favour. He asked  the  respondent  to  take
      into account the administrative errors which had  caused  difficulties
      not of his making.  This was followed by the respondent's decision  of
      19 February 2014 against which the appellant appealed.


   6. The FTTJ  heard  the  appeal  on  12  June  2014.  Both  parties  were
      represented, the appellant by Mr Emezie who appeared  before  me.  The
      appellant gave oral evidence. The FTTJ concluded that there  were  not
      arguably good  reasons  for  granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the
      Immigration Rules. The appellant's wife and their two children, all of
      whom were German citizens, had been living in Germany but  had  joined
      the appellant in the UK. The family could go and live  in  Germany  or
      Nigeria. The appellant could not bring himself within  the  Article  8
      provisions of the Immigration Rules and, applying  Gulshan  principles
      (Gulshan v SSHD [2013] UKUT 640 IAC),  he  had  not  established  that
      there were compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under
      those Rules which merited a grant of leave under Article 8.  The  FTTJ
      dismissed the appeal both under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human
      rights grounds. She did not make an anonymity order.


   7. The appellant applied for and was granted permission  to  appeal.  The
      grounds of appeal are lengthy but in essence argue that the FTTJ erred
      in law in three ways. Firstly, in the light of the respondent's policy
      guidance she should have concluded that the appellant had completed 10
      years continuous lawful residence in the UK whilst awaiting a decision
      on  his  application  for   further   leave   to   remain.   Secondly,
      notwithstanding the evidence before her and her findings in the  light
      of this evidence, she failed to allow the appeal on the basis that the
      appellant had established that he was a member of the family of an EEA
      national exercising treaty rights in the UK and that he  was  entitled
      to reside here under  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations"). Thirdly, the
      finding that the family could continue to live in  the  UK  exercising
      Treaty  rights  whilst  the  appellant  was  removed  to  Nigeria  was
      irrational and not open to the FTTJ.


   8. Permission was granted on the primary basis that it was arguable  that
      the FTTJ erred in not adequately considering any rights the  appellant
      might have as the family member of an EEA national, although  all  the
      grounds could be argued.


   9. Since the hearing before the FTTJ the parties had  not  submitted  any
      further evidence. I have the appellant's bundle which was  before  the
      FTTJ.


  10. In response to my question, Mr Emezie said that he did argue that  the
      appellant was entitled to succeed under the 2006  Regulations  in  his
      submissions to the FTTJ. Whilst he accepted that such submissions were
      not recorded in the determination he directed my attention to what the
      judge said in paragraphs 11,  15  and  18  of  the  determination.  He
      submitted that these provided a clear indication  that  grounds  under
      the 2006 Regulations were argued and that the FTTJ considered them and
      made relevant findings. At the hearing the appellant had produced  the
      original German  passports  issued  to  his  wife  and  children,  her
      original payslips for employment in this country  and  other  relevant
      documents copies of which were contained in the appellant's bundle. He
      submitted that the FTTJ erred in law  by  failing  to  reach  a  final
      conclusion as to whether the appeal should  be  allowed  or  dismissed
      under the 2006 Regulations.


  11. As to the appellant's claim to have achieved 10 years lawful residence
      in the UK, Mr Emezie submitted that, whilst that period might not have
      been achieved by the time of the hearing before the FTTJ, it  had  now
      been completed. This had happened before the appellant's appeal rights
      were exhausted.


  12. Mr Emezie submitted that the FTTJ made a serious error of law  in  her
      conclusion that the appellant could go to Germany with his  family  or
      go  to  Nigeria  with  or  without   them.   There   were   compelling
      circumstances under Gulshan principles  which  included  his  position
      under the 2006 Regulations. Mr Emezie asked me to find that  the  FTTJ
      had erred in law and to set aside the decision. If I was able to allow
      the appeal on the evidence  before  me  he  asked  me  to  remake  the
      decision. If not it would need to go back for rehearing in the  First-
      Tier Tribunal.


  13. Mr Walker accepted that in the light of what was said in paragraph  11
      the FTTJ did see the appellant's  wife's  payslips.  In  reply  to  my
      question as to whether what the FTTJ said in paragraph 15 amounted  to
      an acceptance that the appellant was entitled  to  succeed  under  the
      2006  Regulations,  Mr  Walker  submitted  that  there  was  no  clear
      conclusion although he accepted that  the  finding  appeared  to  lean
      towards an acceptance of the position put forward by the appellant. He
      also  accepted  that  these  findings  should  have  led  to  a  clear
      conclusion as to whether the appeal was allowed or dismissed under the
      2006 Regulations. Had the FTTJ  allowed  the  appeal  under  the  2006
      Regulations  it  would  probably  not  have  been  challenged  by  the
      respondent. The findings in relation to the  2006  Regulations  should
      have led to consideration of the appeal both under  those  Regulations
      and  as  to  whether  the  position   impacted   on   the   compelling
      circumstances test in Gulshan.


  14. Mr Walker accepted that if I found there were errors of  law  I  could
      remake the decision without further evidence. Whilst he said  that  he
      was not able to formally concede the appeal he accepted that it  might
      well be allowed on the facts found by the FTTJ. He  did  not  wish  to
      make any further submissions as to how the appeal should be determined
      if I set aside the decision of the FTTJ.


  15. In reply to my question and after taking instructions Mr  Emezie  said
      that the appellant wish  to  pursue  all  his  grounds  of  appeal.  I
      reserved my determination.


  16. The respondent did not consider the appellant's application under  the
      2006 Regulations because at the time of the  application  and  on  the
      information provided by the appellant there was no reason for  her  to
      do so. At that  stage  the  appellant  had  said  and  the  respondent
      understood the position to be that the appellant's wife  and  children
      were living in Germany and he  visited  them  there.  I  can  find  no
      indication that the respondent became  aware  that  the  position  had
      changed at any time before the issue of the refusal  letter  dated  19
      February 2014. However, in his grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal dated 16 April 2014, the appellant  stated  in  paragraph  29
      that his wife and children had been living with him in  the  UK  since
      August 2013 and that this was now their permanent residence. There was
      no specific reference to grounds of appeal under the 2006 Regulations.


  17. Whilst the determination does not record that Mr Emezie argued grounds
      of appeal under the 2006 Regulations I  find  that  the  determination
      contains sufficient indications that he did so and that these  grounds
      and the evidence relating to them were considered  by  the  FTTJ.  The
      relevant passages are those in paragraphs 11, 15 and 18 which states;


         "11. I heard oral evidence from the appellant who  stated  that  he
         was aware of the factual background  set  out  in  the  grounds  of
         appeal and relied upon them. He said that his wife and  family  had
         moved to the UK in August 2013 because after his first  application
         had been rejected as  invalid  and  whilst  the  matter  was  going
         through the courts, he could not go to Germany to see them  and  so
         his wife decided to move here with the children. She is now a  care
         worker in London and is employed by  Professional  Recruitment  Ltd
         (payslips for January - April 2014 were seen), the children are now
         in  school  in  London  and  they  all  lived  together  with   the
         appellant."


         "15... His  family  are  also  present  here  under  the  2006  EEA
         regulations...."


         "18... Nor is there any reason why an application for  a  residence
         card as the spouse of the German national exercising treaty  rights
         here in the UK could not be made."


  18. The FTTJ correctly stated that she needed to consider the position  at
      the date of the hearing. The appellant's application was for leave  to
      remain outside the Immigration Rules. Leave under the 2006 Regulations
      would be leave outside the Immigration Rules. In circumstances  where,
      following the refusal, the appellant  found  it  either  difficult  or
      impossible to visit his wife  and  children  in  Germany  it  was  not
      unreasonable for the family to make the  decision  that  she  and  the
      children should move here and that they should  live  together.  There
      was no reason why his wife and children, as  German  citizens,  should
      not come and live in this country. It was open  to  the  appellant  to
      argue an additional ground of appeal that he was entitled to leave  as
      the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights under the  2006
      Regulations. There is no indication that the Presenting Officer at the
      hearing before the FTTJ argued otherwise, nor did  Mr  Walker  at  the
      hearing before me.


  19. I find that the FTTJ erred in law by failing to reach a conclusion  as
      to whether the  appeal  should  succeed  under  the  2006  Regulations
      particularly in the light of her conclusion in paragraph 15 that  "his
      family are also present here under the 2006 EEA regulations".  It  was
      not sufficient to say, in paragraph 18, "nor is there any  reason  why
      an application for a residence card as the spouse of a German national
      exercising treaty rights here in the UK could not be made".


  20. I find that the FTTJ erred in law  in  reaching  the  conclusion  that
      there were not arguably good reasons  for  granting  leave  to  remain
      outside the Rules. The finding that the appellant and his family  were
      present here under the 2006 Regulations was an important factor  which
      should have been considered in  relation  to  this  question  and  the
      question  of  whether  there   were   compelling   circumstances   not
      sufficiently recognised under the Rules which merited  the  grants  of
      leave to remain under Article 8. It  was  not  correct  to  state,  in
      paragraph 17, that the  appellant's  reasonable  expectations  on  the
      conclusion of his studies were limited to going to live with his  wife
      and children in Germany or returning  to  Nigeria.  Because  they  are
      German citizens another reasonable and permissible option would be for
      them to exercise Treaty rights and come and live with him here,  which
      is what has happened. I am not persuaded by  the  FTTJ's  argument  in
      paragraph 17 in relation to the best interests of the  children  which
      appears to be  that  if  their  lives  have  been  disturbed  once  by
      uprooting them and moving them from Germany to  England  there  is  no
      reason why it should have not happen again by moving them to Nigeria.


  21. I find that the FTTJ did not err in law in  her  conclusion  that  the
      appellant had not achieved 10 years continuous lawful residence in the
      UK. I cannot fault the reasoning set out in paragraph 14 which led  to
      the conclusion that the appellant failed because he was still short of
      the 10 year period at the date of the hearing. I can only consider the
      submission that 10 years has been achieved by the date of the  hearing
      before if I set aside  and  remake  the  decision.  Otherwise  I  must
      consider the position as it was at the date of the hearing before  the
      FTTJ.


  22. Having found that the FTTJ erred in law I set aside the decision which
      I conclude  can  be  remade  without  hearing  further  evidence.  The
      findings of fact made by the FTTJ are preserved. Mr  Emezie  made  his
      submissions in relation to both the questions of  errors  of  law  and
      remaking the decision. Mr Walker indicated that he  did  not  wish  to
      make any submissions in relation to remaking the decision.


  23. I find that the FTTJ's conclusion that "his family  are  also  present
      here under the 2006 EEA  regulations"  when  read  with  the  evidence
      leading up to this set out in paragraph 11  is  a  sufficiently  clear
      finding that the appellant has established that he is married  to  and
      living with  an  EU  citizen  who  is  present  in  this  country  and
      exercising Treaty rights as a worker so  that  he  is  entitled  to  a
      residence permit under the 2006 Regulations. The appeal is allowed  on
      this basis.


  24. I find that the appellant has established  that  he  has  achieved  10
      years lawful residence in the UK by the date of the hearing before  me
      on 30 September 2014. The  period  commenced  on  29  June  2004.  The
      reasons for refusal letter dated 19 February 2014  does  not  indicate
      that there are any contra indications  under  paragraph  276B  of  the
      Immigration Rules apart from the period which had not been achieved by
      the date of that letter. The respondent's public's policy "Guidance  -
      Long residence and private life - Version 11.0" valid from 11 November
      2013 indicates that the periods which the appellant has spent awaiting
      a decision on his application  and  on  his  appeal  count  as  lawful
      residence. It was not possible for the appellant to submit  a  further
      application whilst the decision  on  his  application  or  the  appeal
      against the refusal were pending. I allow the  appellant's  appeal  on
      the basis of long residence under paragraph 276B  of  the  Immigration
      Rules.


  25. As the appellant's appeal has been allowed both on the  basis  of  the
      2006 Regulations and 10 years lawful residence it is not necessary for
      me to reach a fully reasoned conclusion as to whether it would succeed
      on Article 8 human rights grounds. However, had it been necessary  for
      me to do so I would have concluded that this is a case  where  Gulshan
      principles apply. In relation to the first  test  there  are  arguably
      good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  the  Rules  largely
      but not wholly as a result of  my  conclusions  in  relation  to  long
      residence and the 2006 Regulations. In relation to the second  test  I
      would  have  found  that  there  were  compelling  circumstances   not
      sufficiently recognised under the Rules.


  26. The FTTJ did not make an anonymity direction and I have not been asked
      to do so. I can see no good reason for such a direction.


  27. Having found that the FTTJ erred in law and set aside her  decision  I
      remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal on the basis of
      long residence under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules and under
      the 2006 Regulations.














      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 1
      October 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

