
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13527/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25th February 2015                         |    On 11th March 2015       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Katherine Grubb, Counsel


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS


   1. In this appeal I will refer to the parties by the style in which  they
      appeared before the First-Tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a male citizen of Jamaica,  born  21  December  1963.
      His full immigration history is set out in the determination of  Judge
      of the First-Tier Tribunal Page, promulgated on 2 October  2014.   His
      history culminated in an application made to the  respondent  to  vary
      leave to remain.  That application was refused and the respondent also
      made a decision to remove him from the United Kingdom.

   3. As indicated above the appellant appealed that decision and his appeal
      came before Judge Page  on  26  September  2014.   Both  parties  were
      represented.  The appellant by Ms Grubb.

   4. Judge Page heard a number of witnesses and noted that there was a form
      of concession made on behalf of the appellant that he could  not  meet
      all the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  that  he  was
      pursuing the appeal outside those rules under Article 8 ECHR.

   5. In his determination Judge Page reviewed the evidence before him  with
      regard to the appellant's contact with  his  children  and  also  made
      comment regarding criminal convictions by reference to  paragraph  322
      of the Immigration Rules.  Particular reference was made to  paragraph
      322(1C)(iv) and in particular the nature of offences committed by  the
      appellant, and the sentences that he received.  In summary Judge  Page
      rejected any adverse effect on the  appellant  of  paragraph  322  and
      found that the respondent had been wrong to assume that the  appellant
      had no contact with his children.  Paragraph 32 of  the  determination
      then records "Appeal allowed".

   6. The respondent sought leave to appeal.

   7.  There  is  only  one  ground  alleging  the  making  of  a   material
      misdirection of law.  There are  then  10  paragraphs  explaining  the
      argument.  It is not necessary to detail all  10  paragraphs,  but  in
      summary they allege  that  the  appellant's  application  fell  to  be
      refused under paragraph 322(1C)(iv).  It was  then  an  error  dealing
      with the Article 8 assessment. Reference was made to  the  Immigration
      Act 2014, which amounts to a detailed expression of government  policy
      on immigration.  Reference is also made to the case of Gulshan  [2013]
      UKUT  00640  and  Nagre  [2013].   Further  reference  is  made  to  a
      Presenting  Officer's  minute   of   the   proceedings   relating   to
      contradictory evidence given at the hearing and that there was nothing
      exceptional regarding the appellant's circumstances.

   8. The respondent's application  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal TRP Hollingworth who  granted  leave.   Judge  Hollingworth's
      reasons make  reference  to  the  original  application  made  by  the
      appellant  and  also  makes  comment  regarding  the  nature  of   the
      appellant's  offending.   However  he  then  goes  onto  make  comment
      regarding use of children as a "trump card".  He  then  makes  various
      other  comments  to   the   nature   of   the   appellant's   original
      application/appeal,  but  then  indicates  that   "all   grounds   are
      arguable".

   9. Hence the matter came before me sitting in the Upper Tribunal.

  10. In his submission Mr Richards relied upon the grounds  seeking  leave.
      He suggested that Judge Page was wrong in coming to the conclusion  at
      paragraph 27, that the  respondent's  original  decision  was  not  in
      accordance with the law.  He had misread paragraph  322(1C)(iv).   The
      refusal would be mandatory.  Had the judge been able to find that  the
      decision was not in accordance with the law, he  should  have  allowed
      the  appeal  to  that  extent,  so  that  the   application   remained
      outstanding before the respondent.  He was then wrong  to  proceed  to
      deal with a stand alone Article 8 consideration.

  11. Ms Grubb referred to her skeleton argument (which was handed in a  few
      minutes  prior  to  the  hearing)  and  invited  me  to  consider  the
      parameters of the appeal.  The application was for indefinite leave to
      remain, but the respondent (in the decision notice) went onto consider
      further leave to remain.  That was rejected and a decision  to  remove
      the appellant was also made.  There was  not  an  appeal  against  the
      decision not to grant indefinite leave to remain.  Ms Grubb said  that
      Judge Page was clear as set out in paragraph 27.  He had carried out a
      proportionality exercise.  There was no mandatory refusal.

  12. Ms Grubb referred to the comments  made  by  Judge  Hollingworth  with
      regard to original application.  I indicated that I did not find Judge
      Hollingworth's comments particularly helpful.

  13. Ms Grubb referred to paragraphs 6 to 10 of the grounds seeking  leave.
      This amounted to no more than  disagreement.   Any  reference  to  the
      Presenting Officers notes should be  ignored  because  they  were  not
      available.  Any alleged inconsistencies in the evidence have not  been
      particularised.

  14. When reading the determination as a whole, Judge Page had reviewed all
      the evidence and he found the witnesses either credible or impressive.
       Ms Grubb accepted that Section 117 of the 2002 Act was  relevant  but
      that any lack of reference was  not  fatal.   The  judge  had  clearly
      weighed the appellant's case  against  public  interest.   There  were
      clear findings that the children were not able to join  the  appellant
      in Jamaica.  It would be disproportionate  for  them  to  spend  their
      lives apart.

  15. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give with
      reasons.

  16. In reaching a conclusion in this matter, I  have  noted  the  comments
      that have been made with regard to paragraph 322  of  the  Immigration
      Rules  HC395.   In   particular   to   paragraph   322(1C)(iv).    The
      respondent's decision notice refers to both  322(1)  and  322(1C)(iv).
      Ms Grubb correctly refers me to  the  fact  that  322(1C)  applies  to
      persons seeking indefinite leave to remain, whereas  it  is  contended
      that the appellant was seeking further leave to remain.  However it is
      clear that the appellant originally  sought  indefinite  leave  as  is
      confirmed by paragraph 7 of Ms Grubb's skeleton argument.  It is  then
      suggested by Ms Grubb that the basis of the appellant's appeal  before
      Judge Page was on a refusal to grant further leave.  If the appeal was
      in respect of further leave paragraph 322(1C)  would  not  apply.   Ms
      Grubb refers me to paragraph 1 of her skeleton argument  before  Judge
      Page which indicates an appeal against a refusal "to  grant  continued
      leave".  The grounds of appeal lodged by or on behalf of the appellant
      make no distinction.  Parameters of the appeal were, in my  view,  not
      clearly defined before Judge Page.

  17. However it maybe that this is of academic  interest  only,  given  the
      acceptance by Ms Grubb (before Judge Page) that  the  appellant  could
      not meet the requirements of the rules.

  18. Judge Page went on at length to review the evidence  before  him  with
      regard to the appellant's contact with his children.  Having  reviewed
      the evidence, Judge Page made findings favourable to the appellant and
      the final sentence of paragraph 27 of the determination indicated that
      the decision had not been made in accordance with the  law.   At  this
      stage I agree with Mr Richards that the appropriate course would  have
      been for Judge Page to have allowed the appeal to the  limited  extent
      that the application remained  outstanding  before  the  Secretary  of
      State.

  19. I note that despite finding that the appellant could not succeed under
      the rules (paragraph 2) the judge did go onto consider in  some  depth
      the effect of paragraph 322(1C).

  20. A reading of the determination as a whole leads to the conclusion that
      Judge Page allowed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR although  paragraph
      32 is unclear.  However no other conclusion would apply,  which  leads
      me then to consider the particulars set out in paragraphs 3  to  5  of
      the grounds seeking leave.

  21. Those grounds in summary suggest the judge should have had concern  as
      to the effect of the Immigration Act 2014 and  its  amendment  to  the
      2002 Act.  The determination is  silent  with  regard  to  that.   The
      grounds also suggest the judge should have considered whether  or  not
      there were "compelling circumstances" not recognised by the rules  and
      that the judge was wrong to proceed without giving consideration as to
      whether there could be a stand alone consideration of Article 8.

  22. Ms Grubb correctly refers me to R (Aliuy)  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWHC  3919
      (Admin) where Judge Andrew Grubb sitting as a Deputy High Court  Judge
      was said to have reached a conclusion that it was not necessary to say
      that an Article 8 assessment should only be carried  out  where  there
      are compelling circumstances.   However  Judge  Page  did  not  direct
      himself at all with regard to this area of consideration.  I  consider
      that to be an error which is material to the outcome of the appeal.

  23. As to paragraph 6 of the grounds seeking leave, I do not consider this
      amounts to an error on the part of the judge.  There  is  no  evidence
      before me that any  of  the  witnesses  gave  contradictory  evidence,
      thereby making the judge's findings perverse.  I reject that ground.

  24. I conclude that the determination does contain a material error of law
      and accordingly the decision of Judge Page falls to be set aside.

  25. Having canvassed the opinion of each representative, I am of the  view
      that this appeal should be remitted back to a judge of the  First-Tier
      Tribunal (other than Judge Page).   No  findings  are  preserved.   No
      doubt at the next hearing the judge will define the parameters of  the
      appeal that falls to be determined.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole

