
IAC-AH-pc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13167/2013
                                                               IA/13193/2013
                                                               IA/13170/2013
                                                               IA/13178/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 August 2014                     |On 23 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NPA
                                     KMA
                                     OCA
                                     SMA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms B Jones, instructed by Jein Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondents are all citizens of Sri Lanka.  The  first  and  second
    respondents are husband and wife and the third and  fourth  respondents
    are their children (the latter aged 15 and 13 years  respectively).   I
    shall hereafter refer to the respondents as the appellants and  to  the
    appellant as the respondent (as they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).

 2. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom  in  October  2007  with
    entry clearance as a student.  The second, third and fourth  appellants
    arrived in April 2008 as the  first  appellant's  dependants.   In  May
    2012, the leave of the first appellant was curtailed as she had  ceased
    studying in the United Kingdom and the leave to remain of the remaining
    appellants was also curtailed as a consequence.  Prior to the expiry by
    curtailment of the first appellant's leave, she made an application for
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom on human rights  grounds.
    That application was refused by the respondent by a  decision  dated  2
    July 2012.  Applying the "new" Immigration Rules (i.e. those introduced
    after 9 July 2012) the respondent considered that  the  appellants  did
    not meet the requirements of the Rules.  Although the  application  for
    further leave  to  remain  predated  the  Rule  change,  the  decisions
    postdated that change so the new Rules did apply (see Singh [2015] EWCA
    Civ 74).  In any event, Counsel before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    (Judge Bagral) acknowledged that the  appellants  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules [20].  Judge Bagral  went  on  to
    consider Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules and  allowed  the
    appeals on that basis.   The  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. There are three grounds of appeal.  In the first ground, the  Secretary
    of State argues that the judge failed to  have  regard  to  a  relevant
    consideration, namely that the first appellant's student status did not
    give rise to a legitimate expectation that leave would  be  granted  to
    enable his family to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Secondly,  the
    decision is challenged on the basis that the judge failed to  strike  a
    correct balance between Article 8 ECHR "as  encapsulated  in  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules."  Thirdly, the  judge's  finding  that
    the third appellant was "at a critical stage of his education" was  not
    supported by the evidence.  The third appellant was not due to sit  his
    GCSE exams until summer of 2007, some three years hence.

 4. The  judge  described  the  first  appellant  as  an  "intelligent  and
    assiduous individual" [29], the child appellants were doing  very  well
    at school, the fourth appellant (aged 12) described as "extremely well-
    behaved, honest and reliable" [32].  The judge clearly found that  this
    was a respectable law-abiding family as was evidenced by  a  number  of
    letters from members of their community  which  had  been  between  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The judge did describe [48] the present  time  to
    be a "critical stage" in the education of  the  third  appellant.   She
    noted that the child appellants  had  laid  down  roots  in  the  local
    community and had many friends.

 5. In the normal course of events, these observations may  not  have  gone
    very far in supporting the claim for leave to remain  under  Article  8
    ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.  However, the judge's analysis  was
    very thorough.  Whilst another Tribunal may have come  to  an  entirely
    different view of the evidence, it cannot be said that  Judge  Bagral's
    analysis is flawed by reason of an improper consideration of irrelevant
    matters or a failure to have regard to relevant facts.  Her view of the
    "critical stage" reached in the  third  appellant's  education  was  as
    legitimate as the respondent's own assertion that  the  stage  was  not
    critical, the GSCEs being some  years  away.   The  lead  up  to  those
    examinations, even  at  three  years'  distance,  might  reasonably  be
    described as a "critical" period in a child's education.  The  opinions
    of the judge and of the Secretary of State are  arguably  both  correct
    from  which  it  follows  that  the  judge's  finding  cannot  properly
    described as perverse or wholly unreasonable.  What I do  find  dilutes
    the force of the submissions of the Secretary  of  State  is  that  the
    judge has made her findings on  the  evidence  and  has  conducted  her
    Article 8 analysis fully aware  of  the  relevant  jurisprudence  which
    might have indicated an alternative outcome.   For  example,  following
    Nasim (Article 8) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) she  properly  attached
    little weight to the lawful conduct of the family whilst in the  United
    Kingdom, whilst lawful conduct may not enhance an Article  8  claim  it
    may have the effect of lessening the weight which  should  properly  be
    given to the public interest concerned with  removal.   The  judge  was
    also aware that the United  Kingdom  did  not  owe  these  children  an
    education nor did she seek to argue that the first  appellant  had  any
    legitimate expectation that his period  as  a  student  in  the  United
    Kingdom would lead to a longer period of residence.  Judge  Bagral  has
    been alive throughout her decision  to  the  factors  which  tended  to
    indicate a negative outcome of the appeal whilst she has given  careful
    and detailed reasons for finding that, on these particular  facts,  the
    appeal should be allowed.  The Upper Tribunal  should  hesitate  before
    seeking to interfere with or alter the conclusions of a judge  who  has
    had the opportunity of hearing the oral evidence and who  has  assessed
    that evidence fully aware  of  the  jurisprudence  which  favoured  the
    position of the Secretary of State, as well as that of the  appellants.
    Although I acknowledge that a different Tribunal might have  reached  a
    different  outcome,  that  is  not  the  point.   I  can  identify   no
    significant error of law in Judge Bagral's analysis which would lead me
    to set aside her  decision.   Accordingly,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed        Date 28 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
