
IAC-FH-CK
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13957/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 November 2014                         |On 22 December 2014            |
|Prepared 3 November 2014                   |                               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR HAMZA BENGHIDA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Lenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Respondent attending in Person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this appeal the Appellant is referred to as the Secretary  of  State
    and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Algeria, date of birth  25  February  1984,
    appealed against the Secretary of  State's  decision,  dated  13  March
    2014, to refuse to extend leave to remain pursuant to an application of
    9 January 2014.

3.   The appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Devlin (the judge),  who  on  13  June  2014,  having  found  that  the
    Claimant's case did not succeed under the Immigration Rules,   went  on
    to consider whether or not the Claimant  came  within  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended.  The judge
    concluded in both respects that the appeal failed.  The judge  went  on
    to conclude that the appeal should succeed under Article 8 ECHR outside
    of the Rules.

4.   In considering those matters it appeared to me that  the  judge  simply
    treated Article 8 outside of the Rules as being the next  step  bearing
    in mind the case law the judge cited.  The  judge  failed  to  consider
    whether in the context of MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192  and  Nagre
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) that there needed to  be   a  consideration  of
    whether the  Secretary  of  States  decision  was  ECHR  compliant  and
    secondly   whether there were compelling/exceptional circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules which rendered the Secretary of
    States decision  disproportionate.   From  a  reading  of  the  judge's
    determination of paragraphs 87 to 91 it is clear that the judge started
    the exercise by deciding that there was a  case under  Article  8  ECHR
    and that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  disproportionate.
    Having reached that conclusion, the judge therefore decided that  there
    was a compelling case not sufficiently recognised by the Rules.

5.   Putting aside any error of law in the judge's approach for one  moment,
    it seemed to me it is clear on the evidence and  documents  before  the
    judge, determining this matter on the papers the judge could do  little
    on the evidence that was actually before him than  reach  the  decision
    that the judge did on the application of the Immigration Rules.

6.   I conclude that the judge's assessment was properly made on the  issue,
    looking at the matter under of the Rules.

7.   Unfortunately the judge's consideration of Article 8  ECHR  and  family
    life matters failed to consider if a claim to remain based upon his  UK
    spouse's ill health was provided for  under  the  Rules.   It  was  not
    argued that there is such provision  under  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph
    276ADE or elsewhere in the Rules to enable the Claimant  to  remain  in
    the UK.

8.   The Claimant's typed grounds of appeal did  give  some  information  on
    his wife's reduced liver function (reduced to  22%,  16%  and  6%  Rt),
    diabetes and the problems of access  to  hospitals  for  dialysis,  the
    costs of treatment and travel, their reduced  income  in  Algeria,  the
    lengthy travel to Bejaia (300km) and Oran (1,200km) and time taken  for
    dialysis away from his home area of Guelma using coaches (with  no  on-
    board W.C. facilities) over several days.  His wife needs to use a W.C.
    about every two hours.

9.   In the case file before me there are simply no medical documents  about
    the Claimant's wife's ill health, either from a GP, her treating doctor
    or the hospital whereby she was undergoing any regular treatment.  This
    position was consistent with the judge's remarks at paragraph 90 of the
    determination that the claim has not been  substantiated  by  evidence.
    The Claimant says that he sent to the Tribunal a 'big file' of  medical
    information to confirm his wife's suffering from  kidney  problems  and
    type 2 diabetes.  The  Claimant  believed  a  letter  from  his  wife's
    treating doctor at Guy's Hospital was sent to the judge.

10.  This is a Secretary of State's  appeal  and  it  would  seem  that  the
    Claimant was not alerted to the need to either raise further grounds in
    resisting the Secretary of State's application or  alternatively  argue
    for his part that documents had been  provided  and  that  the  judge's
    findings of fact on the material evidence was wrong.

11.  I concluded that the Claimant was being honest about the 'big file'  of
    medical evidence he sent in.  I find that the  judge  made  a  material
    error of law in failing to properly  assess  whether  to  look  at  the
    matter outside of the Rules.  It also appears that there may well  have
    been some procedural irregularity through the loss within the  Tribunal
    system of relevant evidence submitted which would have borne  upon  the
    judge's assessment of the Article 8 claim.

12.  In these circumstances I am satisfied that the  only  fair  and  proper
    course is for the appeal of the Secretary of State to be allowed.

13.  The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.

14.  The matter will have to be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.

15.  No anonymity order was sought


DIRECTIONS

(1)  Case to be relisted in the First-tier Tribunal  not  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devlin or Judge T B Davey.

(2)  Please relist Taylor House, two hours.

(3)  Issues with the judge's findings on  paragraph  284  of  the  Rules  to
    stand;

    (i)  whether the medical health of the Claimant's wife should be  taken
         into  account  as  a  material  factor  as  part   of   exceptional
         circumstances and/or in assessing the outcome of an Article 8 claim
         outside of the Rules and


    (ii) whether Article 8 outside the Rules is engaged.

(4)  No interpreter required.

(5)  Claimant to  provide  copies  of  the  medical  evidence  ('big  file')
    submitted to the First-tier Tribunal and any updated medical evidence.

(6)  Any additional documentation to be provided concerning  the  Claimant's
    claim and/or the health of his wife not less than fourteen days  before
    the further hearing.



Signed        Date 17 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

