
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13417/2015
                                                               IA/13419/2015
                                                               IA/13426/2015
                                                               IA/13430/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th October 2016                 |On 10th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        mr M. N. A. (first Appellant)
                        mrs S. N. (second Appellant)
                        mr M. A. N. (third Appellant)
                        miss F. N. (fourth Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr R de Mello, Counsel.

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity is granted in these proceedings because two of the appellants are
minor children.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    a First-tier Tribunal (Judge Fowell) allowing the  Respondents  appeals
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 17th March  2015  refusing
    them leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. For the sake of clarity I shall refer throughout this decision  to  the
    Secretary of State as "the Respondent" and to the Respondents  as  "the
    Appellants" reflecting their respective positions before the FtT.

 3. The principal Appellant in these appeals is M. A.   The  second,  third
    and fourth Appellants are his wife and their two children respectively.
    His wife and children appeal as his dependants, so  for  convenience  I
    shall refer to M. A. as "the Appellant".

Background

 4. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born  3rd  February  1980.   He
    entered the UK on 14th March 2006 in possession of an entry visa  as  a
    student.  This was extended by various terms, but on  27th  March  2013
    the Respondent made a decision curtailing the Appellant's  leave,  with
    an expiry date of 26th May 2013.  In the meantime, the Appellant's wife
    had entered the UK in 2008 and their two children were born here on 9th
    October 2008 and 16th December 2010 respectively.

 5. Following the Respondent's decision to curtail his leave, the Appellant
    made an application for leave to remain on the basis of his Article  8,
    ECHR rights.  The Respondent refused that application and a  subsequent
    appeal against the decision was heard on 30th January 2015  before  the
    FtT. That Tribunal found that the Respondent had failed to comply  with
    her duty under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009, regarding the Appellant's two children.

 6. Consequently, a fresh decision letter was issued by the  Respondent  on
    17th March 2015 once again refusing  the  Appellant's  application  for
    leave and it is this decision which forms  the  basis  of  the  present
    appeal.  The Grounds for Refusal set out that the Appellant  could  not
    qualify for leave under the Immigration Rules and so far as his private
    life was concerned could not show  that  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to his returning  to  Pakistan.   The  consideration  of  the
    Section 55 duty was made at the end of the letter and concluded that so
    far as the two children were concerned, as they were aged 6 years and 4
    years respectively, their best interests lay in  returning  with  their
    parents to Pakistan as a family unit.

 7. The Appellant appealed that decision to  the  FtT  on  the  only  route
    available to him, namely that the decision was not in  accordance  with
    his Article 8, ECHR rights.

Hearing Before the FtT

 8. When the appeal came before the FtT, the judge took oral evidence  from
    the Appellant and considered supporting documentary evidence, the  main
    thrust of which, showed that both  children  were  now  at  school  and
    making good progress there.  The judge noted however  that  the  school
    reports of the older child showed  that  he  spoke  Urdu,  as  well  as
    English.  The oral evidence added that M.  A.  had  gained  work  as  a
    senior management consultant for a  company  called  Tech  Sense  until
    their certificate of sponsorship was withdrawn.

 9. Focusing then on the eldest child of the family the judge  acknowledged
    that he had been in the UK now for seven years (and his sister for five
    years).  The judge then said at [29];

         "the position of the third  Appellant  does  not  have  any  strong
         features beyond the fact that he has spent his first seven years in
         the UK and has now spent over  two  years  at  primary  school.   I
         accept that he has never  been  to  Pakistan  and  that  he  speaks
         English, as well as  Urdu.   Those  initial  seven  years  are  not
         however the  most  significant  from  the  point  of  view  of  his
         independent social development."

10. The judge then went on to look at Section 117B of  the  2002  Act.   He
    said at [34];

         "by Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act the public  interest  does  not
         require the removal of a  parent  with  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with a child who has lived in the UK  for  at
         least seven years and - using the same language considered above -
         (276ADE) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
         the UK."

    He then went on at [35] to say;

         "ultimately  there  is  nothing  in  this   family's   history   or
         circumstances to tell against them with any real force."

    He then allowed the appeals of the Appellant's wife  and  two  children
    under Article 8, ECHR and M. A.'s appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and Article 8, ECHR.

Onward Appeal

11. The Respondent sought and was granted permission to appeal.  The  grant
    of permission is set out in the following terms;

         "It is arguable that  the  judge  should  have  set  out  a  fuller
         analysis of the competing consideration in the context of  carrying
         out the proportionality exercise pursuant to Article 8 outside  the
         Rules.  It is arguable that in applying Section 117B(6)  the  judge
         has set out an insufficient analysis of the relevant factor  within
         the parameters of reasonableness which has thereby arguably led  to
         a flawed conclusion."

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether  the  FtT's  decision
    discloses an error of law requiring the decision to be  set  aside  and
    remade.

The UT Hearing

12. Miss Isherwood on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  relied  on  the
    grounds seeking permission and the grant  of  permission  itself.   She
    referred to the judge's material error in his approach and referred  to
    the approach being inconsistent with the guidance set out in AM (S117B)
    Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 and EV (Philippines) and others v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

13. Mr de Mello for the Appellants submitted that the grant  of  permission
    was limited to the question of reasonableness in the context of whether
    it would be reasonable to expect a qualifying child to  leave  the  UK.
    Mr de Mello submitted that the judge had taken into account the  school
    reports of the eldest child  [8]  and  had  considered  material  which
    formed part of the reasonableness test.  He submitted  that  the  judge
    had carried out the  balancing  exercise  properly,  referring  to  the
    relevant jurisprudence and  despite  Miss  Isherwood's  assertion,  the
    judge had referred to EV (Philippines) in [27].  In addition the  judge
    had referred to Azimi-Moayed and Others and  the  decision  in  PD  and
    Others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims)  Sri  Lanka  [2016]  UKUT
    00108 (IAC).

Consideration

14. In this appeal, the issue before me centres on whether  the  judge  has
    given sufficient reasons to show that he has turned his mind to whether
    or not it could be said that it would be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    children of this family to leave the UK with their parents both of whom
    are here without leave.  In this context the eldest child of the family
    has now been in the UK for seven years.  The considerations in  Section
    117B(6) "the reasonable test" now come into play and form the threshold
    test with the question needing to  be  asked,  is  it  unreasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK?

15. Despite Mr de Mello's  submissions  that  the  judge  carried  out  the
    appropriate balancing exercise, I find that he has not. I  accept  that
    the judge has set out and referred to relevant case law, in  particular
    EV (Philippines).  What I find, however, is that the judge  has  simply
    relied upon quoting the  case  law  and  nowhere  do  I  see  a  proper
    application to the evidence of the  principles  identified  therein.  I
    find  therefore  that  there  are  insufficient   reasons   given   for
    conclusions reached.

16. I find the judge has approached the reasonableness test from the  wrong
    angle.  He says at [35] when assessing the evidence;

         "ultimately  there  is  nothing  in  this   family's   history   or
         circumstance to tell against them with any real force"

    The only evidence identified in the present case appears to be that the
    eldest child is now in education and has been here for seven years.   I
    see no analysis and therefore no findings made on the competing  public
    interest requirement of maintaining  immigration  control.  It  appears
    from a full reading of the decision, that the FtT has treated the  best
    interests of the  qualifying  child  as  determinative  rather  than  a
    significant factor which has to be weighed in the balance.  It  is  not
    clear that the judge has kept in mind and factored into the balance the
    guidance set out in EV (Philippines), namely that the starting point is
    that a child's best interests are to remain with his parents.   I  find
    therefore that the decision of the FtT must be set aside  for  material
    error.  The decision will need to be remade  afresh  with  findings  of
    fact made to fully reflect these principles.

17. Both representatives were of the view that if I should find an error of
    law, requiring the decision to be remade  then  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision afresh.  I agree with that course.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby  set  aside  for  material
error.  I set aside the decision.  The matter is returned to the  First-tier
Tribunal (not Judge  Fowell)  for  that  Tribunal  to  remake  the  decision
afresh.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts   Date 09 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

