
                                    [pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13251/2014
                                                               ia/15173/2014
                                                               IA/15177/2014
                                                               IA/15183/2014
                                                               IA/15191/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 July 2016                      |On 01 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                              Krzysztof [K] (1)
                               Monika [K] (2)
                                  [I K] (3)
                                  [B K] (4)
                                  [M K] (5)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This appeal to the Upper Tribunal was heard on 18th March 2016  when  I
    found a material error of law but fixed a further hearing at which  the
    appellants  were  to  adduce  further  evidence  and  make   additional
    submissions.

2    The background to the appeal hearing on the above date is  set  out  in
    the earlier decision.  I will adopt the nomenclature and  abbreviations
    in that decision.

3.    At  the  adjourned  hearing   the   appellants   attended   but   were
    unrepresented. Mr Diwnycz continued to represent the respondent.

3.   I heard submissions and evidence by the appellants who  explained  that
    the second appellant had the benefit of a social pension from Poland. I
    also heard evidence about the parties work histories,  which  were  far
    from straightforward.

4.   At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision  which  I  will  later
    give after the following discussion.

Discussion

5.   The appellants are required to show that as  EEA  nationals  they  have
    resided in the UK  in  accordance  with  the  2006  Regulations  for  a
    continuous period of five years.  This may be as a family member of  an
    EEA national, a worker or a self-employed person who  has  ceased  that
    activity or a family member of a worker or self-employed person who has
    ceased that activity.  Unfortunately, the evidence is complex and it is
    unsurprising  that  the  respondent  was  unable  to  find   that   the
    requirements  of  Regulation  15  of  the  EEA  Regulations  were  met.
    However, I have had an opportunity to review the  evidence  having  had
    the benefit of an  oral  explanation  by  Mr  and  Mrs  Kopacynski  who
    attended  two  hearings  before  me.   Although  Mr  Diwnycz   had   an
    opportunity to challenge their evidence, essentially, he did not do so.
     Unfortunately, at both hearings, Mr Diwnycz faced a substantial bundle
    of documents produced by the appellants.  By  the  end  of  the  appeal
    process it was far from clear which documents  had  been  disclosed  at
    what time.  I have attempted to make sense of the substantial bundle of
    documents produced. Had they been represented  I  would  have  required
    much closer adherence to the rules but  as  they  are  unrepresented  I
    allowed them considerable leeway in presenting their case.

6.   I understand that the first twelve months of the five  year  continuous
    period required by Regulation 15 is not in issue.  The first  appellant
    believes that this  period  began  in  or  about  April  2007  when  he
    describes himself as being self-employed but seeking work.  He does not
    explain the nature of his  self-employment.   However,  he  did  obtain
    employment in May 2007 and has produced a  self-assessment  calculation
    to prove it.  That covers the period until October 2008.  As the  first
    appellant pointed out, the Regulations do not  require  the  five  year
    period to be calculated from the date that an  appellant  arrived  into
    the UK (in this case 26 September 2006).

7.   In addition to his work on a self-employed basis  the  first  appellant
    worked for Best Connection  from  6  October  2007.   However,  in  his
    response to the respondent's appeal the first appellant explained  that
    the registration certificate for the above period  of  employment  with
    Best Connection predated the commencement of that employment.   It  was
    in fact dated on 10 June 2007.  It seems that at some stage  the  first
    appellant worked for the Magnet Group but  it  is  not  clear  when  he
    started working for that company.  What is clear, or at least  clearer,
    is that the employment with Magnet Group started on 14 January 2008 and
    came to an end on 27 November 2008 when he was made redundant.

8.   Following that event he did not register as a  job  seeker.   According
    to the above chronology, based on the first appellant's response to the
    respondent's appeal, the appellant was therefore employed or  at  least
    in some form of employment between April  2007  and  November  2008,  a
    period of approximately eighteen months.

9.   Turning to the second  appellant's  employment  history,  this  appears
    more straightforward.  On 1  May  2009  the  second  appellant  started
    working for Clipper Logistics.  This continued until 23 April 2010 when
    she started in self-employment. She told  me  that  she  had  become  a
    paralegal and produced documents to confirm this.

10.  The aggregate of the first appellant's period  of  employment  and  the
    second appellant's  period  of  employment  and  self-employment  is  a
    continuous period  of  five  years  from  April  2007  to  April  2012.
    Therefore, when they made their application to  the  respondent  for  a
    document certifying their right to permanent residence in the UK on  19
    January 2014 they had been continuously residing in the UK for a period
    of five years exercising Treaty rights.

11.  The second reason for refusal given by  the  respondent  was  that  the
    appellants had not  provided  evidence  that  they  held  comprehensive
    sickness insurance in the UK during the period of  their  residence  in
    self-sufficiency.  This is stipulated by Regulation 4 which deals  with
    "a self-sufficient person".  This is defined as a person who has -

         "(i) sufficient resources not to become  a  burden  on  the  social
             assistance system of the UK ...; and

         (ii) comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the UK."

12.  The respondent was  concerned  that  no  such  documentation  had  been
    supplied.

13.  However, the second appellant provided a social  insurance  certificate
    which she had translated from Polish.  This document seems to have been
    produced for the first time at the appeal  hearing.   Nevertheless,  Mr
    Diwnycz did not object to me taking account of its contents.  There was
    also a document confirming her pension entitlement.

14   Finally, the appellants stated that they had  supplied  utility  bills,
    bank statements and P60s for the relevant period. Mr Diwnycz was not in
    a position to contradict this.

15.  I must now consider whether the evidence  supplied  was  sufficient  to
    satisfy the requirements of the 2006 Regulations.

Conclusions

16.  Having carefully reviewed the evidence it is  sufficient  to  establish
    that the appellants were indeed exercising Treaty rights in the UK  for
    the full period of five years as stipulated by  the  Regulations.   The
    evidence  is  disparate  but  taken  cumulatively,  it  satisfies   the
    requirements of the Regulations.

17.  Secondly, there was sufficient evidence of sickness  insurance  in  the
    form of the social pension card produced at the hearing, which,  as  Mr
    Diwnycz confirmed, appeared to be in order.

18.  Accordingly, the original decision, although it contains  an  error  of
    law, ultimately reached the correct result.



Notice of Decision

Having preciously allowed the respondent's appeal against  the  decision  of
the FTT to the extent that I found a material error of law on 18th May  2016
I have now decided to re-make the decision.  I have  decided  to  allow  the
appellants' appeal against the respondent's refusal  to  issue  a  residence
card.

I make no anonymity direction and no fee award.

The reason for the latter decision is that the documentation is  still  very
unclear.  Had clear documentation been supplied in the first place  much  of
the costs and delay that has been occasioned would have been avoided.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award but have decided to make no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

