
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/13390/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 25th June 2015                    |On 16th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                  AMJAD ALI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kadirgolam of Muzaffar Associates Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Duffy, Senior Home Office presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a national of Pakistan. He came to the UK in 2011  as
    a student. He ceased his studies at the beginning of 2013 and,  so  far
    as we are aware, has not studied since.  The  appellant  chose  not  to
    advise the Home Office that he was no longer a student. The appellant's
    student visa expired on 10 October 2013.

2.    On 8 September 2013, the appellant underwent a  ceremony  of  marriage
    to Margareta Olahova, a Slovakian national aged 17 years. At that time,
    Ms Olahova had been in the UK for about one month, having left Slovakia
    in circumstances which caused concern and resulted in her being  listed
    as a missing person. It  is  said  that  she  and  the  appellant  fell
    instantly in love, commenced co-habitation and then married as a result
    of a developing relationship of love.

3.    After the ceremony of marriage, the appellant  made  two  applications
    for a residence card, confirming his right to reside in the UK  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights of movement. Each of
    those applications was refused by the respondent. The appellant appeals
    against the second refusal. Each of his applications was refused on the
    grounds that the marriage he has conducted with the EEA national  is  a
    marriage of convenience so that the appellant is not a family member of
    an EEA national.

4.    The basis of the respondent's decision is that the appellant  and  the
    EEA national, when questioned, give differing accounts of events in the
    period leading to marriage. They could not give consistent accounts  of
    important dates in the development of their relationship nor could they
    give  reliable  and  consistent  accounts  of  how  their  relationship
    developed. Ms  Olahova  could  not  give  a  reliable  account  of  her
    conversion from the Roman Catholic faith to the Muslim religion. It  is
    noted that even after marriage, Ms Olahova defines herself as  a  Roman
    Catholic rather than a Muslim.

5.    The First Tier Tribunal Judge Boyd ("the judge") heard  evidence  from
    the appellant, from Ms Olahova and  from  another  witness.  The  other
    witness said that he was present at the marriage of the  appellant  and
    the EEA national and had visited them at their  home.  There  was  also
    evidence that the appellant and the  EEA  national  live  at  the  same
    address and, at the time of the hearing before the judge,  Ms  Olahaova
    was present. It was not said that the appellant is not  the  father  of
    her child.

6.    The judge specifically mentions the foregoing matters  and  said  that
    these are factors which  must  be  taken  into  account.  After  taking
    account of the foregoing matters, he concluded that the marriage  on  8
    September 2013 was a marriage  of  convenience  and  he  dismissed  the
    appeal.

7.    The grounds of appeal simply state  that  the  judge  did  not  afford
    sufficient weight to some of the evidence. On 18 September 2014,  First
    Tier Tribunal Judge McDade  granted  leave  to  appeal  saying  "it  is
    arguable that the judge erred by giving undue weight to certain factors
    and insufficient weight to others..." Despite that grant of  permission
    to appeal, we cannot see  any  error  of  law.  Matters  of  weight  of
    evidence are classically matters for the fact finding  judge  at  first
    instance. The grounds of appeal make it clear that the  appellant  does
    not agree with the judge. That does not amount to an error of law.

8.    There were substantial reasons for thinking that the marriage  is  one
    of convenience. The evidence does not all point in the one direction.

9.    There is nothing that the Judge ought to have taken into account  that
    is not taken into account in the decision of the Judge  dated  27  June
    2014. The Judge did not err in reaching the conclusion that he did.

10.   There is no error of law.

11.   The Judge's decision therefore stands.



Signed      Date

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
