
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13302/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On 15 December 2015                  |On 29 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer


                                   Between

                                     P A
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:    Ms M  Rasoul,  instructed  by  Myles  Hutchinson  and  Lithgow
                    Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

Introduction

 1. The origins of this appeal are traceable to a decision made  on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State for the Home Department  (the  "Secretary  of
    State"), dated 30 May 2012, to deport the Appellant, a national of  the
    Democratic Republic of the Congo (the "DRC"), aged 42 years,  from  the
    United Kingdom (the "UK").

 2. We have anonymised the appellant because he is a vulnerable  adult  and
    extensive reference is made to medical evidence relating  to  him.   We
    have also anonymised his partner  ("L"),  so  as  to  ensure  that  her
    identification does not lead inadvertently to his  identification,  and
    also  because  this  decision  refers  to  sensitive  medical  evidence
    relating to her.

 3. Both members of the panel have contributed to this decision.

Appeal Proceedings

 4. On 13 December 2012, the Appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal (the  "FTT").
    On 21 June 2013, the decision of the FTT was set  aside  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal (the "UT") and remitted for fresh hearing.   By  its  decision
    promulgated on 02 October 2013, a different panel of the FTT  dismissed
    the appeal once again.

 5. On 3 March 2014 permission to appeal to  the  UT  was  granted.   On  4
    December  2014,  at  a  case  management  review  hearing,   directions
    requiring the service and lodging of the Appellant's  medical  evidence
    by 01 March 2015 were given and the listing of the appeal was adjourned
    pending the expected country guidance decision of the UT.   On  30  May
    2015 the decision in BM and  Others  (returnees  -  criminal  and  non-
    criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 00293 was promulgated.  This was  followed
    by further case management directions, which included an  extension  of
    time to 19 August 2015 for the provision  of  the  Appellant's  further
    medical evidence. The  Appellant's  representatives  duly  submitted  a
    supplementary bundle  in  compliance  with  directions.   Next,  on  23
    November  2015,  the  conventional  Notice  of  Hearing  notifying  the
    relisting of the appeal on 15 December 2015 was transmitted.

Background facts

 6. The Appellant arrived in the  UK  on  25  September  2004  and  claimed
    asylum.  His appeal against the refusal of his asylum claim  was  heard
    in absentia and dismissed on 23 May 2005.  He  is  recorded  as  having
    absconded.  Whatever his circumstances  he  lodged  another  claim  for
    asylum soon after this in December 2005  under  a  different  name  and
    different date of birth.  A finger print check revealed  his  identity.
    On 3 March 2006 he pleaded guilty  to  the  offence  of  attempting  to
    obtain leave by deception and was sentenced to 12  months  imprisonment
    and recommended for deportation.  On 12 January 2007 the Appellant  was
    released from prison into hospital.  In a letter dated 22 January  2007
    Dr Snow, a Consultant Physician described the Appellant  as  "currently
    very seriously ill requiring intensive nursing care  and  very  careful
    monitoring" after neurosurgery.  In a follow up letter  dated  4  April
    2007 Dr Snow said that should the Appellant be removed from  access  to
    medication supplies and proper medical follow up, "immune function will
    rapidly fail, there would be a flare up of his  cerebral  toxoplasmosis
    and risk of other opportunistic infections leading to severe illness or
    death".  The Appellant was released into the care of  Newcastle  Social
    Services and placed in 24-hour residential care on 24  April  2008.   A
    social services assessment dated 4 July 2008 states that the  Appellant
    "needs regular support in order to  complete  daily  tasks,  if  he  is
    unaccompanied outside he will often forget where  he  is  or  where  he
    lives". The  decision  letter  refers  to  a  report  from  South  Tees
    Hospitals NHS Trust dated 27 May 2009.  This states that the  Appellant
    was diagnosed as  HIV  positive  in  January  2007  with  toxoplasmosis
    encephalitis, and that he had significant memory loss such that he  was
    in a care home with support workers to assist him on a daily  basis.  A
    more up to date letter from the same source  dated  24  September  2014
    describes  the  toxoplasmosis  as  a  consequence  of  being   severely
    immunocompromised at the time with a very low CDR count.

 7. The Appellant was notified of his liability to be deported  on  14  May
    2010. This was based on his 2006 conviction and the recommendation  for
    deportation by the sentencing judge.  In response to this the Appellant
    stated he wished to return to  the  DRC  on  18  November  2010  before
    amending this to Cameroon on 6 December 2010.  On 7 December  2010  the
    Secretary of State wrote to the Appellant.  It was explained  that  the
    UKBA had liaised with the Appellant's best interests assessor  who  had
    made it clear that she believed  he  had  the  capacity  to  make  this
    decision.  The best  interests  assessor  further  explained  that  the
    Appellant shared an in-depth plan on  how  he  would  be  supported  to
    return to Cameroon, where some of his family members were residing, and
    she supported his request.  The Secretary of State concluded the letter
    by outlining the options to the Appellant and  asking  him  to  discuss
    these with his family, representatives and best interests  assessor  in
    order to make an informed decision  about  the  best  way  to  proceed.
    This letter seems to have crossed  with  a  letter  from  Middleborough
    Council of the same date.  Whilst we have been provided with the  first
    page of this letter only this  is  likely  to  be  in  support  of  the
    Appellant's application to return to Cameroon.

 8. In a form dated 12 January 2011 signed by the Appellant with an address
    given as "Roseleigh Care Home" he made a formal application  under  the
    'voluntary assisted return and reintegration programme' to be  returned
    to Cameroon.  The Secretary of State's bundle contains screen  shot  of
    CID notes dated 17 January 2011.  These include, "Applicant has applied
    to return to Congo on AVR programme...Applicant does not meet  criteria
    for AVR programme - REJECTED (More than 12  months  sentence...".   The
    CID note is inaccurate in two important respects: the  application  was
    for a return to Cameroon (not the Congo)  and  the  Appellant  was  not
    sentenced to more than 12 months as  he  was  sentenced  to  12  months
    imprisonment.  What is clear is that  the  Appellant's  application  to
    make a voluntary return was rejected by the Secretary  of  State.   The
    decision letter states that on 11 March 2011 the Appellant stated he no
    longer wished to return to the  Cameroon  and  wished  for  his  asylum
    application  to  be  considered.   However,  there  is  no  documentary
    evidence to support that assertion. The documents in the  Secretary  of
    State's bundle then paint the following picture at this  point  in  the
    chronology: the Appellant clarified that he wished  to  return  to  the
    Cameroon and he withdrew his asylum application in May  2011.   Another
    form to enable the Appellant to return to the Cameroon was completed by
    him on 15 September 2011 but the Secretary of State again rejected  the
    application on 20 September 2011, commenting "'Applicant  has  received
    custodial sentence in excess of 12 months, therefore he  does  not  fit
    our criteria' (He  has  been  rejected  by  AVR  before  for  the  same
    reason)".  It is difficult to trace with any  precision  what  happened
    next.  The decision letter asserts that the Appellant  made  a  further
    application to depart in October 2011 but failed to sign  the  required
    form.

 9. On 14 November 2011 the Secretary of  State  issued  a  new  notice  of
    intention to deport, relying on the same  grounds  as  before.   On  15
    December 2011 the Secretary of State asked the Appellant (who continued
    to reside at Roseleigh Care Home) for an up  to  date  medical  report,
    before issuing him  with  a  Liability  for  Deportation  Notice  on  3
    February 2012.  There then followed a further  request  for  additional
    information regarding the Appellant's health. This was followed by  the
    decision currently under appeal, described in [1] above.

10. The Appellant met L in 2011 when he was still living in the care  home.
    He left the care home at the beginning of  2012  and  began  cohabiting
    with L.  They have lived together and L has cared for the Appellant  on
    a full-time basis ever since.

Error of law

11. On behalf of the Appellant, Ms Rasoul relied upon the grounds of appeal
    she  had  drafted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.   She  focused   her
    submissions upon the FTT's failure to engage with the medical  evidence
    before it when making important  findings  of  fact  and  the  lack  of
    clarity in the FTT's findings  regarding  the  availability  of  family
    members in the DRC and Cameroon to care for the  Appellant.  Ms  Rasoul
    made it clear that the findings in the country guidance decision in  BM
    (supra) are such that the Appellant no longer relies upon any  risk  to
    him as a failed asylum seeker and his claim is entirely predicated upon
    Article 8 of the ECHR for a combination of family and  health  reasons,
    which when viewed together meet the requirement of exceptionality.

12. Mr Parkinson while describing  the  availability  of  support  for  the
    Appellant in the DRC as "a crucial issue" invited us to  conclude  that
    the FTT was entitled to find that the  Appellant  would  have  adequate
    support in the DRC.

13. After hearing submissions from both parties we announced  our  decision
    with reasons, which we now set out in more detail in writing.   We  are
    satisfied that the FTT made two material errors of law that require the
    decision to be set aside.

Medical evidence

14. First, we consider that the FTT  failed  to  sufficiently  engage  with
    detailed medical evidence.  This included a medico-legal report dated 5
    December 2012 prepared on behalf of the Medical Foundation by  Mr  Alan
    Bryce.  This comprehensive report was based upon 11 sessions  with  the
    Appellant.  Mr Bryce carefully  summarised  the  appellant's  past  and
    current health concerns.  In February 2007 the Appellant  was  admitted
    to hospital very ill.  His survival remained in doubt at the time  and,
    after further investigations and treatment, he was found  to  have  HIV
    infection  with  very  advanced  immunodeficiency.   His   neurological
    problems were said to have been caused by toxoplasma infection  of  the
    brain and possibly meningitis due to tuberculosis.  He  was  discharged
    on 6 March 2007.  He is said to have suffered  from  persisting  memory
    deficit and was placed in a  residential  care  home.   Mr  Bryce  then
    summarised further expert evidence before opining  that  the  Appellant
    has  been  left  with  permanently  damaged  memory  function  and   is
    completely dependent on the care of others.  Mr  Bryce  opined  "he  is
    extremely vulnerable in any society without a carer literally alongside
    him" and is at "great risk" is left alone.  Without the support of L Mr
    Bryce concluded that the Appellant would  require  24-hour  residential
    care.

15. The FTT also had a report dated 30  August  2013  from  Dr  Kamlana,  a
    consultant psychiatrist.  He diagnosed the Appellant as suffering  from
    a mixed anxiety and depressive  disorder  as  well  as  having  a  mild
    cognitive disorder associated with brain damage.  Dr  Kamlana's  report
    also contained similar observations to those that we have  already  set
    out from Mr Bryce.

16. We acknowledge that the FTT referred to this evidence [30 and  31]  and
    accepted that the Appellant suffers from the disorders described and is
    in need of support [32].  However, we conclude that the FTT  failed  to
    take this evidence into account when considering the issue of Appellant
    having sought to voluntarily  leave  the  UK.  The  FTT  recorded  that
    between 2010 and 2011 the Appellant made requests to leave  the  UK  to
    return to the DRC or join his family in Cameroon before  resiling  from
    these requests.  The FTT then made the following finding at:

         "Furthermore we concluded that his persistent conduct in requesting
         a facilitated return to one country  and  then  the  other,  before
         withdrawing his requests, was  nothing  more  than  an  attempt  to
         manipulate the immigration process to suit his own ends."

17. This finding cannot be reconciled with the medical and  other  evidence
    available to the FTT  that  we  have  summarised  above.   Although  it
    appears that the Appellant initially stated he wished to return to  the
    DRC this was relatively quickly and formally amended to  an  aspiration
    to return to Cameroon before the  Secretary  of  State  considered  the
    application.  When the Secretary of State considered the application it
    was rejected on the erroneous basis of return to the DRC, when by  that
    stage it was clear that  the  application  was  based  upon  return  to
    Cameroon.  Further the FTT failed to take into account  the  fact  that
    the Secretary of State had refused the Appellant's application to  make
    a voluntary departure on two occasions in 2011.   It follows  that  the
    FTT was entirely mistaken in describing the Appellant as having engaged
    in persistent conduct that included changing the country of return  and
    then withdrawing applications.  We  are  satisfied  that  the  accurate
    picture is starkly different.

18. We conclude that the FtT's failure to engage with and/or understand the
    medical and other evidence including that  relevant  to  the  voluntary
    departure process, resulted in an error of law of the  kind  identified
    in Edwards v Bairstow [1956] AC 14.  The materiality of this  error  of
    law seems to us incontestable.

19. Even if we are wrong about this,  we  consider  the  finding  that  the
    Appellant deliberately sought to manipulate the system between 2010 and
    2011 to be unsustainable.  The undisputed medical evidence that we have
    summarised above is such that it was not rationally open to the FTT  to
    find that this Appellant was capable of deliberate manipulation of this
    kind.  The Appellant was living in a residential care home and  in  the
    care of social services for the entirety of this period.   He  suffered
    from significant memory loss.   His  capacity  to  make  decisions  was
    markedly limited.  The FTT's  finding  that  this  Appellant  exercised
    manipulation is one that reaches the high threshold  of  perversity  in
    all the circumstances of this case.

Availability of care in DRC / Cameroon

20. The second error of law which we have identified relates to  the  FTT's
    assessment of the availability of care available to  the  Appellant  in
    the DRC and Cameroon. The preponderance  of  the  evidence  establishes
    that the Appellant's family fled DRC in order to reside in  Cameroon  a
    very long time ago.  Given this, together with the nature and extent of
    the Appellant's health concerns and care needs, we consider that it was
    incumbent upon the FTT to make clear and sustainable  findings  on  the
    critical issue of whether the Appellant has relatives based in the  DRC
    or Cameroon who are able and willing to provide the requisite intensive
    care for the foreseeable future.   For the reasons elaborated below, we
    conclude that the FTT failed to do so.

21. The FTT appears to have assumed that "regular contact with  his  family
    who clearly care for him" [32] means that  there  is  a  family  member
    able, willing, available and resourced to provide the  intensive  level
    of care necessary for him.  We bear in mind that the Appellant asserted
    this to be the case in 2010 but there was no evidence  to  support  the
    finding that such care would be available in 2013.  In contrast to  the
    position in 2010, three years later the  Appellant  did  not  have  the
    benefit of assistance  and  advice  from  social  services  or  a  best
    interests assessor.  The FTT drew strong adverse  inferences  from  the
    evidence of the Appellant and L that they did not canvass the issue  of
    support with his family members.  In the same vein, the  FTT  concluded
    that "the Appellant either knows that there would be support for him so
    he did not need to make the enquiry, or that he made  the  enquiry  and
    that suitable arrangements are in  place...".   We  consider  that  the
    adverse   inferences   and   this   conclusion   involved   unjustified
    speculation, devoid of  evidentiary  foundation.   These  findings  are
    unsustainable accordingly.  We are satisfied that  the  materiality  of
    this error of law is beyond plausible dispute.

The FtT's decision remade

Hearing

22. Both representatives concurred with our suggestion that the decision of
    the FtT should be remade in this forum and that an adjournment was  not
    necessary  for  this  purpose.   We  proceeded  accordingly.   At   the
    beginning of the rehearing we clarified the further evidence  that  was
    now available to us in a supplementary bundle.  This  included  further
    medical evidence, supporting evidence from Church members and telephone
    bills.

23. Whilst removal directions have been made to the DRC it was agreed  that
    when remaking the decision we should consider the position in both  the
    DRC and Cameroon, should the Secretary of State  at  some  future  date
    seek to amend the removal directions.

24. We then heard oral evidence from the Appellant and L.  They  were  each
    briefly cross-examined by Mr  Parkinson.   During  the  course  of  his
    submissions Mr Parkinson accepted the Appellant's medical condition  as
    described in the medical reports.  He also accepted that the  Appellant
    has a family life with L.

25. We pause here to note  that  Ms  Rasoul  quite  properly  drew  to  our
    attention a mistake in L's witness statement before the FTT.  This  was
    confirmed by L.  She explained that the witness statement  inaccurately
    referred to her relationship with the Appellant as a sexual one when it
    was not, albeit they had an intention to marry and had  lived  together
    for a long time.  Mr Parkinson did not cross-examine L about this issue
    and did not invite us to draw adverse inferences as a  result  of  this
    during his submissions.  We consider he was correct to do so.  Both the
    Appellant  and  L   gave   evidence   in   a   straightforward   albeit
    unsophisticated manner.  We have no doubt about their genuine  attempts
    to be honest with  the  Tribunal,  and  Mr  Parkinson  did  not  submit
    otherwise.  We accept that this was a genuine error.

26. Mr Parkinson re-emphasised that he considered the crucial issue in this
    rather unusual case to be whether or not the Appellant would obtain the
    necessary level of care if returned to the DRC.  He asked  us  to  find
    the evidence  regarding  this  to  be  unclear  and  unpersuasive.   Mr
    Parkinson conceded that if we found against the Secretary of  State  on
    this point then the relevant threshold of exceptionality for the appeal
    against the deportation order to be allowed on Article  8  grounds  was
    met.

27. We then heard from Ms Rasoul who highlighted the exceptionality of  the
    case when all the relevant factors are  considered  cumulatively.   She
    predicated her submissions firmly and solely upon Article 8.  Upon  the
    completion of submissions we reserved our decision, which we  now  give
    with reasons.

Applicable Immigration Rules

28. The decision to make a deportation order is  of  some  vintage,  having
    been made in May  2012,  and  before  the  implementation  of  the  new
    Immigration Rules relating to deportation (which came into effect  from
    9 July 2012).  These new provisions were further  amended  with  effect
    from 28 July 2014 and apply to all appeals heard on or after this  date
    even if the Secretary of State's decision was made before that  date  -
    see YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.

29. The current version of the  Immigration  Rules  contain  the  following
    under a section headed 'Deportation and Article 8':

         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and

             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good because they have been convicted of an offence
             for which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
             of at least 4 years;

             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good because they have been convicted of an offence
             for which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
             of less than 4 but at least 12 months; or

             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good because, in  the  view  of  the  Secretary  of
             State, their offending has caused serious harm or they  are  a
             persistent offender who shows a particular disregard  for  the
             law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it  will
         only be outweighed by other factors where there are very compelling
         circumstances over and above those described in 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if - ?

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child...; or

             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and

                  (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
             of his life..."

Findings of fact

30. We have already indicated that we are satisfied that the Appellant  and
    L gave honest evidence and have been entirely credible  in  seeking  to
    explain the current circumstances as best as they  can.   Much  of  the
    evidence is accepted and we can therefore set out our findings briefly.

31. We accept the medical evidence that has been submitted on behalf of the
    Appellant,  much  of  which  we  have  already  summarised.   We  would
    highlight that the letter from  South  Tees  dated  24  September  2014
    states that the Appellant was severely immonocompromised  in  the  past
    and if his treatment was stopped he would quite quickly return  to  his
    nadir low CD4 level giving him a life expectancy of 1 to  2  years.   L
    has provided compelling evidence, supported by  the  medical  evidence,
    that she has to remind the Appellant to take his medication  every  day
    given  the  extent  of  his  memory  loss.   Even  if  the  appropriate
    medication is accessible to the Appellant in DRC and Cameroon we accept
    that he requires a person to prompt him and monitor his medication on a
    daily basis.  Without this his treatment will stop and he will be faced
    with the fate summarised in the South Tees' recent letter.

32. We find that the Appellant and L  are  in  a  close  relationship  that
    amounts to family life.   This  was  not  disputed  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State and indeed accepted at the FTT hearing in  2013  [22
    and 28].  They have been living together for nearly four years.   L  is
    60 and a widow.  She has grown up children and grandchildren living  in
    the UK.  She is HIV positive.  They are  committed  to  and  love  each
    other.  They wish to marry.  This is a case in which the  Appellant  is
    in a family relationship with a person who has become his  sole  carer.
    This must be viewed in its full context.  The medical evidence supports
    the Appellant needing 24-hour care. This care is  provided  exclusively
    by L.  We are therefore satisfied that their relationship  goes  beyond
    that of a mere carer looking after another person.  Indeed L  has  made
    it clear that she is devotes so much time and energy to caring for  the
    Appellant because she  loves  him.   The  care  that  she  provides  is
    therefore an intrinsic part of the family life that they share.   Their
    daily lives are entirely consumed by one another and this has been  the
    status quo for nearly four years.  The Appellant is entirely  dependent
    upon L for all of his basic needs throughout the day.  We accept that L
    is responsible for and wholly committed to caring  for  him  constantly
    throughout the day given his health concerns and that without  her,  he
    would require 24-hour residential care indefinitely.

33. The Appellant has a well-established private life in  the  UK  We  find
    that he has formed strong bonds with his Church  community.   He  is  a
    regular attender of bible study and Church on a Sunday.   It  is  clear
    from the supporting  letters  in  the  supplementary  bundle  that  the
    Appellant is warmly regarded by friends  he  has  met  within  the  All
    Nations Church community.  They have provided helpful examples  of  the
    extent to which the Appellant is unable to look after himself  such  as
    wearing flip-flops to walk in the snow, which generates mixed  elements
    of both private and family life.

34. We now turn to the only real factual dispute between the  parties:  the
    availability of family members in either the DRC or  Cameroon  to  care
    for the Appellant.  We find that the Appellant has  lost  contact  with
    all of his family members and currently has no one to turn to for  care
    and / or support in the DRC or Cameroon.   We  further  find  that  he,
    together with his family (which at  this  stage  included  his  mother,
    brother and two sisters) left the DRC for Cameroon during the  war  and
    after three siblings were killed  in  1998.   The  Appellant  has  been
    broadly consistent about this  and  it  ties  in  with  the  background
    evidence on the DRC, as well as L's evidence regarding the  Appellant's
    family.  It is also consistent with the flashbacks  documented  by  Tom
    Wright, a psychological therapist, in a Medical Foundation report dated
    20 January 2015.

35. We accept the Appellant's evidence that  he  kept  in  touch  with  his
    family in Cameroon by telephone but lost contact with  extended  family
    members in the DRC when he left the DRC.  We  are  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant has no contacts in the DRC, having left the country  together
    with his family a long time ago and at a very unstable time.

36. We find that the last time the Appellant had any contact with family in
    the Cameroon was probably in 2014 and he has had no means of contacting
    them since this time and does not know where  they  are.   We  note  Mr
    Parkinson's concern that the Appellant and L were unable  to  be  clear
    about the exact time that contact ceased.  That is factually accurate -
    they both admitted to such.  The explanation for the  Appellant  is  an
    obvious one given his accepted significant memory issues.  L is clearly
    not adept at recalling detail but we have no doubt at all that she  has
    been entirely honest with the Tribunal.  She accepted that  there  used
    to be contact but it stopped.  She provided her telephone bills to  her
    solicitors without checking  them.   These  demonstrate  that  for  the
    period for September 2013 to August 2014  there  were  two  very  short
    calls to a  mobile  phone  in  Cameroon.   We  accept  the  Appellant's
    evidence that he has lost contact with his family in Cameroon and  does
    not know where they are or whether they are alive.   He  knows  that  a
    sister died because his brother told him about this in 2013.  He had  a
    mobile phone number for his brother but it has not worked.  Whilst  the
    Appellant was unable to place a date on this, we are satisfied,  having
    considered all the evidence in the round that it  is  likely  that  all
    contact ceased in around May 2014.  We  do  not  speculate  as  to  the
    reason for this but we accept the  Appellant's  evidence  that  he  was
    eager for it to continue and his efforts were to no avail.

Application of the law to the facts

37. It was accepted on behalf of the Appellant that he is  unable  to  meet
    the relevant Immigration Rules.  He has been sentenced to an offence of
    12 months but paragraph 399 does not apply to him.  He is in a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a
    British citizen, and it has been accepted that it would be unduly harsh
    for L to live in the DRC or Cameroon.  As we set out above, we entirely
    accept the  former  as  did  the  FTT  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative.  Further, Mr Parkinson did  not  seek  to  dispute  the
    contention that it would be unduly harsh for L to live in  the  DRC  or
    Cameroon with the Appellant.  L is HIV positive and has substantial and
    long-standing connections to her community, family members and the  UK.
    As a British  citizen  she  should  not  be  required  to  depend  upon
    healthcare in the DRC or Cameroon that in all likelihood  will  not  be
    able to meet her needs, given her age and HIV status.  We are satisfied
    that there are very significant difficulties which would be faced by  L
    in continuing family life in the DRC or Cameroon, which  could  not  be
    overcome or which would entail very  serious  hardship  for  her.   For
    reasons we set out below it would in our view be unduly harsh for L  to
    remain in the UK without the  Appellant  in  light  of  the  particular
    closeness of their relationship and her clear emotional  dependence  on
    him.  We are satisfied that  for  the  last  few  years  L's  life  has
    willingly been entirely consumed by looking  after  the  Appellant  and
    that she has undertaken this out of love.   However,  the  relationship
    was formed at a time when the Appellant did not have leave  to  remain.
    His  immigration  status  has  at  all  material  times  been  at  best
    precarious. We are therefore satisfied that whilst the requirements  of
    (ii) and (iii) of paragraph 399(b) are met, (i) is not.  Paragraph 399A
    does not apply as the Appellant has not been lawfully present in the UK
    for most of his life.

38. Paragraph 398 makes clear that where, as here, paragraphs 399 and  399A
    do not apply it will only be in very compelling circumstances over  and
    above those described in  paragraphs  399  and  399A  that  the  public
    interest in deportation will  be  outweighed  by  other  factors.   The
    authoritative exposition of the correct approach to the test  contained
    in the old version of the final words of paragraph 398 (which  referred
    to  exceptional   circumstances   as   opposed   to   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in 399 and 399A) has  been
    set out in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2014] 1 WLR 244.   One  of  the  issues
    before the Court was how the approach taken in paragraphs 398-399B  was
    compatible with the  assessment  of  proportionality  required  by  the
    jurisprudence relating to Article 8 of the ECHR.  Paragraphs  43-44  of
    the judgment of the Court, given by Lord Dyson  MR,  read,  so  far  as
    material, state as follows (p. 561 D-E):

         "43. The word 'exceptional' is often used  to  denote  a  departure
         from a general rule. The general rule in  the  present  context  is
         that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom paras. 399 and 399A
         do not apply, very compelling reasons will be required to  outweigh
         the public interest in deportation. These  compelling  reasons  are
         the 'exceptional circumstances'.

         44.  We would, therefore, hold that the new rules  are  a  complete
         code and that the exceptional circumstances to be considered in the
         balancing exercise involve the  application  of  a  proportionality
         test as required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence ... ."

39. In SSHD v AJ (Angola) and AJ (Gambia) [2014] EWCA Civ  1636,  Sales  LJ
    referred to MF Nigeria and said, in a judgment  with  which  the  other
    members of the Court agreed:

         "39. The fact that the new rules  are  intended  to  operate  as  a
         comprehensive  code  is  significant,  because  it  means  that  an
         official  or  a  tribunal  should  seek  to  take  account  of  any
         Convention rights of an appellant through the lens of the new rules
         themselves, rather than looking  to  apply  Convention  rights  for
         themselves in a free-standing  way  outside  the  new  rules.  This
         feature of the new rules makes  the  decision-making  framework  in
         relation to foreign criminals different from that  in  relation  to
         other parts of the Immigration Rules, where the Secretary of  State
         retains a general discretion  outside  the  Rules  in  exercise  of
         which, in some circumstances, decisions may  need  to  be  made  in
         order to accommodate certain claims for  leave  to  remain  on  the
         basis of Convention rights, as explained in Huang and R  (Nagre)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

         40.  The requirement that claims  by  appellants  who  are  foreign
         criminals for leave to remain, based on the  Convention  rights  of
         themselves or their partners,  relations  or  children,  should  be
         assessed under the new Rules and through their lens  is  important,
         as the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) has emphasised.  It seeks to
         ensure  uniformity  of  approach   between   different   officials,
         tribunals and courts  who  have  to  assess  such  claims,  in  the
         interests of fair and equal treatment of different appellants  with
         similar cases on the facts. In this  regard,  the  new  rules  also
         serve as a safeguard in relation  to  rights  of  appellants  under
         Article 14 to equal treatment within the scope of  Article  8.  The
         requirement of assessment through the lens of the  new  Rules  also
         seeks to ensure that decisions are made in a way that  is  properly
         informed by the considerable weight  to  be  given  to  the  public
         interest in  deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  as  declared  by
         Parliament in the 2007 Act and reinforced by the Secretary of State
         (as the relevant Minister with responsibility for operation of  the
         immigration system), so as to promote  public  confidence  in  that
         system in this sensitive area.?

         41.  In LC (China) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 1310, this Court again emphasised the  points  made
         in both SS (Nigeria) and MF (Nigeria). It dismissed an appeal  from
         the Upper Tribunal, which had allowed an appeal from the FTT.  This
         Court held that the  FTT  in  that  case  "clearly  erred"  in  its
         understanding and application of the new Rules, by considering  the
         case of a foreign criminal based on Convention rights  outside  the
         new Rules (see para. [14]), just as the Upper Tribunal has done  in
         both the cases before us. As in the cases before us, the error  had
         occurred because the decision of the FTT had been made  before  the
         judgment of this Court in MF (Nigeria) was handed  down.  At  para.
         [17], Moore-Bick LJ (giving the leading judgment) said this:

             "Two points of importance emerge  from  the  decisions  in  SS
             (Nigeria) and MF (Nigeria). First, both  emphasise  the  great
             weight  to  be  attached  to  the  public  interest   in   the
             deportation of foreign criminals and  the  importance  of  the
             policy in that regard  to  which  effect  has  been  given  by
             Parliament in the UK Borders Act 2007, a weight and importance
             neither of which seem to have been fully  appreciated  by  the
             First-tier Tribunal in this case. The second  is  that  it  is
             wrong to consider the question of infringement  of  article  8
             rights outside the terms of  the  Immigration  Rules,  as  the
             First-tier Tribunal did.""

40. More recently, in MA (Somalia) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 48,  Richards  LJ
    said:

         "17. It follows from MF (Nigeria) that MA's case should  have  been
         considered only within the Immigration Rules and on the basis  that
         the scales are heavily weighted in favour of deportation  and  that
         something very  compelling  is  required  to  outweigh  the  public
         interest in deportation."

41. The decision under Article 8 must be  made  through  the  lens  of  the
    Immigration Rules but we must nevertheless apply the five-stage  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 test, whilst recalling that the essential question  when
    considering proportionality is whether the  Appellant  has  shown  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A, capable of outweighing the significant public interest in
    deporting him.

42. We are satisfied that the  strong  and  deeply  ingrained  family  life
    between the Appellant and L, as accepted by the FTT, will be  subjected
    to a major interference in consequences  of  the  decision  to  deport.
    Family life will not just be ruptured: the Appellant's deportation will
    almost inevitably result in its abrupt and permanent  destruction.   We
    have already set out above that it has been accepted that it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect L to reside in the DRC or Cameroon and there are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in either  of  those
    countries.  They will be unable to sustain any meaningful telephone  or
    other contact given the Appellant's memory issues and  the  absence  of
    support for him in the DRC and Cameroon.

43. There will also be a  significant  interference  with  the  Appellant's
    private life.  The Appellant has been in the UK for over 10  years  and
    has built up substantial links with his Church community in particular.
     His medical condition is such that  he  is  likely  to  find  it  very
    difficult to rebuild such contact in the community or be in a  position
    to manifest his religious beliefs (which are very important to  him  as
    set out within the supporting letters we have referred to, as  well  as
    Mr Wright's report)  without  support  mechanisms  in  place.   In  all
    likelihood, in the unusual circumstances of this  case  all  meaningful
    community and Church links will end on his deportation.

44. There is no  doubt  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  is  in
    accordance with the law  and  pursues  a  legitimate  aim,  namely  the
    prevention of crime and the protection of the rights  and  freedoms  of
    others, as well as the economic well being of the country.

45. We now turn to the pivotal issue in this appeal: whether there are very
    compelling circumstances capable of outweighing the significant  public
    interest in deporting the Appellant given  his  criminal  offence.   We
    note that the Appellant used his own tribal name to claim asylum  again
    and this can properly be regarded  at  the  less  serious  end  of  the
    spectrum of criminality of this genre.  Nevertheless we do not overlook
    the seriousness of his conviction and sentence.  As HHJ Joseph observed
    when passing sentence on 3 March 2006 it is "always a  serious  offence
    when somebody who has been refused leave  to  remain  in  this  country
    tries to get round that refusal by using  deception  by  telling  lies,
    that is what you have done".  We are satisfied  there  is  no  risk  of
    reoffending.  However issues of public revulsion, public confidence and
    deterrence remain, as does the significant public interest in deporting
    the Appellant.

46. In considering the relevant public interest question for  the  purposes
    of Article 8 of the ECHR, section 117A of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") states that we must have regard to
    the considerations listed in section 117B and, as this is a deportation
    case, the considerations listed in section 117C.

47. Section 117B(2)-(3) can be dealt with simply by us  acknowledging  that
    the  Appellant  speaks  English  but  is  most  unlikely  to  ever   be
    financially independent. In  this  particular  case  the  Appellant  is
    likely to have more cause than most to rely upon the health and  social
    care resources available in the UK.  This is a  relevant  factor  going
    against the Appellant when considering the public  interest,  which  we
    bear in mind.

48. The applicability of sections 117B(4) is less straightforward.   Little
    weight should be given to  a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying
    partner (in this case L) that is established by a person at a time when
    he is in the UK unlawfully - see Deelah  and  others  (section  117B  -
    ambit) [2015] UKUT 515 (IAC).  Was the Appellant in the  UK  unlawfully
    when he began and developed his relationship with L? At  the  time  the
    Appellant's relationship began in 2011 he  had  been  notified  of  his
    liability to deportation and he  was  in  the  process  of  seeking  to
    facilitate a voluntary departure from the UK.  At around  the  time  he
    started living with L in 2012 he had been issued  with  a  decision  to
    make a deportation order, which carried with it a right of appeal.  The
    Appellant duly exercised his right of appeal, on 15 June 2012.  Once an
    appeal to the Tribunal against an immigration  decision  under  section
    82(1) of the 2002 Act is pending then the appellant cannot  be  removed
    from or required to leave the UK.  An appeal remains pending  until  it
    is finally determined.

49. In AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal described
    the  relevant  legislation  as  drawing  a  sharp  distinction  between
    unlawful and precarious immigration status in these terms [23]:

         "Our starting point must therefore be that Parliament has now drawn
         a sharp distinction between any  period  of  time  during  which  a
         person has been in the UK "unlawfully",  and  any  period  of  time
         during which that person's immigration status in the UK was  merely
         "precarious". We are satisfied that those who  at  any  given  date
         held a precarious immigration status must have held at that date an
         otherwise lawful grant of leave to enter or to  remain.  They  must
         have enjoyed some immigration status within the  UK  at  the  given
         date, because if that were not the case, then their presence in the
         UK would have been unlawful at that date.  Thus  we  are  satisfied
         that  Parliament  envisaged  that  the  immigration  history  of  a
         particular individual might disclose periods when they had  enjoyed
         lawful immigration status in the UK, and periods when they were  in
         the UK unlawfully because they had enjoyed none. Some  might  enter
         unlawfully and  never  acquire  a  grant  of  leave.  Others  might
         subsequently acquire a grant of leave. Some  might  enter  lawfully
         but then fail to obtain a variation of their  leave.  Others  might
         always have held a  grant  of  leave.  We  regard  the  immigration
         history  of  the  individual  whose  Article  8  rights  are  under
         consideration as an integral part  of  the  context  in  which  any
         Article 8 decision is made, whether by the Respondent or the FtT."

50. In AM the Upper Tribunal's focus was firmly upon those with  some  form
    of leave to remain.  No consideration was given to  a  person  who  was
    liable to deportation with a pending  in-country  suspensive  statutory
    appeal or those with temporary admission. Although this Appellant could
    not be required to leave the UK at the material time, he did  not  have
    any form of leave.  It is difficult to see how he could be said  to  be
    in the UK unlawfully, when he could not be required to  leave  and  was
    legitimately pursuing his right to appeal.   Accordingly, we find  that
    he was at the material time a person whose presence and status  in  the
    UK were precarious.  We acknowledge the legal effect of this as set out
    in section 117B of the 2002 Act to include a requirement that  we  must
    attach little weight to the Appellant's private life.

51. In any event, on  14  May  2010  the  Appellant  was  notified  of  his
    liability  to  deportation.   There   then   followed   a   period   of
    correspondence  between  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State
    regarding his voluntary departure.  The Appellant was again notified of
    his liability to removal under served with a Liability  to  Deportation
    Notice on 3 February  2012.   Although  this  is  not  clear  from  the
    Secretary of  State's  decision  letter,  we  are  satisfied  that  the
    Secretary of State must have granted the Appellant temporary  admission
    (or at least he was entitled to be granted temporary  admission)  after
    his sentence of imprisonment expired, whilst a  decision  was  made  on
    whether to make a decision to deport him - see paragraph 2 of  Schedule
    3 to the Immigration Act 1971.  For those liable  to  deportation,  the
    main alternative to detention is the grant of temporary  admission.   A
    person granted temporary admission is 'lawfully present' in the UK  for
    the purposes of social security entitlement - see Szoma v Secretary  of
    State for Work and Pensions [2005] 1 AC 564.  Although  such  a  person
    does not have leave and his status is of precarious nature, those  with
    temporary admission (including many asylum seekers) cannot be  said  to
    be in the UK unlawfully.

52. We note  paragraph  2.3.8  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  Immigration
    Directorate Instruction ("IDI")  'Criminality  guidance  in  Article  8
    cases' which states:

         "Section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act sets out that little weight should
         be given to a private life or  a  relationship  with  a  qualifying
         partner established when  the  person  is  in  the  UK  unlawfully.
         Section 117B(5) sets out that little weight should be  given  to  a
         private life established at a time when  the  person's  immigration
         status is precarious. A person  is  in  the  UK  unlawfully  if  he
         requires leave to enter or remain in the UK but does not  have  it.
         For the purposes of this guidance, a person's immigration status is
         precarious if he is in the UK with limited leave to enter or remain
         but without settled  or  permanent  status,  or  if  he  has  leave
         obtained fraudulently, or if he has been notified that he is liable
         to deportation or administrative removal."

    This suggests that a person who has been notified that he is liable  to
    deportation has precarious as opposed to unlawful  immigration  status.
    In any event we are satisfied for the  reasons  that  we  have  already
    provided above that this Appellant's immigration status was  precarious
    and not unlawful when he established family life with L.

53. We now turn to section 117C of the 2002 Act.  Sub-sections (1) and  (2)
    are self-explanatory.  By virtue of sub-section (3)  we  must  consider
    whether Exception 2 applies.  This is defined at (4) as follows:

         "Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

    A "qualifying partner" is defined at section 117D(1)(a)  as  a  British
    citizen.  We  have  already  decided  above  that  the  effect  of  the
    Appellant's deportation on L would be unduly  harsh.   Section  117C(3)
    provides that "the public  interest  requires  C's  deportation  unless
    Exception 1 and 2 applies".  Section 117C is unclear as to what  should
    happen where an exception is met.   One interpretation is that where an
    exception is met the public  interest  does  not  require  deportation.
    Such an interpretation would be inconsistent with paragraph  339(b)  of
    the  Immigration  Rules.   As  discussed  above  this   imposes   three
    conditions, two of which we have  found  the  Appellant  to  have  met.
    These conditions are more onerous that the single condition imposed  by
    section 117C(3) regarding a relationship with a qualifying partner.  We
    consider that where a section 117C(3)  exception  applies,  this  is  a
    relevant  factor  to  be  taken  into  account  when   conducting   the
    proportionality exercise under Article 8.

54. At this stage we draw the various threads together.  We  are  satisfied
    that the interference with family life in this case is  at  the  severe
    end of the spectrum.  The effect of deportation will end  family  life.
    Family life in this case consists of a loving  relationship  between  a
    couple who have cohabited for nearly four years, and is dominated by  a
    very compelling and exceptional feature which pervades it  on  a  daily
    basis.  The Appellant's medical condition is so serious that without  L
    he would be in a care home,  where  he  resided  for  some  four  years
    previously.  This is because he  requires  24-hour  support  and  care,
    which he gets from L.  She in turn is fully committed to providing this
    demanding level of care not because she feels a sense of responsibility
    or because she is paid but because she loves the Appellant and wants to
    help him.  His care needs are such that  virtually  all  of  her  daily
    existence is devoted to looking after him.  It is our assessment of the
    evidence that L gets just as  much  out  of  the  relationship  as  the
    Appellant does.  While he is physically and emotionally dependent  upon
    her she is emotionally dependent upon him. It  follows  that  rupturing
    the relationship will have a devastating impact upon both the Appellant
    and L.

55.  Many  appeals  in  which  reliance  is  placed  upon  Article  8   are
    characterised as a 'health/medical case' or a 'carer case'  or  'strong
    relationship' case.  This case does not permit easy categorisation.  In
    this context we remind ourselves that, as a matter of law, Article 8 of
    the  ECHR  is  not  susceptible  to  comprehensive  categorisation   or
    definition.  It is an often textured and elastic right,  and  has  been
    described as "the least defined and  most  unruly"  of  the  Convention
    rights (see [30] of R (on the  application  of  Wright  and  others)  v
    Secretary of State for Health  and  another  [2009]  2  WLR  267).   We
    conclude that  when  all  the  relevant  circumstances  are  considered
    cumulatively very compelling circumstances emerge.  To summarise:

      i) We attach weight to the strong quality of the family  life  enjoyed
         between the Appellant and L. The interference with family  life  is
         such  that  it  will  cease   altogether   upon   the   Appellant's
         deportation.

     ii) The impact of the cessation of family life and the care  that  this
         brings with it is likely to be catastrophic for the Appellant.   He
         will not have any support, much less the care he requires,  in  the
         DRC or Cameroon.

    iii) We attach limited weight to the Appellant's private life in the UK.

     iv) We consider that the Appellant is unlikely to be able  to  practice
         his religion or access the community without the  support  that  he
         requires in the DRC or Cameroon.   This  will  have  a  detrimental
         impact on his established way of life.

56. The recent country guidance decision of BM (supra) notes  at  [7]  that
    "DRC is one of the poorest countries in  the  world.   Food  insecurity
    affects one third of the population and life expectancy is amongst  the
    lowest in the world.  Corruption  is  endemic".   Indeed  Mr  Parkinson
    conceded that in the absence of family support for the Appellant in the
    DRC and Cameroon, the requisite test to allow the appeal was met.   The
    Appellant will not be able to obtain and / or take the daily medication
    he needs.  The medical evidence makes clear that if treatment stops  he
    would return to his nadir low CD4 count giving him a life expectancy of
    one to two years.  Without access to care, support and accommodation it
    is likely that the Appellant's living conditions will be dire such that
    his life expectancy will be considerably shorter than one to two  years
    in consequence and the  balance  of  his  existence  is  likely  to  be
    accompanied by serious pain, suffering and indignity.

57. The impact of the cessation of family life on L will be catastrophic in
    an emotional sense as her entire life has centred around the Appellant.
     She will also have to suffer with the knowledge  and  anxiety  of  the
    Appellant's likely mental and physical  suffering  and  probable  death
    within a  relatively  short  period  of  time  after  his  deportation,
    together with the agony of not knowing what is happening  to  him.   In
    these circumstances the effect of the Appellant's deportation would  be
    unduly harsh on L.

58. Finally, for this combination of reasons we conclude that  the  crucial
    question that we have posed above must be answered  affirmatively  when
    all  the  relevant  considerations  are   viewed   cumulatively.    The
    Appellant's circumstances in the DRC or Cameroon, in the absence of L's
    care or alternative care are likely to be dire for the reasons we  give
    above.  Further, it would not just be unduly harsh for L to live in the
    DRC or Congo and for her to remain in the UK without him.   This  is  a
    case in which the Appellant's deportation would lead to  the  cessation
    of family life and cause L intense emotional suffering, particularly in
    light of her knowledge of his likely dire  conditions  and  short  life
    expectancy in DRC or Cameroon.  Our conclusion is  that  the  Appellant
    has shown very compelling circumstances over and above those  described
    in paragraphs 399 and 399A,  capable  of  outweighing  the  significant
    public interest in deporting him.

Decision

59. The decision of the FTT is infected by material errors of  law  and  we
    accordingly set it aside.

60. We remake the decision of the FTT by allowing the appeal.


Signed: Melanie Plimmer

Ms Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Dated: 20 January 2016
