
[pic]
IAC-YW-LM-V4

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13728/2014
                                                               IA/11244/2014
                                                               IA/11240/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 June 2015                      |On 22 July 2015                      |
|Prepared 16 June 2015                |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                            GURWINDER SINGH (A1)
                              GURJIT KAUR (A2)
                             GURNOOR SINGH (A3)
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Macdonald, Counsel, instructed by RM Legal
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   The Appellants, nationals of India born on 5 July 1985, 26 March  1984,
    and 13 August 2011, appealed against decisions made by  the  Respondent
    to refuse their applications for leave to remain and  to  make  removal
    directions under Section 47 of the IANA 2006.  A1 had applied on 15 May
    2012 for leave to remain on the basis of family and private life.   His
    wife, A2, had applied on a like basis and an application  was  made  on
    behalf of A3 on a like basis.

2.   The refusal was with reference to Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules (the Rules).  The matter came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Judge Woolley (the Judge) who,  on  29  September  2014,
    dismissed the appeals  under  Appendix  FM,  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules and under the Human Rights Act 1998.

3.   The Judge did not formally deal with  the  removal  directions  but  no
    issue is taken upon that and an inevitable consequence of the  decision
    made by the Judge for each Appellant was  that  the  removal  decisions
    would stand.

4.   Permission to appeal that decision was refused by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Chambers on 27 October 2014.  On identical grounds, but  redated,
    R M Legal Solicitors sought to make a  renewed  application  which  was
    granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on  16  February  2015  in
    which she stated as follows:

         "1.  This is a determination that contains a thorough and  reasoned
             proportionality balancing exercise.  It is however arguable  -
             just - that the First-tier Tribunal (and indeed  the  parties)
             have conflated the test  in  paragraph  276ADE1(iv)  of  'very
             significant   obstacles'   to   integration   with   that   of
             'insurmountable obstacles'.  It is further arguable that up-to-
             date evidence concerning the third Appellant's fitness to  fly
             was not given adequate consideration."

5.   The grounds to the First-tier and to  the  Upper  Tribunal  as  renewed
    assert that A3 "has been advised by  a  medical  professional  that  he
    should not have long haul flight at  his  critical  condition"  in  the
    background paragraph numbered 1.   In  Ground  1,  A3's  condition  was
    described as "acute".  Ground 2 asserted that the Judge had  failed  to
    consider why A3's life would not be endangered if he was to  travel  to
    India "in such an acute medical condition".   Ground  3  asserted  that
    A3's GP had given  a  prognosis  that  "long  haul  flight  may  almost
    certainly be fatal".  Ground 4 asserted risk if A3 had to  remove,  for
    which a report was needed.  Similarly Ground 5 asserted that A3 is in a
    frail condition and a long haul flight could be fatal.

6.   In fact the documentation referred to as if it were three exhibits,  is
    in fact only two. The first exhibit, GKGSGS01, a  letter  from  a  GP's
    surgery dated 13 November 2014, describes the health  complications  A3
    was born with, those which have been treated and monitored,  and  where
    A3 is under further investigation regarding a persistent cough  with  a
    lung problem and shortness of breath.  The  letter  dated  13  November
    2014 from Dr Ahmad of the GP surgery in Southampton says this:

         "...  He is suffering with similar problems which are affecting his
         condition.  Long journey and especially long haul  flights  may  be
         harful [sic] to him as can affect his lungs condition with  can  be
         very serious."

    The letter was not before the Judge and he could never have  considered
    it, Ground 1 of the application  for  permission  was  carelessly,  and
    seemingly deliberately, misleading.

7.   The second letter, dated 3 November 2014 (GKGSGS02),  related  to  A3's
    condition and was a solicitor's  letter  in  response  to  a  potential
    negligence claim against a hospital and was not any assessment of  risk
    to A3 undertaking a flight.  The third letter, the representatives were
    agreed, did not exist.  Therefore there was nothing in the evidence  to
    show that a flight could be "fatal", let  alone  "almost  certainly  be
    fatal".

8.   In these circumstances I find the  core  claim  Ground  1,  upon  which
    permission was given by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce, was  grossly
    misleading and simply completely  unsupported  by  the  evidence.    In
    addition to this, the Judge's decision was dated 29 September 2014  and
    the GP surgery letter was not even written at that date: It is dated 13
    November 2014.  How it could therefore  be  said  the  Judge  erred  in
    failing to properly consider the evidence of such risk  as  claimed  is
    inexplicable.  Such criticism was wholly unsustainable and deliberately
    misleading, to repeat the criticisms in  the  renewed  grounds  was  to
    compound the grave errors made.

9.   I find that the settling of these grounds by RM, solicitors,  dated  18
    November 2014,  as  indeed  those  of  8  October  2014,  were  grossly
    misleading and an abuse of the appeals process.  The criticism made  in
    Ground 3 that the Judge had not properly directed himself on the  issue
    of  insurmountable  obstacles  let  alone  conflated  those  with   the
    provisions under the Rules was ultimately meaningless.   The  fact  was
    that the Judge properly assessed those issues and was not  misdirecting
    himself either as to the effect of obstacles that  might  arise  within
    the terms of the Immigration Rules let alone obstacles of another  kind
    outside of the Rules.  In either case the Judge  was  not  raising  the
    standard of proof to some higher level and no example is given of  such
    an error in the decision by the Judge.

10.  The medical evidence before the Judge was  extremely  limited  and  has
    been repeated in the Appellants' bundle (AB).  At page 135  (AB)  there
    is a letter, dated 21 May  2014,  which  recited  some  of  the  health
    problems faced through the pregnancy and birth of A3.  The letter  from
    Dr Vollmer, consultant paediatric neurologist, simply described earlier
    problems and the need  for  long  term  input  from  the  developmental
    medicine, paediatric neurology and therapy services.  At  AB  page  136
    there is a letter of 17 April 2014 which described, at  AB  page  136,
    early  health  problems  that  A3  encountered  and  recommended  renal
    examination and assessment on a regular basis.

11.  A letter of 6 March 2014,  AB  page  138,  referred  to  the  need  for
    further monitoring and observation.  A letter of 29 September 2013,  AB
    page 139, simply identified historical ill health of A3  and  the  then
    continuing need for regular outpatient  follow  up.   AB  page  141  is
    simply an appointment letter of 15 April  2013.   AB  page  142  is  an
    undated health visitor letter speaking of a period of ill health within
    the period up to about two months after A3 was born.

12.  The letter of 27 April 2012 (AB  page  143)  does  not  say  more  than
    evidence the earlier health problems of A3.  Similarly the  letters  at
    page 144 and 145 speak to health problems A3 had  as  a  baby  and  are
    dated 22 February 2012 and 9 February 2012.

13.  There was also correspondence in 2011 relating to the health of A3.

14.  A letter from Dr Vollmer dated 16 May 2012 makes reference to  A3,  the
    extent of developmental progress he was making and identified  that  A3
    has some mild to moderate global development delay:  However  a  formal
    psychometric assessment had not yet been performed and A3 continued  to
    have mild to moderate muscular  hypertonic  and  intermittent  abnormal
    development progress but the  ophthalmological  findings  had  improved
    considerably.

15.  There was clearly other evidence which related to a period in May  2015
    which of course was not before the Judge.

16.  There was a further letter from Dr Ahmad at the GP surgery  of  21  May
    2015.  The letter is a bare repetition of his 13 November  2014  letter
    and repeated with the same spelling error on the issue that  long  haul
    flights may be, I infer, harmful  to A3.

17.  These letters in part at different stages  refer  to  the  stress  upon
    A3's mother (A2) and the family caused by A3's ill health.

18.  There was no assessment of the available  facilities  in  India,  their
    presence or lack of,  the  need  to  monitor  A3  either  in  terms  of
    paediatric considerations or by a  neurologist  or  a  nephrologist  or
    consultant ophthalmologist.

19.  There is  indeed  no  evidence  that  necessary  facilities  cannot  be
    obtained so as to pose life threatening consequences for  A3.   Nor  is
    there evidence to suggest that his renal problems cannot  be  addressed
    in India.  If A1 and A2 live some distance  from  a  suitable  hospital
    then it will be their choice where to move to in India to  obtain  such
    services if they wish.

20.  The Judge considered these matters and  gave  particular  consideration
    to the submissions made in  his  analysis  of  the  health  case  under
    Article 3 and Article 8.

21.  There is therefore no evidence of which it is said  the  Judge  omitted
    from consideration or irrationally discounted or was  perverse  in  not
    taking into account to show material harm likely  to  arise  to  A3  on
    return to India.

22.  It is clear that the care in the NHS  in  the  United  Kingdom  may  be
    different from that available in India but that does not entitle either
    A3 or his anxious parents to remain for chosen treatment in the  United
    Kingdom.  There was no sensible  case  being  advanced  that  A3  could
    remain on his own or that A2 and A1 would not return to India with him,
    for their removal was as a family.

23.  The Judge at paragraph 36 of the decision considered the issue  of  the
    proximity of hospital treatment and for reasons he gave concluded  that
    the removal of A3 with his parents would not breach his or their rights
    under Article 3 or indeed Article 8 ECHR.

24.  Mr Macdonald's skeleton argument ultimately setting out  the  documents
    that were before the Judge to consider does not show that there  was  a
    failure to properly consider the medical evidence.

25.  Rather it seemed to me since the  Judge  could  not  have  had  the  13
    November 2014 letter from the GP surgery the  matters  relied  upon  in
    that letter do not  demonstrate  any  arguable  error  of  law  in  the
    consideration the Judge gave to the issue of A3's health.

26.  Mr Macdonald sought to rely upon  evidence  produced  by  the  hospital
    concerning the medical ill health A3 faced arising from his  birth  and
    the processes thereof.

27.  Quite simply the detail into which  those  matters  go,  which  may  be
    pertinent to a negligence claim against the hospital  or  the  doctors,
    was neither here nor there  for  the  Judge  could  not  resolve  those
    issues, nor did he have the evidence to do so, nor was such evidence of
    negligence relevant to the issue of risk in removal  or  on  return  to
    India.  I therefore reject the claim that refusing to allow A1, A2  and
    A3 to remain is in any way material to the outcome of such  litigation,
    if it ever occurs.

28.  For the avoidance of doubt  I  do  not  accept  that  the  Tribunal  in
    considering the issue of A3's health and its impact on his parents  was
    applying a high threshold in terms of the standard of proof.  It seemed
    to me somewhat unfair to criticise the  Judge  on  those  matters  when
    there was no report provided at the hearing addressing either the  real
    risks to the  Appellant  through  removal  or  indeed  risk  on  return
    thereafter, given his various health conditions or the circumstances he
    might come to live in India.  I address the adjournment  request  issue
    later at paragraph 34.

29.  Accordingly, I reject the criticisms of the Judge  in  connection  with
    the assessment of the evidence.

30.  I find that the third ground simply is a  development  of  an  argument
    more founded in linguistic sophistry than in substance.   It  is  clear
    that as a matter of approach insurmountable obstacles do  not  in  this
    context mean that  they  are  truly  insurmountable  so  much  as  very
    significant.  Whether those are "difficulties" or  "obstacles"  matters
    not for these purposes.

31.  In the circumstances the factors relied upon as  significant  obstacles
    or very significant, or indeed  even  were  they  to  be  described  as
    insurmountable obstacles, really do not merit argument.  The  fact  was
    that the Appellants still have family in India, A1 was employed and has
    been employed before he came from India, the length of time  that  they
    have been  in the United Kingdom and their community  and  social  ties
    here were not really evidenced by  anything  significant  to  be  given
    weight.  I find they have a supporting network left in India.   It  may
    be there are other countervailing factors but the fact  of  the  matter
    was that there were not, through A3's health, serious  issues  relating
    to his removal and there were, as the Judge found, effectively no  very
    serious obstacles.

32.  In the circumstances I do not accept that there was  any  substance  in
    the assertion that the Judge has applied, not least by reference to its
    outcome,  anything  erroneous  in  relation  to  the  consideration  of
    paragraphs 276ADE.  On a fair reading of the decision it is clear  that
    the Judge had regard to the relevant evidence.  If it was  a  criticism
    that there was more about A3's health than needed to be considered then
    it appeared to me to lie with the Appellants and the limited  scope  of
    the evidence they produced.  It was not said, for  example,  that  they
    could not afford to or were  unable  to  obtain  appropriate  evidence,
    relating to risk on return, if they had wanted to.

33.   The  other  elements  of  those  grounds  advanced  on  Ground  3  are
    essentially disagreements with adverse  findings  and  appear  to  have
    approached the assessment of the decision on a nitpicking basis  rather
    than one founded upon the evidence advanced as a whole.

34.  The issue of whether there should  have  been  an  adjournment  by  the
    Judge was not a matter upon  which  permission  to  appeal  was  given.
    Nevertheless, I heard the submissions made and I am bound to  say  that
    they too have no substance.  Plainly, as Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 418  (IAC)
    recited the decision of the President (UTIAC) on the general principles
    upon which adjournments may be sought and granted, there was nothing on
    the face of it to show that at the time the application was  heard  any
    attempt had actually been made to obtain a medical  report  summarising
    A3's case and needs.  Rather, there was no expert appointed to consider
    it, nor was there any timetable in which such a report might come to be
    presented, and nor was there any indication as to  what,  at  the  very
    least, the potential outcome of such a report  might  be.   There  was,
    therefore, nothing before the Judge to show that  such  evidence  might
    make a material difference to the outcome of the appeal.  It  was  thus
    an entirely speculative application for an adjournment in the hope that
    something might come forward to support the claim.

35.  In connection with  the  adjournment  request,  under  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 then  in  force  Regulation
    21, the party applying for an adjournment must, if practicable,  notify
    all other parties of the application, show good reason why  adjournment
    is necessary and produce evidence of any fact or matter relied upon  in
    support of the application.  The Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing on
    the application of a party unless satisfied the appeal cannot be justly
    determined.  Under paragraph 21(3) the Tribunal must not in  particular
    adjourn a hearing on the application of a party in order to  allow  the
    party more time to produce evidence, unless  satisfied  that:  (a)  the
    evidence relates to a matter in dispute in the appeal; (b) it  will  be
    unjust to determine the appeal without permitting the party  a  further
    opportunity to produce the evidence.  It is clear that there  was  non-
    compliance with the directions given by notice of 9 May  2013  for  the
    hearing on 19 September 2013 and there was no satisfactory  explanation
    for that failure ever advanced, even before me.

36.  In these circumstances it seemed to me absolutely clear that there  was
    no proper basis for the  adjournment  application  and  it  was  wholly
    speculative as to what might be the  outcome  of  any  report  written.
    There was no unfairness  and,  applying  the  overriding  objective  in
    Regulation 4 of the 2005 Rules, the  outcome  of  such  an  application
    would have only been to further delay and waste hearing time  allocated
    within the system of appeals.

37.  Even now Mr Macdonald was unable to identify any unfairness nor can  he
    identify because of his instructions, anything that any  specialist  or
    expert might have said concerning the  issues relating to  A3's  health
    or the impact upon A1 and A2 of A3's health condition.

38.  In these circumstances I  find  that  there  was  no  Robinson  obvious
    miscarriage of justice through the wrongful denial of  the  adjournment
    request.

39.  The Original Tribunal made no error of law.   The  Original  Tribunal's
    decision stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 21 July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
