

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13898/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester IAC                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27th July 2017                      |On 28th July 2017                   |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                ZAIGHUM MEHDI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on the grounds that  it
      was arguable that his inadvertent error in missing  the  date  of  his
      hearing before the First-tier Tribunal amounted to  an  error  of  law
      because his oral evidence may have made a material difference  to  the
      outcome of his appeal.


   2. The appellant had appealed the decision of the respondent refusing  to
      grant him leave to remain on the grounds of  his  private  and  family
      life. The appeal was determined on the papers, neither  the  appellant
      nor the respondent appearing. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the
      First-tier Tribunal were general and did no  more  than,  in  essence,
      assert that the decision was incompatible with his human  rights.  The
      grounds stated that "additional grounds" would  be  submitted  with  a
      paginated indexed bundle at the time of the hearing. The  respondent's
      bundle included the documents the appellant had relied upon in support
      of his application for leave to remain.

   3. The appellant accepts he received the notice of hearing  but  sent  it
      elsewhere and didn't recall the date of hearing correctly. The  Notice
      of Hearing directs the appellant to file the documents  he  wishes  to
      rely upon. He did not do that and gave no explanation for  failing  to
      do so. Even if he failed to recall the correct hearing date there  was
      nothing to prevent him filing documents upon which he sought to rely.

   4. Whether oral evidence could have affected the outcome of  the  hearing
      is not relevant, in this instance, to whether there is an error of law
      by the First-tier Tribunal judge.  The  failure  of  an  appellant  to
      attend the hearing in the circumstances of this appellant cannot be an
      error of law by  the  judge.  It  is  surprising  that  he  was  given
      permission to appeal.

   5. The appellant is unrepresented. I have considered the determination of
      the judge with that in mind and considered whether there are, in fact,
      any material errors of law such that the decision should be set  aside
      to be  remade.  The  judge  in  paragraph  14  refers  to  exceptional
      circumstances. Although it appears the judge  may  have  misunderstood
      the legislative framework within which he is  required  to  reach  his
      decision it is plain that on the basis  of  the  evidence  before  him
      there was simply no evidence upon  which  a  decision  other  than  to
      dismiss the appeal could have been reached. The appellant  had  simply
      not filed any evidence; the judge considered that which had been  sent
      to the respondent. The appellant could not conceivably  have  won  his
      appeal on that evidence. The failure to attend the hearing is  not  an
      error of law on the part of the judge.

        Conclusion

   6. There is no error of law. I do not set aside the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  stands  namely
      the appeal is dismissed.


[pic]

                                    Date 27th July 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
