
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13698/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd July 2014                                |On 4th August 2014         |
|Prepared 8th July 2014                          |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                             MR RAFIK MAGHRAOUI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C. Jacobs of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria  born  on  21st  July  1978.   He
    appeals against a decision of the Respondent dated 12th April  2013  to
    refuse to grant him indefinite leave to remain on the basis of fourteen
    years' long residence.  The Appellant's appeal  against  that  decision
    was dismissed at first instance by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Oliver sitting at Hatton Cross on 24th September and 6th December 2013.
     For the reasons given below that decision was set  aside  and  I  have
    reheard the appeal.

2.   The Appellant claimed to have arrived in the United Kingdom in  January
    1998 in the back of a lorry and thereafter  to  have  worked  and  paid
    taxes under the name of Farook Ouane from 1998 to 2004.  He states that
    he worked for the remainder of his time in the United Kingdom under the
    name of Nadge Sinani using a French passport in that name  said  to  be
    issued on 15th June 2004.  With his application his solicitors produced
    documentary evidence with a schedule relating to each of the  years  of
    his claimed residence in the United Kingdom.  For  1998  these  were  a
    tenancy agreement, pay slips, medical centre letter  and  accommodation
    agency letter.  For the remaining years there was a tenancy  agreement,
    pay slips, P60, P45, bank letter, gas bill, rent receipt.

The Decision

3.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's application on 12th  April  2013
    stating there was no evidence of the Appellant's arrival in the  United
    Kingdom and he had produced no evidence to show that he had  ever  been
    granted lawful leave to enter or remain.  He was an illegal entrant and
    was accordingly liable for administrative removal.  He  had  failed  to
    submit acceptable photographic evidence to show that  he  and  the  two
    aliases, Ouane and Sinani, were one and the same person.  The Appellant
    had produced a photocopy of a French identity card in the name of Ouane
    which was not acceptable.  The personal  references  from  friends  and
    acquaintances could not be accepted as independent  evidence.   He  did
    not qualify under Article 8 as he had not severed all ties with Algeria
    and had spent the majority of his life there.

4.   The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision  and  the  matter  came
    before Judge Oliver who recorded the evidence  received  by  him.   The
    Appellant said that the agent who had brought him to the United Kingdom
    in 1998 had obtained the French identity card in  the  name  of  Farook
    Ouane.  He had never left the United Kingdom after  arriving  in  1998.
    He had changed his identification  after  the  manager  of  the  Levant
    Restaurant told him there was  something  wrong  with  the  Appellant's
    national insurance identity.  The Appellant  bought  his  new  identity
    document in the name of Nadge Sinani in  Finsbury  Park.   He  produced
    some further documents including a medical certificate  from  a  doctor
    who said he had treated the Appellant at the Mumtaz Medical  Centre  in
    London W11 from April  1998  to  May  2001.   The  Appellant  had  been
    prescribed antidepressants as a result of his  experiences  during  the
    Algerian Civil War.  The Appellant denied when it was  put  to  him  in
    cross-examination that the  pay  slips  from  1998  to  2002  had  been
    similarly crumpled and contained what looked like tea stains  in  order
    to give the appearance of age.  The Appellant did not know why  certain
    information on the medical centre documentation was  inconsistent,  the
    road number of his GP practice was different on the letter to  that  on
    the GP's stamp.

The Determination at First Instance

5.   The Judge was satisfied that a  man  named  Ouane  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom and working from 1998 to 2004.  He was also satisfied that from
    2004 a man named Sinani was in the United  Kingdom  and  working.   The
    question was whether these two men were  the  claimed  aliases  of  the
    Appellant.  The Judge was unimpressed by the  medical  centre  document
    which led him to believe that it was created by a person illiterate  in
    English.  The name used by the patient claimed  to  have  been  treated
    from 1998 to 2001 must have been Rafik Maghraoui but that  contradicted
    the Appellant's claim that at that time  he  was  using  the  alias  of
    Farook Ouane.  The  Judge  placed  no  weight  on  the  medical  centre
    document as indicating that it was the Appellant who had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom from 1998.

6.   The Appellant claimed to have kept his pay slips safely in a box.   The
    Judge found that that contradicted the  appearance  of  the  pay  slips
    which were crumpled and had the appearance of being tea  stained.   The
    Appellant's landlord, who claimed that the Appellant was his tenant  in
    1998, was not called to give evidence even though he was contactable at
    the time of that application as was the  GP.   The  witness  called  on
    behalf of the  Appellant  stated  that  he  played  football  with  the
    Appellant in 1999 but knew him as  Mr  Sinani,  a  name  which  on  the
    Appellant's case was only adopted from 2004.  The second witness called
    by the Appellant gave one place in his witness statement where  he  and
    the Appellant used to meet up (Leicester Square) but in  oral  evidence
    said they had not met there for the last year but now met at a caf�  in
    Shepherds Bush which had not been mentioned in the witness's statement.
     The Judge found he could place no weight on  the  evidence  of  either
    witness.  He found no reliable evidence that Farook Ouane was the  same
    person as the Appellant and therefore no  reliable  evidence  that  the
    Appellant had been in the United Kingdom  since  1998.   There  was  no
    claim for family life and although the Judge was unable to say how long
    the Appellant had been in the United Kingdom there was no evidence that
    it was anywhere near twenty years.  The Judge dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

7.   The Appellant appealed against that  decision  in  grounds  settled  by
    Counsel who had  represented  him  at  first  instance  (and  who  also
    appeared before me).  The grounds made the point that the Appellant had
    produced the original identity card used by the Appellant in  the  name
    of Farook Ouane and the original passport used by the Appellant in  the
    name of Nadge  Sinani.   In  the  circumstances  the  Judge  had  acted
    unreasonably in failing to reach any finding  on  these  two  documents
    which were the most compelling evidence produced by the Appellant.   It
    was an error to find that the Appellant's pay slips were tea stained as
    the burden of proof of establishing that was upon the Respondent.

8.   Permission to appeal the decision was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Coker on 25th February 2014.  She wrote:

         "It is arguable that the failure of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         to make any finding on the reliability or otherwise of the original
         documents produced at the hearing  or  their  provenance  may  have
         tainted the findings reached.  It may be, given the other  evidence
         before the Judge, that the outcome will be the same but the lack of
         consideration  of   original   documentation,   particularly   when
         considered to be relevant by the Respondent in the refusal  letter,
         may be relevant."

9.   The matter next came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Wilson  on  4th
    April 2014 to determine whether there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the
    Judge's determination such that  it  fell  to  be  set  aside  and  the
    decision remade.  He found that there was such an error and  set  aside
    the  decision.   Annexed  to  this  determination  is  a  copy  of  his
    determination  dated  9th  April  2014.   At   paragraph   3   of   his
    determination the Judge referred to:

         "The two  documents  issued  apparently  regularly  by  the  French
         authorities show first of all a gentleman named Ouane,  first  name
         Farook, issued in the Paris Prefecture on 14th June 1998 valid  for
         ten years and secondly a French passport  issued  in  the  name  of
         Sinani, first name Nadge in 2004".

10.  The photographs of the three persons concerned, Ouane, Sinani  and  the
    Appellant, were, Judge Wilson was  satisfied,  all  one  and  the  same
    person save that there was a slight ageing of the  Appellant  over  the
    years.  For the Judge not to have had regard to the identity  card  and
    the passport was a material error of law.  Judge Wilson put the  matter
    on the basis that if the  documents  were  not  issued  by  the  French
    authorities  when  stated,   particularly   1998,   and   were   simply
    sophisticated forgeries produced recently, the Appellant's  case  would
    fail.  If however the identity card in particular  was  issued  by  the
    French authorities in 1998 the Appellant would be entitled to  work  on
    the basis of that document and the case would succeed on a  balance  of
    probabilities.  The question was whether  the  identity  card  and  the
    passport were issued by the French authorities.  The Judge felt that it
    was reasonable to allow the Respondent time to make an  application  to
    the French authorities for their views as to these respective  identity
    documents.  He directed that the decision on the appeal be  remade  and
    adjourned the appeal for  two  months  to  allow  sufficient  time  for
    enquiries to be made.

11.  On 13th June 2014 the Respondent wrote  to  the  Tribunal  attaching  a
    copy of the report from the Home Office National  Document  Fraud  Unit
    which had examined the identity card in the name of Farook  Ouane  said
    to have been issued in June 1998 in Paris.  The National Document Fraud
    Unit examined the  card  on  20th  May  2014  and  found  it  to  be  a
    counterfeit and should not be relied upon as evidence of nationality or
    identity.  The reasons given were:

         "The above purported French identity card is ink  jet  printed  and
         lacks  any  security  features  -  it   is   therefore   completely
         counterfeit".

12.  The Appellant's representatives wrote to  the  Tribunal  on  25th  June
    2014 asking for an adjournment of the hearing listed for 2nd  July.  It
    was their understanding that  the  Respondent  was  to  make  enquiries
    directly with the French authorities as to the authenticity of  the  ID
    card but instead had looked at the card themselves.  They requested  an
    adjournment to obtain  verification  from  the  French  authorities  in
    respect of the ID card.  This request was  refused  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Eshun on 27th June 2014.  Counsel for the Appellant  had  written
    to the Tribunal noting that as at 20th May 2014 the Respondent had  not
    received a reply from the Document Verification Unit in relation to the
    Appellant's French identity card, the original of which was sent to the
    unit on 13th May 2014 (it  was  for  that  reason  that  the  case  was
    adjourned to 2nd July).  Judge Eshun wrote:

         "According to  a  letter  from  Christopher  Jacobs,  Counsel,  the
         Respondent  was  expecting   a   reply   from   the   Documentation
         Verification Unit in relation to the Appellant's  French  ID.   The
         reply dated 20th May 2014 from the DVR has  been  received  by  the
         Upper Tribunal and on that basis the request to adjourn the hearing
         on 2nd July 2014 is refused."

The Application for an Adjournment

13.  At the  hearing  before  me  on  2nd  July  2014  Counsel  renewed  the
    application for an adjournment.  Counsel acknowledged that the passport
    said to have been issued in 2004 which  was  held  by  the  Appellant's
    solicitors, had not been submitted by them to  the  French  authorities
    for verification as the Appellant now accepted that it was  a  forgery.
    However the Respondent had not put the  identity  card  to  the  French
    authorities  in  accordance  with  the  directions  of  Judge   Wilson.
    Although the Respondent's Document  Verification  Unit  had  found  the
    identity card to be false, the French authorities might have their  own
    methods of determining whether a document was false or not.  It was not
    for the UK authorities to authenticate the  document.   The  Respondent
    had seized the identity card and was now refusing to return it  to  the
    Appellant's representatives.  The Respondent was  not  entitled  to  do
    this as it was evidence in live proceedings.  It had been handed to the
    Home Office by  the  Appellant's  representatives  but  should  now  be
    returned.

14.  In response it was argued that what the  Learned  Deputy  had  actually
    said was that it was reasonable to allow the Respondent time to make an
    application to the relevant authorities  for  their  views  as  to  the
    respective identity documents.  It was not a direction  as  such.   The
    Respondent  had  examined  the   identity   document.    The   Document
    Verification Unit were experts in examining documents.  The  Respondent
    was entitled to retain the document  pursuant  to  Section  17  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004. Where a
    document comes into the possession of the Respondent in the  course  of
    the  exercise  of  an  immigration  function  the  Respondent   or   an
    Immigration Officer may retain the document while he suspects that  the
    person to whom the document  relates  may  be  liable  to  removal  and
    retention of the document may facilitate the removal.

15.   There  were  practical  difficulties  about  approaching  the   French
    authorities, it was likely to be a long  and  protracted  matter.   The
    document would have to be sent to the  Foreign  Office  and  then  from
    there to the Embassy in France who would  then  have  to  approach  the
    French authorities to verify it.  As opposed to that an expert  opinion
    on the report was already available.  Given the claimed  provenance  of
    the document, that it was supplied by an agent who had  trafficked  the
    Appellant into the United Kingdom, not in  the  Appellant's  name,  the
    circumstances pointed to the document being counterfeit.

16.  In response Counsel argued that the question of whether the  Respondent
    was entitled to seize the identity document had  been  litigated  twice
    before both at first instance and before Judge Wilson.  In seizing  the
    document the Respondent was not exercising an immigration function.  To
    allow the Respondent to confiscate  evidence  in  a  court  proceedings
    would frustrate the functioning of the  Tribunal.   In  any  event  the
    Respondent  was  directed  to  forward  the  document  to  the   French
    authorities.  There was little  detail  in  the  document  verification
    report.  The reasons given for finding the  document  counterfeit  were
    "meaningless".  A direction should be made that the card be returned to
    the Appellant's representatives.

17.  I considered the application for an adjournment  bearing  in  mind  the
    Court of Appeal decision in SH Afghanistan that  the  test  is  one  of
    fairness.  The indication by Judge Wilson  that  the  Respondent  could
    forward "the identity documents" to the French authorities was somewhat
    impractical.  In the first  place  the  Respondent  did  not  have  the
    passport  said  to  have  been  issued  in  2004  and  the  Appellant's
    representatives evidently had no intention of forwarding  the  passport
    to the French authorities knowing it  to  be  fake.  Judge  Wilson  had
    proceeded on a false assumption that the passport might be genuine when
    it was not.

18.   The  argument  in  the  case  turned  on  the  identity   card.    The
    Respondent's experts had looked at the document. I do  not  accept  the
    characterisation that it was a cursory glance, rather I  find  that  it
    was with some care and the unit had found the identity document to be a
    crude forgery.  I respectfully agree with Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Eshun
    who refused the earlier application for an adjournment on  the  papers.
    In the light of the receipt of the document verification  report  there
    was now no longer any point in further adjourning the  matter  and  the
    case  could  proceed  on  the  basis  of  the  report.   The   Document
    Verification Unit are very well accustomed to examining documents  from
    a wide range of countries and  have  a  particular  expertise  in  this
    field.   What  is  noticeable   is   that   the   Appellant   and   his
    representatives do not intend  themselves  to  instruct  an  expert  to
    examine the identity card.  That facility was made available to them by
    the Respondent but it has not been taken up.   Given  the  prima  facie
    evidence that the identity card is a false document, there would be  no
    purpose served in a lengthy prolonged adjournment whilst  efforts  were
    made to contact the  French  authorities.   The  matter  was  perfectly
    capable of resolution by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before me.

19.  Nor do  I  agree  that  the  Respondent's  retention  of  the  identity
    document is in any way unlawful.  The examination of a  document  which
    is said to have been used to obtain employment unlawfully is clearly an
    immigration function and the Respondent was therefore quite entitled to
    retain the document.  It is correct that the document had been produced
    as evidence in the Tribunal but it also had  importance  as  the  means
    according to the Appellant by which he  obtained  unlawful  employment.
    This breach of the  Immigration  Rules  was  not  something  which  the
    Respondent could ignore.  The Respondent could certainly not return the
    document to the Appellant in such circumstances given the risk that  it
    might be used again  for  unlawful  purposes.   In  the  light  of  the
    Appellant's claim that he had used the document for a number  of  years
    unlawfully, it was not something which it was reasonable to expect  the
    Respondent to risk again.  Clearly  retention  of  the  document  would
    facilitate the Appellant's removal and it might  be  used  in  criminal
    proceedings thus rendering the Appellant liable to further sanction.  I
    indicated therefore I was not prepared to adjourn the matter  and  that
    the case should proceed which it did.

The Substantive Hearing Before Me

20.  The Appellant attended  and  gave  oral  testimony  through  the  court
    appointed  interpreter.   He  was  examined,  cross-examined  and   re-
    examined.  There were no other live witnesses.  The  Appellant  adopted
    his witness statement in support of his appeal in which he said that he
    had arrived in the United Kingdom in January 1998  and  had  been  here
    ever since.  The pay slips and P60s he  had  produced  related  to  his
    employment in the United Kingdom.  Counsel pointed out to  his  client,
    the Appellant that the card was said to have been issued in  June  1998
    whereas the Appellant  said  he  had  arrived  in  January  1998.   The
    Appellant replied that he had the card in France before he came to  the
    United Kingdom. The difficulty with that answer was that that would  be
    impossible if the Appellant had arrived in January 1998  and  the  card
    was only issued six months later.  Counsel put  that  contradiction  to
    the Appellant in examination-in-chief.  The Appellant replied  that  he
    arrived in the United Kingdom in June and that there was a  mistake  in
    his statement when he said he arrived in January.  He  had  been  given
    the card by the agent who brought him here who had had it made  up  for
    him.  The Appellant had given the agent a photograph and in  six  weeks
    the man had produced the identity card.  The agent told  the  Appellant
    he went to the prefecture in France and used someone  else's  name  for
    the card.  The Appellant thought this was all legal stating that if the
    card was false he would have had it made in his own name.

21.  The reason why he then obtained a second identity (the  false  passport
    in 2004) was because at the last job he did he  did  not  have  a  bank
    account and was getting paid in the name  of  Bebchick.   He  therefore
    changed into another identity, Sinani, in order to be able  to  open  a
    bank account.  A man in Finsbury Park made the French passport for him.
     He had paid the man some money.

22.  In cross-examination he said he obtained the French  identity  card  in
    March or April 1998.  Later on in cross-examination he said he obtained
    the French identity card around 21st or 22nd June 1998 when he arrived.
     He had never seen the card in France.  The agent  gave  him  the  card
    when he arrived here.  He had obtained a genuine French  identity  card
    even though he intended to leave France because he thought he would  be
    working and would have to show it.  This raised the question why it was
    important for the Appellant to have a genuine  identity  card  in  1998
    when he arrived but  not  important  that  he  should  have  a  genuine
    identity document in 2004 when he obtained the false passport.  He said
    that the passport was to enable him to get some work.  When he  arrived
    in the United Kingdom in a lorry they got as  far  as  London  Victoria
    where the agent gave him the card.  The name on the identity  card  did
    exist, it was registered with the prefecture.

23.  In re-examination the Appellant  was  asked  to  explain  the  conflict
    between stating that he had obtained the  identity  card  in  March  or
    April 1998 and that he had first seen the card about 20th or 21st  June
    1998.    The  Appellant  replied  that  he  had  given  the  agent  the
    photograph and the money in March/April and then after that  the  agent
    had produced the document.  He was adamant he had not seen the identity
    document until after he had arrived in the United Kingdom.

Closing Submissions

24.  In closing for the  Respondent  reliance  was  placed  on  the  refusal
    letter, the identity document was a  counterfeit,  it  lacked  security
    features.  Pay slips and other documents were not reliable  either  and
    did not relate to the Appellant.  It did not make  any  sense  why  the
    Appellant should obtain a validly issued identity card in  1998  but  a
    false passport in 2004.  That had been put to the Appellant  in  cross-
    examination but he had not been able to answer  the  point.   That  the
    Appellant  had  submitted  a  counterfeit   document,   the   passport,
    undermined his credibility as a whole.  The Respondent  relied  on  the
    same submissions made to the Judge at first instance.   The  pay  slips
    were unreliable, they were tea stained.  No witnesses had  been  called
    to support the Appellant's claim to have been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since 1998 and that too should weigh against the Appellant.  The doctor
    for example had not come forward.  The appeal should be dismissed.

25.  For the Appellant Counsel argued that the identity card was  issued  in
    1998 by the French authorities rather  than  being  recently  produced.
    The Appellant could show he had been here since 1998.  He only  had  to
    show that he had been here for fourteen years prior to enforcement.  It
    was  accepted  that  there  were  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
    evidence but it did not detract from the Appellant's case.   No  weight
    should be attached to the document verification report  given  that  it
    was in breach of a direction of the Tribunal.  The events in  questions
    in 1998 were a long time ago, it was not surprising that the  Appellant
    was not exact in his answers.  He had not seen the identity card  until
    20th or 21st June of that  year  when  the  document  was  produced  to
    facilitate his entry.

26.  In 2004 he was required to  have  better  identification  and  he  then
    obtained the passport.  It may or may not be genuine  but  he  did  not
    understand it to be genuine.  The distinction had to be drawn between a
    document used to obtain entry and a document used to  support  oneself.
    The passport was not used to commit fraud but to enable  the  Appellant
    to live and work as an illegal entrant.  The use of false documents was
    not a reason not to grant indefinite leave to  remain.   Unlawful  work
    was part and parcel of a fourteen year  Rule  application.   It  was  a
    difficult  case  because  the  Respondent  had  prevented  the   French
    authorities from confirming the authenticity of the identity  document.
    The Appellant had  done  all  he  could.   The  identity  document  was
    produced in 1998.  As regards Article 8  he  had  developed  a  private
    life.   He  had  worked  and  there  was  evidence  from  witnesses  of
    friendships.

Findings

27.  In order to meet paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules the  Appellant
    has to show on the balance of probabilities that he had  had  at  least
    fourteen years' continuous residence in the  United  Kingdom  excluding
    any period spent in the United Kingdom following service of the  notice
    of liability to removal.  This provision was deleted on 9th  July  2012
    but by virtue of the transitional provisions  because  the  application
    was made  before  that  date  the  Appellant  can  still  rely  on  the
    paragraph.  In this case the Appellant applied for indefinite leave  to
    remain on the basis of  long  residence  on  4th  July  2012  thus  the
    paragraph applies.  Following  the  decision  in  Edgehill,  where  the
    Appellant raises an argument under Article  8  (right  to  respect  for
    private and family life) before that date the provisions  of  paragraph
    276ADE and Appendix FM do not apply.

28.  I accept the record of  the  evidence  given  to  the  Judge  at  first
    instance (there was no argument that I should not) but  of  course  his
    determination having been set aside any conclusions he reached on  that
    evidence do not apply.  The issue in the case was whether the Appellant
    could show that he and the two aliases he claimed to have used were one
    and the same person.  I have to say, having heard  the  Appellant  give
    his evidence to me, I did not find him to be any  more  of  a  credible
    witness than the Judge at first  instance  had.   The  Judge  at  first
    instance had identified a number  of  difficulties  with  the  evidence
    produced by the Appellant to show the  Appellant's  residence  in  this
    country.  These difficulties I have referred to above (see paragraphs 5
    and 6 ) include such matters as the evidence said to  be  from  the  GP
    practice and the contradictory evidence of the  Appellant's  witnesses.
    No steps have been taken by the Appellant  or  his  representatives  to
    address those difficulties. Indeed the evidence in this case remains in
    the same unsatisfactory state that it was in at first instance.  Having
    carefully looked at it myself I find I can place  no  weight  upon  the
    evidence said to show the length of time the Appellant has been in  the
    United Kingdom.

29.  The determination at first instance was set  aside  because  the  Judge
    had not analysed two documents which the Appellant said would show that
    he had lived and worked in the United Kingdom since  1998.   Those  two
    documents were a French identity card and  a  French  passport.   Judge
    Wilson was not made aware that the French passport was fake and that no
    useful purpose would be served by sending it to the French authorities.
     It seems to have been produced in London from a man the Appellant  met
    in Finsbury Park.  I do not see how this passport could  possibly  take
    the case any further.  To accept that it was produced in 2004 (and then
    used by the Appellant to obtain work) is to accept the  credibility  of
    the Appellant's account. There is however a serious difficulty with the
    Appellant's account. It makes no sense why the  Appellant  should  have
    obtained a false document in 2004 when, on his case, he had  a  genuine
    identity card already.  This point was put to the Appellant  in  cross-
    examination, but the Appellant had no answer to the point and Counsel's
    submissions in closing could not answer the point either.

30.  On the Appellant's case and according to the evidence he  gave  me,  he
    had in fact stopped using the name on the identity card  by  that  time
    and was using another name altogether (Bebchick).  Since he  presumably
    had no documentation in that name he says he was told he had to  obtain
    documentation in order to open a bank account and he therefore obtained
    the false passport.  The Appellant  was  quite  unable  to  answer  the
    obvious inconsistency in this.  If he had  a  genuine  French  identity
    card from 1998 there was no reason for him to use another identity  for
    which he had no documentation and no reason to obtain a false  document
    in a third identity.  It is not for me to speculate on when  the  false
    passport was created or for whom but it was not  I  find  used  by  the
    Appellant.

31.  The Appellant's case depends entirely on his claim  that  he  had  been
    given a genuine French identity card  in  1998.   The  card  itself  is
    clearly  not  genuine.   I  accept  the  evidence   of   the   document
    verification report for the reasons I have given above.   The  identity
    card is a crude forgery.  That of  itself  undermines  the  Appellant's
    claim that it was produced in  1998  but  the  difficulties  which  the
    Appellant got into in his evidence further confirm my  conclusion  that
    no weight can be placed  on  the  identity  card.   The  Appellant  got
    himself into a complete muddle in his oral evidence as to when  he  had
    actually obtained this identity card.  He seemed unclear as to  whether
    he had been given the identity card before he left France or  after  he
    arrived in the United Kingdom.  He was unclear  whether  the  card  was
    used to facilitate entry into the United  Kingdom  or  whether  it  was
    handed to him at London Victoria.

32.  On the one hand in his statement (and what he had  told  the  Judge  at
    first instance) he arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  January  1998.
    However when it was pointed out to him by his  own  Counsel  that  that
    appeared to contradict the date on the card as  being  issued  in  June
    1998, the Appellant hastily amended his evidence to say that  that  was
    when he had arrived in the United Kingdom. I appreciate that the events
    of 1998 are some  sixteen  years  ago  now  but  as  against  that  the
    Appellant was not giving evidence for  the  first  time  when  he  gave
    evidence to me.  He had given a detailed statement to  his  solicitors.
    He had been cross-examined once before about his claim.  The fact  that
    after all this time the Appellant  was  still  incapable  of  giving  a
    consistent  and  coherent  account  merely  served  to  underscore  the
    unreliability of his evidence.  At some date the Appellant  acquired  a
    false French identity card, a crude forgery as I have found, I  do  not
    accept that that card was produced in 1998.  Whilst it may well be that
    an individual by the name of Ouane was working from 1998 to 2004, I  do
    not accept that that was the Appellant and I do  not  accept  that  the
    French identity document which he produces establishes that.  Far  from
    it, I find  that  the  identity  document  undermines  the  Appellant's
    evidence.

33.  The Appellant is not able to show that  he  has  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than fourteen years.  He cannot satisfy the provisions
    of paragraph 276B.  The arguments put forward in this case, for example
    that the Respondent has unlawfully seized the identity card, in my view
    are something of an attempt by the Appellant  and  his  legal  team  to
    obscure the issues rather than clarify them.  The Appellant has a  very
    weak case.  He is an unreliable  witness  lacking  in  credibility  and
    consistency.  I therefore dismiss  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

34.  In relation to the Appellant's claim under Article 8, it is not for  me
    to speculate on how many years the Appellant has in fact  been  in  the
    United Kingdom.  It is certainly nowhere near the fourteen  years  that
    he claims.  The Appellant has established a private life of  sorts  for
    the period that he has been here but even setting aside the  fact  that
    no one has come to court for him to give evidence on his behalf,  there
    is still scant  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  private  life  in  this
    country.  I do not accept his claim of employment but I do find that he
    has put forward false documents to the Tribunal in a bid to deceive the
    authorities.   Given  the  limited  nature  of  the  evidence  of   the
    Appellant's private life and the fact that  he  cannot  show  that  the
    people who have been working in this country are indeed him, I  do  not
    find that the Appellant can show that he has established a private life
    in this country which would  be  interfered  with  by  his  removal  to
    Algeria.

35.  He has no family life in this country and the evidence he  put  forward
    at first instance as to his private life I  find  to  be  unimpressive.
    His witnesses  contradicted  themselves  in  their  evidence  at  first
    instance and they were not even called to give evidence to  me.   I  do
    not find therefore that the Appellant's removal to Algeria should  that
    eventually come to pass would interfere  with  protected  rights.   The
    Appellant's removal would be in accordance with the legitimate  aim  of
    immigration control particularly as the Appellant has sought to deceive
    the authorities by putting forward false documents.  To the extent that
    the Appellant has established any form of private life in this  country
    any interference with it would be quite proportionate to the legitimate
    aim being pursued given  its  limited  nature  and  that  it  has  been
    acquired whilst the Appellant has had no leave to remain.  I  therefore
    dismiss the appeal under the Human Rights Convention.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and has been set  aside.   I  remake  the  decision  by  dismissing  the
Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  vary
leave or to grant leave.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public reason for so doing. I  make
no fee order in this case.


Signed this 30th  day of  July  2014


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

[pic]

[pic]
[pic]


