
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA138752015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th June 2016                       |On 14th June 2016                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI



                                   Between

                                    [R A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss F Shaw, Counsel, instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For ease of comprehension, the parties are referred to by their  status
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Housego  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision refusing  to  vary  leave  to
    remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Migrant.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated its decision allowing the Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision on 4th December 2015.

 3.  The  Respondent  appealed  against  that  decision  and  was   granted
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ford.   The  grounds
    upon which permission to  appeal  was  granted  may  be  summarised  as
    follows.

      i) It is  arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in  concluding  that  the
         Appellant should be granted a further 60 days  discretionary  leave
         in order to identify another sponsor;

     ii)  It  is  also  arguable  that  the  judge's  consideration  of  the
         engagement of Article 8, proportionality and  Section  117  of  the
         Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  2002  Act  may  have   been
         incomplete.



Error of Law

 4. At the close of  submissions  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision which I shall now give.  I find that there is no error of  law
    in the First-tier Tribunal's decision such that the decision should  be
    set aside. My reasons for so finding are as follows.

 5. Mr Mills for the Respondent accepted that although  the  Appellant  had
    received  a  "60  day  letter",  he   was   diagnosed   with   paranoid
    schizophrenia and the judge found that he was unable to  remember  what
    happened and was unable to understand the letter when it was  received,
    and indeed his mental health did not improve until  the  start  of  the
    appellate proceedings.

 6. It is complained that the judge failed to  apply  the  Supreme  Court's
    decision in Patel & Ors v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] UKSC 72 (hereinafter  "Patel")  but  acknowledged  that  it  had
    regard to it at paragraph 30 of the determination.  I find  that  there
    is no merit in this criticism.  The judge has  cited  from  [56-57]  of
    Patel that went in  the  Secretary  of  State's  favour  explicitly  at
    paragraph 30 of his determination and was obviously aware of that dicta
    and implicitly applied it in his determination.  The judge  nonetheless
    finds that Article 8 was engaged notwithstanding  that  dicta.   It  is
    important to note that the judge  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
    several bases, namely on human rights grounds,  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, and to the extent that the Secretary of State should  now  grant
    Appellant leave to remain for 60 days on  the  basis  of  her  previous
    letter of 9 January 2015. Consequently, even if there were an error  in
    relation to this ground of complaint, it may be  immaterial  given  the
    success on several other bases.

 7.  Returning  to  the  human  rights  arguments,  I  accept  Miss  Shaw's
    submissions that the ratio of Patel does not  exclude  the  possibility
    that a student can enjoy engagement of his or her private life  in  the
    UK under the Article 8(1), however that  private  life  should  not  be
    merely premised upon the pursuit of studies. The  dicta  in  Patel  was
    natrually focused upon the arguments put forward by  the  Appellant  on
    that occasion,  namely  that  a  "near  miss"  should  go  towards  the
    engagement of the  Article  and  characterise  the  assessment  of  the
    student's private life.

 8. As the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in  Nasim  and  Others  (Article  8)
    Pakistan [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) made clear, the decision of  the  Supreme
    Court refocused attention on the nature and purpose of  Article  8  and
    recognised the Article's limited utility in private life cases which is
    far removed from the protection of an individual's moral  and  physical
    integrity.  In this regard it was plain from the decision in Nasim that
    the Article in question would have  limited  utility  in  private  life
    cases but not that it would have no utility at all.  It is also of note
    that Mr Mills pragmatically accepted that he could not dispute that the
    circumstances that the Appellant faced could go towards  engagement  of
    the Article in respect of his physical and moral integrity.

 9. I find from reading the determination  as  a  whole  that  the  judge's
    assessment of whether Article 8 was engaged is  clearly  premised  upon
    the fact that the Appellant was unable to comprehend the 60-day  letter
    which he received in January 2015 such that he could not take advantage
    of it, and the fact of his mental health incapacity and the  consequent
    inability to take advantage of the Secretary of  State's  decision  and
    simultaneous inability to inform the Secretary of State of  his  mental
    health incapacity (given that same incapacity),  coupled  further  with
    the refusal to vary leave  interfering  with  (more  than  a  technical
    degree) with his private life (which is of limited  utility)  but  also
    his physical and moral integrity, which  all  cumulatively  demonstrate
    that the Article was squarely engaged before the First-tier Tribunal.

10. In  respect  of  the  judge's  consideration  of  Section  117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  the  judge  has  clearly
    stated that he has  borne  in  mind  fully  the  great  weight  of  the
    statutory considerations and the need to  uphold  immigration  control.
    Given that judges are required to  have  regard  to  the  statute,  the
    complaint the Secretary of State makes  is  one  of  form  rather  than
    substance in light of the judge's clear indication that  he  has  borne
    the statute in mind including the public interest and  need  to  uphold
    immigration control.

11. Finally, in respect of  the  alternate  basis  upon  which  the  appeal
    succeeded, even if I am wrong in my decision concerning the  engagement
    of Article 8 and the assessment  of  that  Article  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, based upon his findings  he  made  it  clear  that  the
    decision was "not in accordance  with  the  law"  and  the  failure  to
    exercise discretion on the current facts.  In this regard Mr Mills drew
    my attention to the decision in Marghia  (Procedural  fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT 366 (IAC) which states as follows in its judicial head note:

         "The common law duty of fairness is  essentially  about  procedural
         fairness.  There is  no  absolute  duty  and  common  law  to  make
         decisions which  are  substantively  'fair'.  The  court  will  not
         interfere  with  decisions  which  are   objected   to   as   being
         substantively unfair, except the decision in question falls foul of
         the Wednesbury test  i.e.  that  no  reasonable  decision-maker  or
         public body could have arrived at such a decision.  It is a  matter
         for the Secretary of  State  whether  she  exercises  her  residual
         discretin.  The exercise of such residual  discretion,  which  does
         not appear in the Immigration Rules, is absolutely a matter for the
         Secretary of State and nobody else, including the Tribunal  -  Abdi
         [1996] Imm AR 148."

12. It is also important to bear in mind the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in
    Ukus (Discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC) which states
    inter alia as follows in its second head note concerning decisions that
    are not in accordance with the law:

         "Where the decision maker has failed  to  exercise  the  discretion
         invested in him, the Tribunal's jurisdiction on appeal  is  limited
         to a  decision  that  the  failure  renders  the  decision  not  in
         accordance with the law ...because the discretion is vested in  the
         executive, the appropriate course  will  be  for  the  Tribunal  to
         require the decision-maker to  complete  his  task  by  reaching  a
         lawful decision on the outstanding application, along the lines set
         out SSHD v Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148.  In such a  case,  it  makes  no
         difference whether there is such a statutory power as mentioned  in
         paragraph  1  above  (see  Section  86(3)(b)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002)."

13. Given the above dicta, I find that the judge found the decision was not
    in accordance with the law based upon the exercise of discretion and in
    particular the failure to exercise discretion. Therefore whilst Marghia
    is correct that a judge cannot independently utilise the  Secretary  of
    State's residual statutory discretion for him or herself, the  Tribunal
    may, where the decision maker has failed  to  exercise  the  discretion
    vested  in the decision  maker,  find  that  the  decision  is  not  in
    accordance with the law and require  the  decision  maker  to  complete
    their task by reaching a lawful decision on the outstanding application
    bearing in mind the findings of fact made by the Tribunal.

14. I find  that  this  is  precisely  what  the  judge  has  done  in  his
    determination and was entitled to do given the above authorities.

15. Consequently the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is refused.



Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.





Signed                                  Date 10 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

