
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13779/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 10 October 2013                            |On 16 October 2013           |
|Prepared 10 October 2013                      |                             |



                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               ALHAJI BANGURA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Z Kiss, Senior  Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M J H Wilson who, in  a  determination
    promulgated on 16 August 2013, allowed the  appeal  of  Alhaji  Banguar
    against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 2  April  2013  to
    refuse him leave to remain under Regulations 7 and 8 of the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

2.   Although this is the appeal of the Secretary of State I will  for  ease
    of reference refer to her as the respondent as she was  the  respondent
    before the First-tier Tribunal. Similarly I will  refer  to  Mr  Alhaji
    Bangura as the appellant as he was the appellant before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

3.   At the hearing before me there was no appearance  by or  on  behalf  of
    the appellant. I am satisfied from a  perusal  of  the  file  that  the
    notice of hearing had been correctly served on  the  appellant  at  the
    address of  his representatives, that being the address  which  he  had
    given in the notice of appeal.  In these circumstances  I  consider  it
    appropriate to determine the appeal taking into account  the  documents
    on the file before me.

4.   The Secretary of State had refused the appellant's application  because
    it was not accepted that he had produced a valid  marriage  certificate
    nor was it considered that he  was  in  a  durable  relationship.   The
    appellant had claimed that he was married  to  an  EEA  national  in  a
    native, proxy marriage in Sierra Leone.  When making the application he
    had produced a Certificate  of  Native  Marriage  dated  29  June  2012
    together with an affidavit supporting the Sierra Leone  Certificate  of
    Native Marriage dated 29 November 2012 as well as a Portuguese identity
    card for his claimed wife and a copy of his own passport.

5.   In the notice of refusal it was pointed out  that   the  provisions  of
    the Sierra Leone Registration of Customary  Marriage  and  Divorce  Act
    required that a statutory declaration should accompany the  Certificate
    of Native Marriage and that that  declaration  should  contain  certain
    specified evidence but that what had been  produced  was  an  affidavit
    which did not contain the relevant evidence.

6.   The appeal was determined on the papers by Judge  M  J  H  Wilson.   He
    referred to the terms of the Registration  of  Customary  Marriage  And
    Divorce Act  which stated that the application for  registration  of  a
    marriage should be made within six months of the marriage and  that  it
    should be accompanied by a statutory declaration setting out the  names
    of the parties to the marriage, the place of residence of  the  parties
    at the time of  the  marriage  and  the  conditions  essential  to  the
    validity of the marriage in accordance with the  applicable   Customary
    Law had been complied with.

7.   The judge stated that he had before him a statutory  declaration  which
    covered all relevant requirements. He therefore allowed the  appeal  on
    the basis that the requirements of the Act were met and therefore  that
    the appellant had entered into a valid marriage and qualified for leave
    under  the  provisions  of  Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.

8.   The Secretary of State appealed pointing out that  the  declaration  to
    which the judge had referred was dated more than six months  after  the
    date of marriage and that therefore the registration was  invalid.   On
    that basis permission to appeal was granted on 3 September 2013.

9.   As I have stated above, there was no appearance before me.  I did  have
    a copy of the document which had  been   lodged  with  the  application
    which is clearly an affidavit. It is not a statutory  declaration.   It
    was sworn on 29  November  2012.   It  does  not   have  the  necessary
    evidence required by the Sierra Leonean Customary Marriages  Act.   The
    Secretary of State was therefore correct to refuse the  application  as
    there was no evidence as the required evidence to show that this was  a
    valid marriage was not produced.

10.  I have seen the statutory declaration to which the judge  refers.   The
    reality is, however, that it is dated 27 June 2013.  It  is  not  dated
    within six months of the  marriage.   Again  the  requirements  of  the
    Sierra Leonean Registration of Customary Marriages and Divorce Act 2009
    have not been  met.

11.  I consider that the Immigration Judge made  a  material  error  of  law
    when he relied on the statutory declaration as it is clearly not  dated
    within six months of the marriage taking place.

12.  I therefore set aside the decision of the Immigration Judge.   For  the
    reasons which I have set out above I find that the  appellant  has  not
    entered into a valid marriage and  that  therefore  he  cannot  succeed
    under  the  provisions  of  Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.  Moreover there is no evidence whatsoever to indicate
    that he is in a durable relationship with  an  EEA  national  here  and
    therefore his appeal could not succeed under the terms of Regulation 8.

13.  I therefore, having set aside the decision of the Judge of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal,  remake  the  decision  and  dismiss  this  appeal   on
    immigration grounds.

14.  The determination of Judge Wilson was silent with regards to the  issue
    of the appellant's rights under Article 8 of  the  ECHR,  and,  as  the
    appeal was dealt with on the papers, he heard no  submissions  in  that
    regard.  I note that there was a Statement of Additional Grounds  which
    referred in general terms to the rights  of  the  appellant  under  the
    ECHR.  However, there is no evidence before me that would indicate that
    the appellant is exercising private and family life here to the  extent
    that the rights of the appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR  could  be
    engaged.  I therefore also dismiss this appeal on human rights grounds.

Decision

15.  This appeal is dismissed on both immigration and human rights grounds.

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

