
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13886/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 December 2016                       |On 14 December 2016               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                 MR PHIL [A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Kamal, Solicitor, instructed by Nasim & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Beg
    promulgated on 27 April 2016.  The appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria,
    born on 1 January 1973, who appealed the respondent's decision dated 24
    March 2015 refusing to vary his leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.
    Removal directions have subsequently been made.

2.   The judge approached the matter by an examination  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Mr Kamal who acts for the appellant makes no criticism  of  the
    judge's determination and fully accepts that the appellant in this case
    is unable to satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  either  in  the  spousal
    category or as a parent of a British child.  The judge then went on  to
    carry  out  a  consideration  of  the  matter  outside  of  the   Rules
    particularly with reference to Article 8 of the European Convention  on
    Human Rights.

3.   Mr Kamal's  sole  submission  to  today  is  that  the  judge  got  the
    proportionality assessment wrong.  When I asked him to take me to those
    elements within the decision where the error of law  can  be  found  he
    directed me only to one paragraph,  namely  paragraph  25  and  to  two
    passages  within  that  paragraph.   First,  he  referred  me  to   the
    beginning: "The youngest child is only a few months old.  I  find  that
    the effect on her of the appellant's absence  would  be  minimal".   Mr
    Kamal suggests that the effect on the young child would  be  more  than
    minimal and the judge should have taken that  into  account.   However,
    this was a conclusion that the judge was perfectly entitled to come  to
    on the evidence she had heard  and  it  is  within  the  boundaries  of
    legitimate conclusions which fact finding bodies can  come  to.  I  can
    find no justification in this criticism.

4.   Mr Kamal next takes me to the final sentence of  paragraph  25:  "I  do
    not find that  the  interference  in  all  the  circumstances  will  be
    disproportionate" Mr Kamal submits that the interference  would  indeed
    be disproportionate.  He argues first that the appellant is  fluent  in
    English and is financially self-sufficient and therefore not  a  burden
    upon the State.  He also argues that were the appellant  to  return  to
    Nigeria he would be in a position to seek entry clearance from overseas
    which could take three  months  or  if  contentious  nearer  to  twelve
    months.  He makes the point that the appellant is not  yet  married  to
    the sponsor and for that to take place the sponsor would need to travel
    to Nigeria but due to the children's ages they would have  to  go  with
    her.   I  do  not  consider  that  factors,  either   individually   or
    cumulatively, are such as to suggest that there was any error  by  this
    judge in carrying out the proportionality assessment.  It was  she  who
    had heard the evidence.  She had the matters very firmly  in  her  mind
    and was aware amongst other things that  the  appellant's  relationship
    with the elder child had been maintained largely from overseas remotely
    by means of telephone or otherwise.

5.   In all the circumstances I can find no material error  of  law  in  the
    way the First-tier Tribunal Judge assessed the matter. It may  well  be
    that other judges would have come to a  different  conclusion  but  the
    determination the judge came to was within the range of legitimacy  and
    the appeal must accordingly be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is  dismissed,  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                  Date         14 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
