
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13094/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 December 2016                            |ON 9 January 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mr Michel Kofi Akakpo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent is a citizen of Ghana who applied unsuccessfully for a
    residence card as the spouse of an EEA national under Regulation 17 of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).



 2. The Secretary of State did not accept that the respondent's marriage,
    which was a marriage by proxy in Ghana to a citizen of Belgium, was
    legally valid. The Secretary of State also found that the respondent
    had failed to demonstrate he was in a durable relationship such that he
    could be considered an extended family member under Regulation 8(5) of
    the 2006 Regulations and his relationship with his purported spouse was
    described as being one of convenience.

 3. The respondent's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was heard by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Heatherington.  In a decision promulgated on 28
    April 2016 the judge found that the respondent was not a family member
    under the 2006 Regulations as he had failed to show there was a valid
    marriage under Belgian law as required under the 2006 Regulations.
    However the judge found that the respondent was in a durable
    relationship with an EEA national exercising treaty rights.  Having so
    found, the judge allowed the appeal and stated that the respondent was
    entitled to a residence card as the partner of an EEA national.

 4. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge could do no more than allow
    the appeal on the basis that the Secretary of State's decision was not
    in accordance with the law.

 5. Before me Mr Walker relied on the grounds.  The respondent representing
    himself argued that the Secretary of State had already exercised
    discretion under Regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations and this was a
    case where the decision should be made by the Tribunal.

 6. At the hearing the respondent handed up a detailed statement and I
    confirm that I have carefully reviewed it.

Consideration

 7. Although there has been a longstanding assumption that there is a right
    of appeal under Regulation 26 of the 2006 Regulations against a
    decision of the Secretary of State to not grant a residence card under
    Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations to a person claiming to be an
    extended family member of an EEA national, the Upper Tribunal panel in
    Sala has made clear that there is no such right. Accordingly, for the
    reasons given in Sala, with which I agree, the respondent did not have
    a right of appeal against the Secretary of State's decision that he was
    not an extended family member and the First-tier Tribunal did not have
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal.


 8. The judge's decision was made before Sala was promulgated and therefore
    the judge cannot be faulted for proceeding on the basis that there was
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal. However, for the reasons given in
    Sala, there was no jurisdiction and it was an error of law to proceed
    on the basis that there was.


 9. This finding is sufficient to dispose of the matter. However, for
    completeness, and in any event, I find that a further error arises from
    the judge allowing the appeal when whether or not to issue a residence
    card to an extended family member is at the Secretary of State's
    discretion. Where, as in this appeal, the Secretary of State's
    discretion has not yet been exercised the most the judge could have
    done (if he had jurisdiction) was to allow the appeal as not being in
    accordance with the law, leaving the matter of how to exercise that
    discretion to the Secretary of State. See Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning)
    Nigeria [20111] UKUT 340 (IAC).


Decision

A. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal is set aside as the Tribunal did
   not have jurisdiction to hear the respondent's appeal against the
   Secretary of State's decision to not grant him a residence card as an
   extended family member of an EEA national.

B. I remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal by dismissing the
   respondent's appeal as (a) for the reasons given by the First-tier
   Tribunal he is not a family member of an EEA national; and (b) although
   he is an extended family member of an EEA national, there is not a
   statutory right of appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to
   not grant him a residence card as an extended family member of an EEA
   national.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 6 January 2017                |

