
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13740/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 January 2017                   |On 24 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                    S S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     RAMFEL - no attendance by representatives
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria and  her  date  of  birth  is  25
    December 1980.  She has applied for permission to appeal  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Onoufriou) ("FTT") promulgated on  18
    May 2016, in which she dismissed the appeal against a refusal of  leave
    to remain and the making of  removal  directions.   The  appellant  has
    three children who are also citizens of Nigeria and she has a  partner.
    The FTT was satisfied that the appellant's eldest child "K", whose date
    of birth was 3 December 2008, was diagnosed suffering from an  autistic
    spectrum disorder and learning difficulties. It was accepted by the FTT
    that he would not receive the same standard of care in Nigeria [ 10].

2.   In making findings of fact the FTT considered Appendix FM,  Section  E-
    LTRPT.2.2 and found that at the date of hearing the appellant's son was
    a "qualifying" child having lived continuously  in  the  UK  for  seven
    years preceding the date of hearing.  The FTT then went on to  consider
    paragraph EX1 and found that, leaving aside the health problems  of  K,
    it would not be unreasonable for all of the family to  return  together
    to Nigeria.

3.    The  FTT  considered  the  grounds  of  appeal,  guidance  under   the
    Immigration Directorate Instructions which focused on  residence  of  a
    child for more than seven years in considering factors relevant to  its
    assessment of reasonableness.  It considered if there were  significant
    risks to the child's health and whether the child was likely to be able
    to integrate readily into  life  in  another  country.   The  FTT  also
    considered EV Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ 874 in terms of assessing the
    best interests of the child.  At [29]  the  FTT  found  that  the  best
    interests of K were to remain in the UK in  order  to  receive  medical
    assistance  that  was  substantially  lacking  in  Nigeria  and/or  too
    expensive to obtain, and because of his condition he was likely  to  be
    stigmatised and bullied in Nigeria because of the  negative  perception
    towards  children  with  disability.   The  FTT  found  that  the  best
    interests of a child was  not  "a  trump  card".   Thereafter  the  FTT
    considered factors under the public interest with reference to  Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  as  amended
    ("2002 Act").  It took into account information provided by way  of  e-
    mail dated 15 October 2015 from the Patrick Speech and Language  Centre
    in Nigeria which confirmed that facilities  and  treatment  for  autism
    were available and the appellant would be able to access such  services
    for free if on a limited income in Nigeria.  The FTT  assessed  all  of
    the factors at [29] and concluded that medical assistance was available
    in Nigeria albeit to a limited extent than was available in the UK.  It
    concluded that it was not unreasonable to expect Khalid  to  return  to
    Nigeria with his family.

Grounds for Application for Permission to Appeal

4.   It was argued that the FTT's assessment of the best  interests  of  the
    child was lacking in depth and made no reference to the UN Committee on
    Convention of the Rights of the Child, failed to consider the future of
    a child with learning difficulties in Nigeria and  gave  no  indication
    that the child's best interests were "a  primary  consideration".   The
    FTT focused almost  entirely  on  the  precarious  immigration  of  the
    applicant and her partner and failed to have regard to the guidance  of
    the Supreme Court in ZH at paragraphs 33 and 46.  It  was  argued  that
    the FTT applied too stringent a test  in  determining  whether  it  was
    reasonable for the applicant's son to  leave  the  UK  (PD  and  Others
    (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2006] UKUT 108 (IAC),
    paragraph 39).  Further  the  FTT  considered  whether  Article  8  was
    engaged by reference to "exceptional circumstances",  rather  than  the
    correct test for "compelling circumstances" (SSHD  v  SS  Congo  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387).

Permission to Appeal

5.   Permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Landes  on  25
    November 2016 in the following terms;

         "It is arguable that the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  give  any
         indication  that  the  best  interests  of   K   were   a   primary
         consideration and it is not apparent  that  they  were  so  treated
         (paras 10 and 11 grounds).  It was also  arguable  that  the  judge
         failed to give adequate reasons for her conclusion  that  K's  best
         interests were outweighed (paragraphs 12 to 14 grounds).  Whilst MA
         Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705 indicates that the immigration history
         of a parent is a relevant consideration when considering whether it
         is reasonable to expect a qualifying child to  leave  the  UK,  the
         fact that a child has been in the UK for seven years establishes as
         a starting point that leave should  be  granted  unless  there  are
         powerful reasons to the contrary [49].

         I note however, that the judge's comment about medical  assistance
         appears to relate to her finding at  [30],  and  that  she  did  in
         effect consider Article 8 as she considered the factors in  Section
         117B [29].  I draw to the parties' attention however,  that  it  is
         arguable that the judge should  only  have  considered  the  appeal
         under Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules because at the date  of  the
         application to the respondent and the decision, K was not yet  7  ,
         and observe that the appellant  could  not  qualify  for  leave  to
         remain as a parent under the Rules (see [25] and [26]) because  her
         husband was living with her and their children."

Error of Law Hearing

6.   At the hearing there was no legal  representation  for  the  appellants
    although a detailed response had been prepared by their representatives
    RAMFEL which was copied for  Mr  Whitwell.   Both  the  appellant,  her
    husband and their children attended the hearing.  They  confirmed  that
    they wished to rely on the material produced by RAMFEL and did not wish
    to  make  any  additional  oral  representations  or  submissions.   Mr
    Whitwell addressed me, arguing that in any event there was no basis  on
    which the appeal could succeed under paragraph 276ADE  or  Appendix  FM
    with reference to EX1 because the eldest  child  K  did  not  meet  the
    requirements that he had lived continuously in the UK for  seven  years
    immediately preceding the date of application.  He submitted  that  the
    appeal could only be pursued under Article 8, ECHR.  He  accepted  that
    the FTT had imported the  test  of  exceptional  grounds,  rather  than
    referring to the existence of  compelling  circumstances  following  SS
    Congo.  He further conceded that the length of residence in the UK  and
    the  autism  of  the  eldest  child  would   amount   to   "compelling"
    circumstances.

Decision

7.     I agreed with the submission made by  Mr  Whitwell  that  the  appeal
    could only be pursued with reference to Article 8 and  that  the  FTT's
    approach under the Rules was legally  flawed.   The  FTT  had  in  fact
    considered factors under paragraph 117B  and  in  particular  paragraph
    117B(6) 2002 Act (as amended).  The child had resided  for  over  seven
    years as at the date of the hearing which was relevant to consideration
    of Article 8 outside of  the  Rules.   The  main  issue  under  section
    117B(6)  was whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK.  The FTT took the view that  having  regard  to  all  the
    other  circumstances,  in  particular  having  regard  to  the  parents
    immigration history and their reliance of state benefits, that it would
    be reasonable for the child to return to Nigeria with his parents where
    there was some limited support available for  autistic  children  [30].
    The FTT decision found that the best interests of the  child  were  for
    him to remain in the UK, however that is  not  the  same  as  making  a
    finding as to reasonableness.  The FTT made no  specific  reference  to
    the best interests of the child being a primary consideration  although
    reference was made to the fact that "this is not  a  trump  card".   It
    seems to me that there is some confusion in the findings  made  by  the
    FTT as to the best interests of the child and as  to  the  question  of
    weight, and its conclusion that it would be reasonable for the child to
    return to Nigeria.  MA (Pakistan) reiterates

         "However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK  for  seven
         years  would  need  to  be  given   significant   weight   in   the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first because  of
         its relevance in determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second because it  establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary".

    The judgment goes on to acknowledge that there is nothing intrinsically
    illogical in the notion that whilst the child's best interests are  for
    him or her to stay, it is not unreasonable to expect him or her to  go,
    following  the  approach  in  MA,  in   particular   in   the   court's
    consideration of AZ (Pakistan).

8.   The  FTT  in  this  instance  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  best
    interests of the child were to remain in the UK because of  his  autism
    and the potential  for  a  stigmatisation  and  bullying  and  lack  of
    treatment in Nigeria, yet for the same  reasons  the  FTT  went  on  to
    conclude that it would  be  reasonable  given  that  there  is  medical
    assistance in Nigeria albeit to a lesser standard than in the UK.   The
    FTT was correct to consider Section 117B but should have done  so  only
    in the context of Article 8 outside of the Rules.  Section 117B(6) once
    applied to a qualifying child then  makes  specific  reference  to  the
    reasonableness of the child having to leave the UK.  I  take  the  view
    that the FTT has in effect applied too stringent a test in  determining
    the reasonableness of the child to leave the UK (PD and Others (Article
    8 - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 108 IAC,  paragraph
    39).

9.   Accordingly I have decided that considering the  decision  as  a  whole
    and the erroneous approach taken by the FTT in terms of the application
    of the Immigration Rules and as to whether or not Article 8 was engaged
    by reference to exceptional circumstances and the approach taken to the
    test of reasonableness, there are  material  errors  of  law.    I  set
    aside the decision.

10.  I heard further submissions from Mr Whitwell and went on to remake  the
    decision having regard to Article 8, ECHR.  Mr Whitwell submitted  that
    there was no argument in terms of family  life  but  acknowledged  that
    there was a potential argument in respect of  the  inference  with  the
    private life of the child.  Dealing with the matter on that basis I  am
    satisfied that the child has a private life in the UK by reason of  his
    seven year residence and by  reason  of  receiving  treatment  for  his
    autism, both medically and educationally.  I agree with the  conclusion
    made by the FTT that it was in the  best  interests  of  the  child  to
    remain  in  the  UK  because  of  the  length  of  residence  and   the
    availability  of  treatment  for  his  autism.  This   is   a   primary
    consideration which  I  take  into  account  as  a  starting  point  of
    significance in considering if it is reasonable for the child to  leave
    the UK. I have considered  the  wider  public  interest  including  the
    immigration history of the appellant's parents and  their  reliance  on
    State benefits, but take the view that  the  public  interests  do  not
    outweigh the interests of the child.   Having  regard  to  all  of  the
    evidence before me it is  clear  and  I  find  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect K to live in Nigeria where  he  has  no  ties  nor
    significant links  and  connections.   He  is  a  child  who  has  been
    diagnosed with  autism  and  has  difficulty  coping  with  change  and
    receives help at school for his special needs in the UK and where it is
    accepted  that  in   Nigeria   he   would   face   discrimination   and
    stigmatisation, even if there were some limited support  available  for
    him in Nigeria.  He is established in the UK. The appellants are  in  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with K who is a qualifying
    child.

11.  Accordingly I allow the appeal under  Article  8  as  the  interference
    would not be proportionate.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 22.1.2017
GA Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.




Signed                                  Date 22.1.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
