
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Numbers: IA
13293 2013

                                                      IA 13296 2013

                                                      IA 13299 2013
                                                               IA 13308 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 December 2013                            |On 28 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                               Kavita Dabeedin
                             Bhardooaz Dabeedin
                            Rovindra Sen Dabeedin
                          Karishnee Kavita Dabeedin
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr H Kannangara, Counsel, instructed by Jade Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are all citizens of Mauritius and are members of the same
    family.  The first two appellants are married  to  each  other  and  the
    third and  fourth  appellants  are  their  minor  children.   The  third
    appellant, a boy, was born on 23 March 1997 and so is now 16 years  old.
    The fourth appellant, a girl, was born on 1 January 1999 and so  is  now
    15 years old.   They  appeal  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing their appeals against a decision of the  respondent  refusing
    to vary their leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to remove  them.
    It is their case that removing them would  interfere  disproportionately
    with their private and family lives and should be allowed under  Article
    8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 2. Each case must be decided separately and the children in particular are,
    or may be, in a different position from their parents.

 3. The second appellant was the first of the appellants to  arrive  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He entered  on  8  September  2004.   The  other  three
    appellants (being the  mother  and  two  children)  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in December 2004.  The first and third  appellants  returned  to
    Mauritius for almost all of 2005 and returned to the United  Kingdom  in
    December 2005.  The second and fourth appellants have  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom since they arrived.  It follows that they had all had  at
    least seven years' continuous residence in  the  United  Kingdom  before
    their applications were decided in April 2013.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal decided that none  of  the  appellants  complied
    with the requirements of the relevant Rules because they had  not  lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom for at least  twenty  years.   As  is
    explained in the  grounds,  this  is  clearly  a  misdirection  of  law.
    Paragraph 276ADE(iv) of HC 395 gives an alternative way of  establishing
    entitlement to remain on human rights grounds as reflected in the rules.
    An applicant who has not lived in the United Kingdom for at least twenty
    years but "is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously  in
    the UK for at least seven years" has  established  a  right  to  remain.
    Plainly the minor appellants come within the scope of  this  Rule.   The
    Rule  has  subsequently  been  amended  so  that  there  is  a   further
    requirement that "it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant  to
    leave the UK".  However, and somewhat unusually for  Immigration  Rules,
    there are transitional provisions and this additional  requirement  does
    not apply to the third or fourth appellants.

 5. It follows that their appeal should have been allowed under  the  Rules.
    It follows that in the  case  of  the  third  and  fourth  appellants  I
    identify an error of law and substitute a decision allowing  the  appeal
    under the Rules.  This is a case where the alterations to the Rules  may
    very well have been more generous than the Human Rights Act required and
    the Rule was quite soon amended, but these appellants had the  advantage
    of making an application at a time when they could take advantage of the
    wording of the Rules, and their appeals should be allowed.

 6. There is an abundance of evidence before me that they are doing well  at
    school, taking advantage of the opportunities provided for them  by  the
    United Kingdom education system and I have  no  doubt  that  their  best
    interests lie in their  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom  within  the
    education system there in the care of their parents, who appear to  have
    managed their upbringing satisfactorily.

 7. This does not mean that the parents will be allowed to remain.  The best
    interests of the children are not  determinative.  They  are  a  primary
    consideration to which I must have regard.

 8. There is nothing in the papers that indicates that any thought has  been
    given to the best way to consider the rights of the parents in the event
    of the  appeals  of  the  children  being  allowed.   This  is  somewhat
    surprising, but I saw no need to adjourn to invite the parties to  serve
    further evidence.  The conduct of the case is a matter for them and  not
    for me.  My task is to decide the appeal on the evidence already  before
    me if I can do that properly.

 9. The two adult appellants, if I can so describe them, have had permission
    to be in the United Kingdom throughout their stay  and  appear  to  have
    organised their lives very  industriously  and  done  nothing  to  their
    discredit.  I am aware that the First-tier Tribunal found that they  had
    abused the immigration system because  they  said  in  cross-examination
    that they intended to remain in the United Kingdom when they were  first
    given leave to enter.  I am  not  satisfied  that  this  point  is  well
    founded.  It is trite immigration law that a person might want to remain
    in the United Kingdom but intend to follow the Rules, and at every stage
    the appellants have had permission to be in the United Kingdom and  have
    been open in their dealings with the authorities.  The  fact  they  were
    persuaded to say in cross-examination that they intended  all  along  to
    remain suggests to me more that they are people anxious to  act  to  the
    betterment of their family that it does that they ever intended  to  act
    without proper regard to the law. The  finding  that  they  were  people
    intent on abusing the system should not have been made.

10. Nevertheless, they are not entitled to remain  under  the  Rules  and  I
    have to ask myself if there is any misdirection or error  in  concluding
    that their removal is not an unlawful interference  with  their  private
    and family lives.

11. I have had regard to the various stages in Razgar but I see no  need  to
    make  detailed  and  express  findings.   This   case   is   all   about
    proportionality and I have to ask  myself  if  it  is  proportionate  to
    remove people whose lawful stay in the United Kingdom has come to an end
    but whose children have established a right to remain.

12. I direct myself that  the  minor  appellants'  right  to  remain  is  an
    entitlement that comes from satisfying the requirements of the Rules.  I
    think it must be distinguished from an EEA national exercising a  treaty
    right where the policy considerations are different.  I do not  find  it
    helpful to consider the jurisprudence that deals with the obligations on
    a state to accommodate the parents of  an  EEA  national  child  who  is
    exercising treaty rights.  The right to stay  under  the  Rules  is  not
    analogous to the exercise of a fundamental EU treaty right.

13. Nevertheless I have had regard to  the  decision  of  this  Tribunal  in
    Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano  -  Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT
    00048 (IAC). It is relevant because it determines the context in which I
    must conduct the article 8 balancing exercise. The minor appellant's  do
    not have as strong right to remain in the United Kingdom  such  as  they
    would have if they were British or EEA citizens. Nevertheless they have,
    independently of their parents,  established  an  unqualified  right  to
    remain in the United Kingdom. My consideration of the parents' case must
    start from the premise that they  have  children  who  are  entitled  to
    remain in the United Kingdom. This is  not  a  case  where,  subject  to
    questions of reasonableness the family could be removed as a whole.

14. The parents may well have had a  long  held  desire  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom but there is no reason to find that they ever intended to
    behave contrary to the rules. Their conduct in the  United  Kingdom  has
    been industrious and they have been of good behaviour. It  is  generally
    thought important to uphold immigration control by insisting that  those
    no longer entitled to remain do leave but the parents'  cases  are  free
    from aggravating features.

15. I do not find it helpful to consider the position that would  appear  to
    apply if the children were from a broken family unit  and  an  "overseas
    parent" who wanted admission to the United Kingdom for the  purposes  of
    exercising contact.  These children are not from a broken family.  Their
    parents live together as a family unit and, it has been established, can
    provide a home for the children in Mauritius. No  doubt  if  they  would
    make a good home for their children in Mauritius if that  is  what  they
    had to do.

16. However, absent special circumstances,  it  is  clearly  undesirable  to
    separate children from their parents and the children's right to  be  in
    the United Kingdom under the rules is  established.  I  should  not  ask
    myself it if would be reasonable to expect the children to  remove  with
    the parents because that would be deciding the case as  if  the  amended
    rule had been in force at the material time.

17. For the sake of the children I allow the appeal of the parents.

18. It follows that I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    substitute a decision allowing these appeals.

Decision

The  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law.   I  set  aside  the   First-tier
Tribunal's decision in each case and  substitute  a  decision  allowing  the
appeals.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 January 2014                |







