

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers: IA/13140/2014
                                                               IA/15403/2014
                                                               IA/15413/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision  and Reasons          |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 4th March 2015                        |         On 10th April 2015         |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES

                                   Between

                           MRS HELEN ABIEGBE KOSIN
                      MISS FRANSISCA IRUARHO OMINIYODO
                         MR RAPHAEL EDIRI OMUNIYODO
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants: Mrs B Asigo
For the Respondent: Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The first appellant was born on 28th January 1961 and the second and
       third appellants are her children born respectively  on  27th  March
       1988 and 3rd April 1994.  They are all nationals of  Nigeria.   They
       appealed before First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen (the  Judge)  at  a
       hearing at Hatton Cross on 10th November 2014 against  the  decision
       of the respondent, made on 28th February 2014, to  refuse  to  issue
       them with residence cards as confirmation of a right  to  reside  in
       the United Kingdom as family members of an EEA  national  under  the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006. The Judge dismissed the  appeals
       under the EEA Regulations and found no other  basis  on  which  they
       could succeed.


    2. Permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  on  10th
       February 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge R A Cox for the following
       reasons:


         "The grounds in essence contend that the Judge misdirected  himself
         in law in finding that the husband was no longer a qualified person
         at the date of his death and that therefore the appellants  had  no
         retained  right  of  residence,   The  arguments  is  based  on   a
         consideration  of  regulations   3(2)(c),   6(3)   and   10(2)   in
         combination. It seems to me that this is an unusual case  and  that
         the grounds may be arguable.  It may, however, be critical to  know
         on what date the husband left the UK for Germany for what  is  said
         to be for medical treatment and the actual date of death."


    3. The matter accordingly came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the
       making of the decision  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.  The  relevant  background  is
       that the first appellant was issued with a residence  card  on  26th
       October 2010 valid for 5 years; her children had no such  cards  but
       all three of the appellants applied on 30th December 2013 for  cards
       on the  basis  of  a  retained  right  of  residence  following  the
       departure of the first appellant's spouse from the  United  Kingdom.
       He was an EEA German national, Mr Kurt Kosin. The second  and  third
       appellants are  not  his  children  but  come  from  their  mother's
       previous relationship.


    4. The respondent noted the submission of a notice of proceedings  from
       Wandsworth County Court dated  11th  September  2013  but  found  no
       evidence  of  a  decree  absolute  in  support  of  the  claim.  The
       appellants were accordingly considered by the  respondent  in  their
       capacity as the dependants of Mr Kosin  but  the  applications  were
       refused because of insufficient  evidence  of  Mr  Kosin's  economic
       activity in the United Kingdom to show him to have  been  exercising
       Treaty rights as a self-employed person under Regulation  6  of  the
       EEA Regulations.

    5. After the applications had been made but before the date of decision
       Mr Kosin unfortunately died in Germany on  26th  January  2014.  The
       first appellant halted the divorce proceedings  she  had  instigated
       against him. The evidence before the Judge was that in January  2013
       Mr Kosin had left the United Kingdom for  Germany,  his  country  of
       origin, because he was unwell with a heart condition.   The  appeals
       were therefore argued before the Judge on the  basis  of  the  first
       appellant being Mr Kosin's widow and that she and her children  were
       family members with a right of residence under Regulation  10(2)  of
       the EEA Regulations as follows:








                         "Family member who has retained the right of
           residence"

             10. (1) In these Regulations, "family member who  has  retained
           the right of residence" means, subject to paragraph (8), a person
           who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

                   (2) A person satisfies the conditions in  this  paragraph
           if-

           (a) he was a family member of a qualified person or of an EEA
           national with a permanent right of residence when that person
           died;

           (b) he resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
           Regulations for at least the year immediately before the death of
           the qualified person or the EEA national with a permanent right
           of residence; and

           (c) he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6).


    6. The Judge directed himself at paragraph 10 of his determination that
       a person satisfies Regulation 10(2) if he was a family member  of  a
       qualified person when that person died; each appellant therefore had
       to show that at the time of Mr Kosin's  death  he  was  a  qualified
       person. Mr Kosin was  submitted  to  be  a  qualified  person  under
       Regulation 6 by virtue of his status as a self-employed person.  The
       Judge noted that Mr Kosin was at the time of his death  not  in  the
       United Kingdom as  required by Regualtion 6(1) as follows:


           "Qualified person"

             6. (1) In these Regulations, "qualified person" means a  person
           who is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

           (a) a jobseeker;

           (b) a worker;

           (c) a self-employed person;

           (d )a self-sufficient person; or

           (e) a student.

             (2) Subject to regulations 7A(4) or 7B(4), a person who  is  no
           longer working shall not cease to be treated as a worker for  the
           purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-

           (a) he is temporarily unable to work as the result of an illness
           or accident;


    7. Mrs Asigo represented the appellants at the  First-tier  hearing  as
       well  as  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  Judge   records   in   his
       determination her submission for  the  appellants  that  Mr  Kosin's
       absence from the United Kingdom was not of consequence because under
       Regulation 6(2) he would not cease to be treated as a worker  if  he
       was temporarily unable to work because of illness or  accident.  Mrs
       Kosin's evidence was that Mr Kosin was up to the time of  his  death
       temporarily unable to work as the result of  illness.  However,  the
       Judge rejected the submission because he found that Regulation  6(1)
       clearly requires the qualified person to be in the  United  Kingdom,
       which Mr Kosin  was  not  at  the  time  of  his  death;  the  judge
       accordingly found Mr Kosin not to be a qualified person.


    8. The Judge further found that Regulation 6(2) could not apply because
       it deals with a person who, at the  moment  the  matter  has  to  be
       considered, is a living person who happens no longer to be  working;
       the judge found that Mr Kosin was clearly not within that category.


    9. The grounds of appeal before me assert that  the  Judge  misdirected
       himself in finding that Mr Kosin was not a qualified person when  he
       died by reason of his absence from the United Kingdom; he  had  gone
       to his country of origin for a visit which did not mean that he  was
       no longer a qualified  person.  There  is  submitted  to  have  been
       evidence before the Judge to show that Mr Kosin travelled to Germany
       only to seek medical attention from his consultant there.


   10. It is further submitted that the appellants benefit from  Regulation
       3(2)(c) as follows because Mr Kosin was entitled to be  absent  from
       the United Kingdom for up  to  12  months  because  of  his  serious
       illness:

           Continuity of residence

             3. (1) This regulation applies for the purpose  of  calculating
           periods of continuous  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
           regulation 5(1) and regulation 15.

                 (2) Continuity of residence is not affected by -

           (a) periods of absence from the United Kingdom which do not
           exceed six months in total in any year;

           (b) periods of absence from the United Kingdom on military
           service; or

           (c) any one absence from the United Kingdom not exceeding twelve
           months for an important reason such as pregnancy and childbirth,
           serious illness, study or vocational training or an overseas
           posting.

                (3) But continuity of residence is broken  if  a  person  is
           removed from the United Kingdom under these Regulations.



   11. Mrs Asigo submits that Mr Kosin continued to be a  qualified  person
       despite his illness as he retained continuity of  residence  in  the
       United Kingdom as there was no evidence that he did  not  intend  to
       return to the United Kingdom when he  went  to  Germany.  Regulation
       10(2) is submitted not to require the EEA  national  to  be  in  the
       United Kingdom at the time of death. It is submitted that  Mr  Kosin
       could not return to the United Kingdom before his death  as  he  was
       not well enough to travel.


   12. In the skeleton argument submitted for the appellants before  me  it
       is further asserted that the judge  failed  to  consider  Regulation
       5(7)(b) as follows:


           "Worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity"

             5. (1) In these Regulations, "worker  or  self-employed  person
           who has ceased activity" means an EEA national who satisfies  the
           conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

             (2) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if he-

           (a) terminates his activity as a worker or self-employed person
           and-

           (i) has reached the age at which he is entitled to a state
           pension on the date on which he terminates his activity; or

           (ii) in the case of a worker, ceases working to take early
           retirement;

           (b) pursued his activity as a worker or self-employed person in
           the United Kingdom for at least twelve months prior to the
           termination; and

           (c) resided in the United Kingdom continuously for more than
           three years prior to the termination.

             (3) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

           (a) he terminates his activity in the United Kingdom as a worker
           or self-employed person as a result of a permanent incapacity to
           work; and

           (b) either-

           (i) he resided in the United Kingdom continuously for more than
           two years prior to the termination; or

           (ii) the incapacity is the result of an accident at work or an
           occupational disease that entitles him to a pension payable in
           full or in part by an institution in the United Kingdom.

             (4) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

           (a ) he is active as a worker or self-employed person in an EEA
           State but retains his place of residence in the United Kingdom,
           to which he returns as a rule at least once a week; and

           (b) prior to becoming so active in that EEA State, he had been
           continuously resident and continuously active as a worker or self-
           employed person in the United Kingdom for at least three years.

             (5) A person who satisfies the condition  in  paragraph  (4)(a)
           but not the condition in paragraph (4)(b) shall, for the purposes
           of paragraphs (2)  and  (3),  be  treated  as  being  active  and
           resident in the United Kingdom during any period in which  he  is
           working or self-employed in the EEA State.

             (6) The conditions in paragraphs (2) and (3) as  to  length  of
           residence and activity as a worker or self-employed person  shall
           not apply in relation to a person whose spouse or  civil  partner
           is a British citizen.

             (7) Subject to  regulations  6(2),  7A(3)  or  7B(3),  for  the
           purposes of this regulation-

           (a) periods of inactivity for reasons not of the person's own
           making;

           (b) periods of inactivity due to illness or accident; and

           (c) in the case of a worker, periods of involuntary unemployment
           duly recorded by the relevant employment office,

           shall be treated as periods of activity  as  a  worker  or  self-
           employed person, as the case may be.


   13. Mrs Asigo submits that Mr Kosin was not out of  the  United  Kingdom
       for more than 12 months and his period of inactivity was also not of
       his own making and the necessary Regulation is  accordingly  met  by
       the appellants because Mr Kosin remained a qualified worker  at  the
       time of his death.  The respondent's opposition to the appeal is set
       out in a Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  Rule  24,
       response asserting that the Judge's decision is  without  error  and
       should stand.  Tufan  made  oral  submissions  accordingly  for  the
       respondent.


   14. The Judge observed that Mrs Asigo did her best before him "with  all
       the ingenuity that could be mustered in such a case". The  basis  of
       the  applications  made  by  the   appellants   has   changed   very
       significantly since they were made and throughout  the  proceedings.
       The submissions before me  now  cover  the  eventualities  that  the
       appeal  should  have  succeeded  on  the   basis   of   Mr   Kosin's
       uninterrupted status as a self-employed person,  his  continuity  of
       residence in the United Kingdom, his status as  a  worker  or  self-
       employed person who has ceased activity or had periods of inactivity
       for reasons not of his own making. These submissions go beyond those
       made before the Judge in the First-tier Tribunal and in  my  finding
       beyond or counter to the evidence which was before him.


   15. Having taken account of all the matters before me I  find  that  the
       Judge's decision was without error for the following reasons.  I  am
       satisfied  that  he  properly  directed  himself  in   relation   to
       Regulations 10(2) and 6(2) and that the evidence before him did  not
       show Mr Kosin to be a qualified person at his time of death. I  find
       merit in Mr Tufan's submission firstly that, even if it  applied  to
       Mr  Kosin's  situation,  Regulation  3(2)(c)  does  not  assist  the
       appellants because the evidence shows his absence  from  the  United
       Kingdom to have exceeded 12 months.


   16. In oral evidence the first appellant apparently told the Judge  that
       Mr Kosin returned to Germany from the United Kingdom in January 2013
       because he was unwell with a heart condition. There is no supporting
       documentary evidence of Mr Kosin's  date  of  departure;  the  first
       appellant gave no specific day in January 2013 when he  left  and  I
       note that all the application  forms  completed  by  the  appellants
       state that Mr Kosin departed on an earlier date, namely in  November
       2012.


   17. Mr Kosin is said to have had an operation in Germany on 28th January
       2013 but the only certain date, with supporting evidence by way of a
       translated death certificate, is of Mr Kosin's death in  Germany  on
       26th  January  2014.  The  evidence  therefore   leaves   open   the
       possibility that Mr Kosin departed the United Kingdom  more  than  a
       year before 26th January 2014 and the Judge could  not  have  fallen
       into error by failing  to  apply  Regulation  3(2)(c)  requiring  an
       absence from the United Kingdom not exceeding 12 months.


   18. I consider the submission that  the  Judge  erred  by  not  applying
       Regulation 5 (7)(a) or (b) to enter the realms of speculation.   The
       case was not apparently put before him on that basis and there was a
       lack of any supporting evidence of the  timing  or  reasons  for  Mr
       Kosin's departure from the United Kingdom. The reality is  that  the
       first appellant was estranged from Mr Kosin.  The news of his  death
       was relayed to her by a third party and she did not at first believe
       it according to her first statement before the First-tier  Tribunal,
       dated 19th May 2014.  In this statement the first appellant makes no
       mention of the circumstances Mr Kosin's return  to  Germany  or  his
       inability to be active as a self-employed person.


   19. In the first appellant's subsequent  statement  dated  6th  November
       2014 there is no supporting evidence of her claim that Mr Kosin  was
       unable to travel for health reasons and  there  is  no  evidence  to
       support the submission before me that Mr Kosin  always  intended  to
       return to the United Kingdom after a visit to Germany.  In  all  the
       circumstances I find no error  of  law  in  the  making  of  Judge's
       decision and it follows that his decision stands.

Decision

  20. I find that the making of the previous decision did  not  involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law.  It  follows  that  the  Judge's
      decision stands and this appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity order.


Signed:  J Harries
Deputy         Judge         of         the          Upper          Tribunal
           Dated: 31st March 2015


Fee Award

There is no fee award.

Signed: J Harries
Deputy         Judge         of         the          Upper          Tribunal
            Dated: 31st March 2015






