
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13889/2013
     IA/13986/2013
     IA/13903/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20 February 2014                             |On 21 March 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     JKK
                                     MMM
                                    RTKK
                      (anonymity directions maintained)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Vokes, instructed by Rotherham & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondents are citizens of Malawi.  I shall hereafter refer to the
    respondents as "the appellants" as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and to the Secretary of State for the Home Department  as  the
    respondent.  The appellants had applied, in March 2012,  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules.  Their applications were  refused
    by the respondent on 17 April 2013.  The  appellants  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge  P  J  Clarke)  which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 7 November 2013  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 8 ECHR).  The Secretary of  State  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Mr Smart, for the Secretary  of  State,  relied  upon  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  These grounds assert  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
    material error in law by treating the best interests  of  the  children
    involved in this appeal as decisive.  The  respondent  relies  upon  SS
    (Nigeria) EWCA Civ 550 [44]:


    These two characteristics are vouchsafed by authority of the  House  of
    Lords and the Supreme Court. With great respect they  are  capable,  if
    not carefully understood, of  investing  child  cases  with  a  uniform
    prevailing force which yields no or little  space  to  the  context  in
    hand. As for the first characteristic, the key phrase is of  course  "a
    primary consideration". It appears in ZH and subsequently, but is taken
    from Article 3(1) of the UNCRC, so the choice of words may be  regarded
    as having particular significance. What sense is to  be  given  to  the
    adjective "primary"? We know it  does  not  mean  "paramount"  -  other
    considerations may ultimately prevail. And the  child's  interests  are
    not "the" but only "a" primary consideration - indicating there may  be
    other such considerations which, presumably, may  count  for  as  much.
    Thus the term "primary" seems problematic. In the course of argument Mr
    Auburn accepted that "a primary consideration" should be taken to  mean
    a consideration of substantial importance. I think that is right.




 3. The grounds conclude by asserting that,

         On the basis that the FTJ also found that R  could  adapt  well  in
         Malawi [29] and that the principal appellant's  cases  (sic)  would
         have been diminished absent the presence of a child [31] and on the
         basis of the precariousness of the family ties developed in the  UK
         [31] the SSHD requests an oral hearing.

 4. The guidance given by the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania)  2011  UKSC  4
    has now been clarified both in SS and also by the Supreme Court  itself
    in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74.  The best interests of the children are  not
    (as Laws LJ  in  SS  pointed  out)  a  paramount  consideration  in  an
    immigration appeal; other factors may  combine  to  outweigh  the  best
    interests of the children depending on the facts of each case.  In  the
    present appeal, the first appellant is the father of two children,  the
    third appellant (who was born in 2006) is now aged nearly 8  years  and
    also another child (J) who lives with her mother, a former  partner  of
    the first appellant with whom the first appellant  has  contact  "about
    once a month" although he "speaks to her every day on the phone."  (See
    determination paragraph 9(xi)).  It  appears  that  J  and  the  second
    appellant have a good relationship.

 5.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  quoted  at   length   from   the   relevant
    jurisprudence.   It  relied  upon  Azimi-Moayed  &  Others   (decisions
    affecting children: onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC)  where  the
    Tribunal held that,

         Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of  origin  can
         lead to the development of social, cultural  and  educational  ties
         that it would be  inappropriate  to  disrupt,  in  the  absence  of
         compelling  reason  to  the  contrary.   What  amounts  to  lengthy
         residence  is  not  clear  but  past  and  present  policies   have
         identified seven years as a relevant period.

    At [26] the First-tier Tribunal noted that the third appellant had been
    born in the United Kingdom and, save for a few months spent  in  Malawi
    as a baby, has lived in this country ever since.  The judge was clearly
    influenced in his decision-making by the fact that the third  appellant
    had crossed the seven year threshold.  To  have  relied  entirely  upon
    that circumstance to allow the appeal would, as Mr Vokes  acknowledged,
    might have constituted an error or law.  However, I find that the judge
    has been aware of that particular pitfall and has avoided it, at  least
    in part, by adopting an even-handed approach to the evidence.  At [26],
    he noted that,

         Putting matters simply, although [the  third  appellant]  is  of  a
         Malawian family all her life friends and schooling have been in the
         UK.  There is no evidence that she speaks any language  other  than
         English.  She has some family  members  in  the  UK,  but  more  in
         Malawi.  That slightly counteracts the other factors in her favour.

    The judge noted at [29]  that  the  third  appellant's  performance  at
    school had been good, her deputy head teacher referring  to  the  third
    appellant's "secure group of friends."  The judge  had  "no  reason  to
    doubt that [the third appellant] would integrate well in Malawi" but he
    also noted that "all she has known is  the  United  Kingdom."   He  was
    careful to give "full weight to the fact that  her  parents  must  have
    known they had no entitlement to remain past the end of  their  visas."
    On the other hand, the judge pointed out  that,  in  the  case  of  the
    parents, "they have been here for twelve years in one  case  and  eight
    years in the other.  On the basis of the Immigration Rules in operation
    at the date of their application they were beginning  to  approach  the
    time when they could apply on the basis of long residence."  The  judge
    was also  careful,  however,  not  to  employ  a  "near-miss"  argument
    ("although I hasten to add that I am not using this  as  a  'near-miss'
    argument but rather to emphasise that their connection to this  country
    is of significant duration.").

 6. It is clear that the  judge  was  taking  into  account  not  only  the
    upheaval in the third appellant's private life which would be caused by
    her removal from a country in which she had been born and had lived for
    the vast majority of her 7 years but also that  the  first  appellant's
    ties with his child, R, would, in all practical terms,  be  severed  by
    his removal.  In addition, the ties between the half-sisters (the third
    appellant and R) were also likely to be severed.  The relationships  in
    this appeal and the possible consequences of the  appellant's  removal,
    are, therefore, rather more complex than are indicated in the Secretary
    of State's grounds of appeal.

 7. I am aware that the judge's analysis might also have been flawed had he
    failed to give a proper account of the public interest  concerned  with
    the removal of these appellants.  However, at [26]  (as  I  have  noted
    above) the judge took proper account of factors which  weighed  against
    the appellants in the Article 8 proportionality exercise.  He was aware
    also at [31] that, although the adult appellants  had  family  ties  in
    Malawi, their lengthy period of residence in  the  United  Kingdom  had
    been lawful "save for certain periods of [the first appellant's]  stay,
    which I ignore, as the respondent has granted him leave to remain after
    those  periods  of  overstay.   [The  adult  appellants]  have  clearly
    themselves still got ties in the UK."

 8. The principal assertion in the grounds of appeal (that  the  judge  had
    used the best interests of the children as a determining factor in  the
    Article 8 analysis) is not, in my opinion, made  out.   The  judge  had
    taken proper account of those factors which weighed for and against the
    appellants remaining in the United Kingdom whilst the importance of the
    best interests of the third appellant involve (as the judge recognised)
    relationships continuing in the United Kingdom  with  others  including
    her half-sister.  I do not say that another  Tribunal  faced  with  the
    same facts would have reached the same result; however, that is not the
    point.  The judge has reached a conclusion which was available  to  him
    on the evidence and he has considered that evidence in  an  even-handed
    manner whilst having proper regard to the  relevant  jurisprudence.   I
    find that the appeal should be dismissed.

DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 15 March 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

