
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13627/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 22 December 2014                           |On 15 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                ARMEL NTWARI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Burundi born on 19 April 1982.

 2. The appeal comes before the Upper Tribunal following a  hearing  before
    the First-tier  Tribunal  on  27  June  2014  whereby  the  appeal  was
    dismissed, with reference  to  the  Article  8  immigration  rules  and
    Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  However,  these  simple  facts  belie  a
    rather complicated  background  to  the  appeal.   The  salient  facts,
    insofar as they can be deduced from the documents  before  me,  are  as
    follows.

 3. The appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain on 8 May 2007.  It
    appears that since the grant of ILR he returned to Burundi in 2009  and
    2011.  According to the asylum interview, he travelled  to  Jamaica  in
    August 2012, returning to the UK on 9 January 2014. On that occasion  a
    decision was made to cancel his leave to remain  and  refuse  leave  to
    enter.  Because of the way some of the documents have  been  copied  in
    the Tribunal file, it did at one stage appear to me  that  this  was  a
    decision dated 14 January 2014, but it is in fact dated 9 January 2014.

 4. The appellant lodged a notice of appeal in respect  of  that  decision.
    However, it would appear, from the  documents  on  file  IA/03586/2014,
    that the fee  required  for  an  oral  hearing  was  not  paid  by  the
    appellant.  Ultimately, the Tribunal closed the  file  and  no  further
    action was taken on the appeal,  at  least  at  that  stage.   It  then
    appears that the appellant submitted, through solicitors, a  notice  of
    appeal out of time, in respect of the same decision.  On 8 April 2014 a
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal  extended  time.   That  decision  was
    taken in relation to the  appeal  number  IA/13627/2014.   Those  facts
    appear to explain why there are two appeal numbers.  The first  appeal,
    IA/03586/2014 was the appeal in respect of which no further action  was
    taken by the Tribunal.  When the appellant submitted a notice of appeal
    out of time, a new appeal number was  created  by  the  Tribunal,  that
    being IA/13627/2014.  In truth, they relate to the same matter.

 5. On or about 22 March 2014 the appellant claimed asylum.  In his grounds
    to the Upper Tribunal it seems that the appellant disputes that he ever
    made such a claim.  However, whether or not the appellant thought  that
    he was claiming asylum, the Secretary of State considered that  he  was
    making such a claim.  Screening and asylum interviews  were  conducted.
    For present purposes I do not need to decide whether or not he did make
    a claim for asylum in 2014, that not being a matter that is material to
    the issues I have to determine.  In any event, asylum  was  refused  by
    the  respondent.   Following  that  refusal,  there   was   a   further
    immigration decision being a refusal of leave to enter dated  14  April
    2014.  It may be that there was a notice of appeal lodged in respect of
    that decision, although no documentation to that effect is before me.

 6. Before the First-tier Tribunal  there  was  a  Case  Management  Review
    hearing ("CMR") on 13 June 2014.   The appellant was  not  produced  at
    that  hearing,  although  he  was  legally  represented.   Amongst  the
    appellant's complaints as set out in the grounds and  in  his  skeleton
    argument before the Upper Tribunal is the fact that he was not produced
    for the CMR.  At the CMR it seems that the First-tier judge  who  dealt
    with the matter was told by his legal representative that  the  "asylum
    grounds" were withdrawn and that the appeal  would  be  argued  on  the
    basis of Article 3 (health grounds) and Article 8 (private life).  This
    emerges from the written directions  given  following  that  CMR.   The
    appellant  complains  that  he  did  not  give  instructions   to   his
    representatives to withdraw the asylum grounds.  On the other hand,  he
    also states, inconsistently with that proposition, that he  never  made
    any claim for asylum in the first place.

 7. In any event, when the appeal came on for  substantive  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal on 27 June 2014, it proceeded on Article 3  and
    Article 8 grounds, and in relation to Article 8, with reference to  the
    relevant Article 8 immigration rules.

 8. Significantly, at the hearing on 27 June  2014  the  appellant  was  no
    longer legally represented, although he did appear for the hearing.

 9. The appellant complains about the First-tier judge's  determination  in
    terms of the narrative, for example in relation to  when  he  had  made
    asylum claims, agreeing only that it was correctly stated that he  made
    an asylum claim in 2000.  He contends that although he was convicted of
    a drugs offence in Jamaica (which  prompted  the  cancellation  of  his
    leave on return on 9 January 2014), he contends that he did not receive
    a sentence of  eighteen  months'  imprisonment  but  a  twelve  months'
    sentence of which he served only nine months.

10. I have referred to the question of whether or not the appellant claimed
    asylum in 2014.  In terms of the actual sentence he received, according
    to the appellant's undated witness statement received by the First-tier
    Tribunal on 27 June 2014, he received a twelve months' sentence with  a
    further six months in default of payment of a fine.  He states that the
    fine  was  "squashed"  due  to  good  behaviour.   Again,  for  present
    purposes, it does not seem to me to be particularly significant  as  to
    whether he received a sentence of twelve  months  or  eighteen  months'
    imprisonment, or indeed, whether he was deported from Jamaica to the UK
    as stated by the First-tier judge, or whether members  of  the  Burundi
    community paid for his return ticket to the UK.  Similarly, whether the
    appellant was released from prison in Jamaica through good behaviour as
    he originally asserted in his grounds of appeal against the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal, or whether it was a combination  of  his  good
    behaviour and issues of sexual abuse and bullying as he later asserted,
    does not seem to me to be material.

11. However, it is apparent that what has been lost sight of in the process
    of this appeal is that there was a decision to cancel  the  appellant's
    leave.  Notice of appeal was lodged in respect of that decision, albeit
    that the grounds are rather formulaic.

12. Whilst the judges at the  CMR  and  at  the  substantive  hearing  were
    entitled to assume that  the  appellant's  legal  representatives  were
    acting with his authority in stating the  basis  on  which  the  appeal
    would be advanced, it is important to remember that at the  substantive
    hearing the appellant was no longer represented.  At  that  hearing  it
    does not appear that the appellant made any  direct  reference  to  the
    cancellation of his ILR, and did not make any complaint about what  was
    said on his behalf at the CMR and the fact that he was not produced for
    that hearing.  Nevertheless, equally it  does  not  appear  that  these
    issues were canvassed with him.   It  does  seem  to  me  that  it  was
    incumbent on the  First-tier  judge  who  dealt  with  the  substantive
    hearing to consider the underlying  basis  of  the  appeal,  being  the
    cancellation of his leave.

13. The relevant paragraphs of the  immigration  rules  would  seem  to  be
    321(A)(5) (cancellation of leave) and 320(2)(c) (refusal  of  leave  to
    enter).  At the hearing before me I canvassed with Mr Nath the question
    of  whether  the  decisions  under  the  immigration  rules   concerned
    mandatory or discretionary grounds. The submissions on  behalf  of  the
    respondent at the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  referred  to
    the mandatory nature of the refusal. On consideration of  the  relevant
    immigration rules it is apparent that the decisions concerned mandatory
    grounds under the above paragraphs. In  the  circumstances,  given  the
    mandatory nature of those decisions, it may well be that the  appellant
    is not able to succeed on an appeal against the cancellation  of  leave
    or the refusal of leave to enter.

14. In any event, it was accepted on behalf of  the  respondent  before  me
    that in  failing  to  deal  with  the  issue  of  cancellation  of  the
    appellant's leave, the First-tier judge erred in law.  The  same  could
    be said in respect of the refusal of leave to  enter.  I  am  satisfied
    that in failing to deal with those aspects of the appeal the First-tier
    judge erred in law.  In those  circumstances,  the  First-tier  judge's
    decision is to be set aside.  In accordance with the Practice Statement
    at paragraph 7.2 I  consider  it  appropriate  for  the  matter  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

15. At that hearing, consideration will have to be given to the question of
    the  cancellation  of  the  appellant's  leave.   This  may  involve  a
    consideration of the interview that took  place  with  him  at  Gatwick
    Airport on 9 January 2014.  Mr Nath confirmed  that  there  is  on  the
    respondent's file a copy of the interview  that  took  place  with  the
    appellant on that occasion, that interview thus far  not  having  found
    its way into any of the documents put before either Tribunal.

16. I consider that the appropriate course is for the appeal to be heard de
    novo, because although certain findings of fact were made by the First-
    tier judge, findings need  to  be  made  on  the  basis  of  up-to-date
    information.  It would appear unlikely that the appellant  is  able  to
    meet the Article 8 immigration rules, although I  make  no  finding  in
    that respect, that being  a  matter  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine.

17. So far as asylum is concerned, the grounds of appeal before the  First-
    tier Tribunal do state at [4] that the appellant would be  at  risk  of
    persecution on return to Burundi.  At the hearing before the First-tier
    Tribunal the appellant did raise issues as to his  safety  in  Burundi.
    Bearing in mind that he was  not  present  at  the  CMR  and  that  the
    question of risk on return was not considered by the  judge  who  dealt
    with the substantive hearing, I have decided that the appellant  should
    be permitted to argue asylum grounds if he so chooses.  My decision  in
    this respect is consistent with what was  originally  advanced  in  the
    grounds of appeal on his behalf.

    Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The decision is therefore set aside and the  appeal
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.





                                 DIRECTIONS

(1)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Steer.   No
    findings of fact are preserved, except as agreed between the parties.

(2)  No later than 21 days before the next date of  hearing  the  respondent
    is to file and serve a record of the interview that took place with the
    appellant on 9 January 2014 at Gatwick Airport, as well  as  any  other
    disclosable  documents  pertaining  to  the  decision  to  cancel   his
    indefinite leave to remain.

(3)  No later than 7 days before the resumed hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  the  appellant's  legal  representatives,  if  any,  or  the
    appellant  himself  is  to  notify  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    respondent whether asylum grounds are relied on.  If the  appellant  is
    legally represented, a skeleton argument must be filed  and  served  no
    later than 7 days before the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 13/01/15


