

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Numbers:    IA/13333/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 2nd October 2014                          |On:1st December 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MUDASSIR ALI
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Brown, Counsel instructed by Arshed and Co
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan date  of  birth  2nd  December
    1985. On the 9th June 2014 the First-tier Tribunal allowed  his  appeal
    against a refusal to issue him with a  residence  card  confirming  his
    right of residence as the spouse of an EEA national  exercising  treaty
    rights. The Secretary of State now has  permission  to  appeal  against
    that decision.

 2. The Secretary of State had refused the application on the grounds  that
    the Respondent's marriage to Polish national Urszula Olga Kubicz was  a
    marriage of convenience entered into for the purpose  of  circumventing
    immigration control.

 3. The Respondent had appealed the decision on the  papers.    The  First-
    tier Tribunal began its deliberations  by  directing  itself  that  the
    burden of proof is on  the  Secretary  of  State   (paragraph  6).  The
    determination then sets  out  each  of  the  reasons  advanced  by  the
    Secretary of State as to why she considered this marriage a sham. These
    all arose from simultaneous interviews conducted  with  the  Respondent
    and Ms Kubicz by immigration officers who had attended  at  a  registry
    office where they were attempting to get married.  In respect  of  each
    of the points made, the Tribunal resolves the dispute in favour of  the
    Respondent. The  discrepancies  are  found  to  have  arisen  from  the
    respective accents of the parties to the marriage,  and  the  responses
    characterised as "vague" by the decision-maker found to be  so  because
    of the vague nature of the questions put. The Tribunal was  unimpressed
    by the Secretary of State's decision to only reproduce  selected  parts
    of  those  interviews:  "this  is  most  unfortunate  because  selected
    extracts can lead to a false impression of the  overall  interview.  It
    may very well be that the Appellant and the Sponsor were asked  a  very
    large number of questions which would show the  whole  interview  in  a
    different light".


 4. The Secretary of State now has permission to appeal on the grounds that
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to apply the guidance in Papajorgi  (EEA
    Spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT  00038(IAC).    It
    is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal has erred in respect  of  the
    burden of proof, and that this has led the Tribunal to err  in  respect
    of its analysis of the evidence.



    My Findings

 5. There is no burden on the Secretary of State to show  that  this  is  a
    marriage of convenience.  There is an evidential burden only: it is for
    the Secretary  of  State  to  produce  evidence  justifying  reasonable
    suspicion that the marriage is a  sham.  After  this,  it  is  for  the
    Appellant to show that his marriage is in fact genuine.  I am satisfied
    that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  in
    this regard.

 6. I have given careful consideration to Mr Brown's submission  that  this
    error is not such that the determination should be set  aside.  I  have
    some sympathy  with  this  suggestion.  I  agree  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that many of the reasons for refusal in this case are not well
    made  -  some,  such  as  the  difference  in   accents   between   the
    pronounciation of "tigger" and "thaiga", are  frankly  ridiculous.   It
    may be that the Tribunal, having properly directed itself,  would  have
    concluded that the Secretary of  State  had  failed  to  discharge  the
    evidential burden, or that the Appellant had done enough  in  reply  to
    show his marriage to be genuine. I cannot however be  satisfied  as  to
    either. There is repeated reference in the determination to the  burden
    of proof lying on the Secretary of State  and  it  is  clear  from  the
    decision overall that the Tribunal believed that to be  the  case.  Had
    the Tribunal properly directed itself there is a real chance  that  the
    outcome would have been different.

 7. Both parties  invited  me  to  remit  this  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, should an error be found.   Neither  the  Respondent  nor  Ms
    Kubicz were present at the hearing before me, and  Mr  Brown  indicated
    that should the matter be remade, both would wish to give  evidence.  I
    therefore agree that this matter should be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.




      Decisions

 8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


 9. The matter is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.








                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          12th November 2014
