
IAC-TH-CP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13160/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 April 2015                             |On 6 May 2015                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                         Mr Michael Babatunde Odamo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born  on  26  June  1981.
    The respondent refused to vary  his  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and decided to remove him under s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision and the matter came before Judge A
    Khawar of the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  decision  promulgated  on  17
    December 2014 the judge dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  that  decision.  This  was
    granted on the basis that the judge doing so was satisfied that  it  is
    an arguable error of law that following the finding by the  judge  that
    the appellant did not enjoy family life with his parents  and  siblings
    he did not then go on to consider the relationship between  them  as  a
    part of the appellant's private life.  It was  said  that  the  judge's
    consideration of the appellant's private  life  is  cursory  given  the
    appellant has been in the United Kingdom for a number of years.

 4. The respondent filed a response to the grounds of appeal in  accordance
    with Rule 24 of the 2008 Upper Tribunal Rules.  The response is to  the
    effect  that   the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   directed   himself
    appropriately  and  that  the  findings  were   entirely   sustainable,
    adequately reasoned and not  perverse.  There  was  also  a  sufficient
    consideration of the appellant's private life.

The Hearing before me

 5. The appellant appeared in person and produced typed grounds in  support
    of his application.  His oral submissions essentially relied upon those
    grounds to argue that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made a material
    error of law.  He blamed his legal representative for not including his
    son's birth certificate as part of the bundle produced  to  the  First-
    tier Judge.  The appellant's mother and all his siblings live in the UK
    as well as nephews, nieces and a cousin.  They had written  in  support
    to the Tribunal explaining the devastating effect of  his  absence  and
    appealing that he should be allowed to return  to  rejoin  the  family.
    Furthermore the appellant's social and cultural life for fourteen years
    has been in the  UK  and  is  now  in  jeopardy  making  him  extremely
    depressed as a result of ignoring all his emotional or meaningful needs
    in relation to his family with whom he has contact on a regular  basis.
    He has no one to fall back on if he is returned  to  Nigeria.   He  has
    been living and working in the UK  for  over  fourteen  years  and  has
    sustained himself without recourse to public funds. He has  achieved  a
    high level of integration into British society.

My Deliberations

 6. I note from looking at the immigration decision that the appellant  was
    granted limited leave to enter the United Kingdom on 1 April 2011 until
    23  June  2013  in  the  category  of  a  spouse  of  settled   person.
    Essentially the respondent refused the application on  the  basis  that
    the appellant was not legally married to his spouse but  also  that  he
    did not have a genuine and subsisting relationship with her and did not
    intend to cohabit together permanently in the UK at any  point  in  the
    future.  For this and other reasons the appellant was  unable  to  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules and relied purely on  Article
    8 ECHR.  In the Reasons for Refusal Letter the appellant was  noted  to
    have entered the UK in 2005 using a British passport.  He again entered
    the UK using the same passport in 2007.

 7. The judge at paragraphs 11, 12 and 13 set  out  details  regarding  two
    criminal convictions against the appellant for fraud involving the  use
    of a false British passport and  further  for  using  a  "disingenuous"
    electricity bill in order to attempt to collect a mobile telephone  for
    someone.

 8. The judge found that the appellant's appeal had to fail  by  virtue  of
    the mandatory grounds of refusal under paragraph 322(1C) and the appeal
    was therefore dismissed.

 9. The judge accepted at paragraph 16  that  the  appellant  was  lawfully
    married to his sponsor and this was the reason why  the  appellant  was
    granted leave to enter the UK.  The  judge  gave  proper  and  adequate
    reasons for concluding that the  appellant  was  not  living  with  the
    sponsor any longer (see paragraphs 17 and 18) and indeed  at  paragraph
    21 notes that the appellant concedes that the relationship is no longer
    subsisting.   The  appellant  gave  evidence  that  he  started  having
    arguments with his wife in 2011 and it was in that year that he entered
    the United Kingdom.  The relationship broke down in 2013, according  to
    the appellant, which was a month before he  made  his  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of his marriage.

10. The judge then considered the position regarding the  appellant's  son.
    The judge did not believe the appellant for reasons that were  open  to
    him that the appellant was telling the truth about how often he saw his
    son.  The judge noted that the appellant failed to produce any evidence
    whatsoever in the form of a birth certificate to corroborate his  claim
    that in fact he has a child in the UK and noted further that as at  the
    date of the appellant's application he made no reference  to  having  a
    child.

11. The judge noted and considered  the  witness  statements  from  various
    other members of the family.   He  also  referred  to  the  appellant's
    private life in paragraph 29 and at paragraph 19 found that there is no
    reliable  evidence  proffered  by  the  appellant  to   challenge   the
    assertions, analysis and conclusions of the respondent as  set  out  in
    the refusal letter in  relation  to  Article  8  as  incorporated  into
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of  the  Rules.  It  would  have  been
    helpful if the judge had set  this  out  in  more  detail  in  his  own
    decision but it is not a material error that he  did  not  do  so.  The
    refusal letter deals with the Article 8 position  and  the  Immigration
    Rules and the judge agreed with what was put there.

My Decision

12. Before me the appellant attempted to  produce  some  more  evidence  in
    relation to his Article 8 position but I explained  to  him  that  such
    evidence as he may now have should have been produced to the First-tier
    Judge, but it was not.   As  I  further  explained  to  him  the  Upper
    Tribunal is not able  to  interfere  with  the  original  determination
    unless a material error of law has been made.  The judge  was  entitled
    to conclude as he did on the evidence that was put before him. It would
    have been very difficult for the appellant  in  any  event  to  succeed
    under Article 8 where he could not succeed under the Immigration Rules.



13. There is no material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision and therefore the decision to dismiss  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR stands.

14. I see no need for an anonymity direction in this appeal and therefore I
    do not direct one.



Signed   Date 6 May 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
