
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/13445/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 July 2014                               |On 15 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before:

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   APPELLANT
                                     and

                                Cumali Turhan
                                                                  RESPONDENT


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K. Mak, MKM Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Part 1 - the finding of an error on a point of law

      1. On 20 July 2014, I  determined  that  a  panel  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  had  made  an  error  of  law  in  the  making   of   its
         determination.  I set aside the First-tier  Tribunal  determination
         and adjourned the remaking of the decision to  be  resumed  on  the
         First Available Date after 1 September 2014 limited to  submissions
         only.  My reasons for finding the error set out the  background  in
         some detail and I can do no better than set out those  reasons  now
         in full.


Introduction and immigration history

      2. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination of a panel
         (First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fitzgibbon  QC  and  Mr  A.  Armitage)
         allowing Mr Turhan's appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
         of State to make a deportation order against him. For the  sake  of
         continuity, I shall refer to Mr Turhan as 'the appellant' as he was
         before the First-tier Tribunal.


      3. The deportation  decision  was  the  culmination  of  a  series  of
         criminal convictions and comes in the wake of an  earlier  decision
         to deport the appellant which the appellant  successfully  appealed
         to the Tribunal.


      4. The appellant's conduct arises in the context of domestic  violence
         committed upon his wife and  subsequently  misconduct  towards  his
         partner and the appellant's repeated violations of orders  made  by
         the Courts designed to prevent him contacting them.


      5. The appellant was born on 25 January 1979  and  is  a  national  of
         Turkey. He arrived in the United Kingdom  on  4  May  2003  as  the
         spouse of a British citizen. On  14  April  2004,  he  was  granted
         indefinite leave to remain. Their son, A, was born on 7 July  2005.
         He is now aged 9.


The appellant's history of offending

      6. The appellant has recorded against him a number of convictions, the
         majority stemming directly or indirectly from the making of a  non-
         molestation order on 11 October 2007 forbidding him, amongst  other
         things,  from  threatening  violence  against  A  or  intimidating,
         harassing or pestering him.  The order also prevented the appellant
         from communicating with his wife.  The convictions are:


          i) 22 June  2006:  offences  of  battery  against  his  wife  and
             criminal damage for which he  was  sentenced  to  a  community
             order of the 24 months with supervision.
         ii) 25 June 2007: for breach of the order, the order  was  further
             extended for 3 months.
        iii) 2 May 2008: (a) for assault occasioning actual bodily harm and
             (b) breach of  a  non-molestation  order,  the  appellant  was
             sentenced at Chelmsford Crown Court to 12 months imprisonment,
             suspended for two years, with supervision.
         iv) 27 October 2008: for breach of a  non-molestation  order,  the
             appellant was sentenced at Chelmsford Crown Court to 11  weeks
             imprisonment.
          v) 3 August 2009: for breach  of  a  non-molestation  order,  the
             appellant was sentenced at Chelmsford Crown Court to 9  months
             and one day's imprisonment.  In  sentencing  him,  His  Honour
             Judge Goldstaub QC stated,  "Do  not  let  me  see  you  again
             because if I do in circumstances of this kind  it  will  be  a
             long sentence, more than 12 months, and you will be at risk of
             deportation". [Following this  conviction,  the  Secretary  of
             State, on 5 November 2009, served her first notice of decision
             to make a deportation order.]
         vi) 16 September 2009: for further  breaches,  the  appellant  was
             sentenced  at  North  Essex  Magistrates  Court  to  3  months
             imprisonment.
        vii) [26 February 2010, the Secretary of  State  issued  a  warning
             that if he committed any  further  offences,  his  removal  to
             Turkey would be reconsidered.]
       viii) 7 May 2010: for 2 further breaches of a non-molestation order,
             the appellant was sentenced at North Essex  Magistrates  Court
             to 8 months imprisonment.
         ix) 6 or 8 August or November 2011: for an offence of  sending  an
             offensive,  indecent,  obscene  or  menacing  message  to  his
             partner (not his wife), the applicant was sentenced  at  North
             Essex Magistrates Court  to  8  weeks  imprisonment  and  made
             subject to a restraining order.
          x) 7 June 2012: for a breach of the restraining order against his
             partner,  the  appellant  was   sentenced   at   North   Essex
             Magistrates Court to 18 weeks imprisonment.


      7. On any view, this is an appalling history of wrongdoing  which  has
         extended over a period of  seven  years.  The  offences  have  been
         directed against women, either his wife or his partner.  The  terms
         of the original non-molestation order were expressed  in  terms  of
         protecting his son but breaches of orders designed to  protect  his
         former wife are reasonably likely to threaten his son's  well-being
         if he is present. Whilst there is no evidence whatever of a general
         propensity to offend, the evidence against women with whom  he  has
         shared his life is stark and depressing. More worrying still is the
         fact that,  as  recorded  above,  he  has  shown  an  almost  total
         disregard  for  court  orders.  There  have  been  at  least  seven
         appearances before the courts based on breaches of an  order;  some
         concerned multiple offences. Further, the successful appeal to  the
         Tribunal cannot reasonably have been treated by the appellant as  a
         licence to commit further offences; rather, as a warning that, on a
         further  occasion,   his   appeal   would   not   be   treated   so
         sympathetically. If his first appeal was a warning, so too were the
         express words of HH Judge Goldstaub QC, as was the letter  sent  by
         the Secretary of State on 7 March 2012 that further breaches  would
         not be tolerated, if such a warning were needed. (I  am  unable  to
         say whether the offences for which the applicant was convicted on 7
         June 2012 predated this warning.)


The first appeal against a decision to deport the appellant

      8. The appellant's first appeal was the  subject  of  a  determination
         promulgated on 18 February 2010. The panel ('the  first  Tribunal')
         recorded only the convictions on 27 October 2008 and 3 August 2009,
         providing a skewed and inaccurate  pattern  of  offending.  In  the
         course of the hearing, the appellant gave evidence that he believed
         the order was no longer in force because his former wife was in the
         habit of visiting him with their son at his place of work  and  had
         told  him  they  could  work  out   contact   arrangement   between
         themselves. That could not have been the view of  the  courts  that
         sentenced him to imprisonment for the breach.  In his first appeal,
         the appellant was supported by his partner who spoke in warm  terms
         of his fondness  for  his  son  and  described  his  former  wife's
         behaviour as harassment. The first Tribunal had before it  a  court
         order that was made giving him regular supervised contact which the
         appellant  had  exercised  until  May  2009.   It   described   the
         relationship with  his  partner  as  ongoing  and  close.  On  this
         material,  the  panel  concluded  that  the  only  victim  of   the
         appellant's offending  was  his  former  wife  and  this  would  be
         addressed by resolving problems of  contact  through  proper  legal
         channels. It described the appellant's relationship with his son as
         very important to the appellant and a close relationship. The panel
         accepted his assurance that contact needed to be  arranged  through
         the correct legal process  using  solicitors.  Finally,  the  panel
         concluded that the relationship with his partner  was  sufficiently
         close to conclude they would marry once he had been  released  from
         detention.


The circumstances when the second appeal was  heard  and  the  determination
under appeal

      9. I am quite satisfied that, when the appellant's second  appeal  was
         heard by the second panel, the situation was  radically  different.
         In essence, the confidence that was placed by the first Tribunal in
         the appellant's difficulties with his first wife being resolved  by
         recourse to due legal process and the  support  he  was  likely  to
         receive from his partner and future wife were  entirely  misplaced.
         The record of offending that I have set out above was not the basis
         upon which the first panel had reached its  decision.  Recourse  to
         solicitors  had  not  resulted  in  the  cessation  of  appellant's
         behaviour of offending.  The appellant's behaviour with his partner
         had resulted in a restraining order in November 2011 and its breach
         on 7 June 2012.


     10.  An  examination  of  the  second  panel's  determination   clearly
         demonstrates how its approach failed to recognise  the  differences
         between the situation in 2010 and in 2014.  Although it recited the
         appellant's history of offending, paragraph 10 of its determination
         makes it plain that the panel was much influenced by the  fact  the
         appellant had  been  engaged  in  family  law  proceedings  in  the
         Chelmsford County Court in relation to his son. Indeed, as  appears
         from  paragraph  16  of  the  determination,  the  basis   of   the
         appellant's appeal was his representative's submission,


             "...that the decisive factor in favour of allowing the  appeal
             was the appellant's evidence  that  he  has  been  engaged  in
             proceedings in the family Court to re-establish  contact  with
             Alex, and he was actively contemplating  further  applications
             to the Court. His offending behaviour did not give  compelling
             public interest reasons for his deportation."


     11. It was, essentially, this line of reasoning that  resulted  in  the
         second panel allowing his appeal for the second time.  However,  in
         so  doing,  the  panel  persuaded  itself  that  the  principle  in
         Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 702 permitted the  first  panel's  view  on
         proportionality to retain its validity,  notwithstanding  the  fact
         that circumstances had radically changed,  that  he  had  committed
         further offences, that the optimism in relation to progress towards
         rehabilitation was ill-founded, that his history  of  offending  as
         seen in 2014 represented a continuing threat to  public  order  and
         that the  current  relationship  with  his  son  was  significantly
         different. Although the second panel accepted that some of the 2010
         findings would  have  to  be  looked  at  again  it  concluded,  in
         paragraph 29:


             In our  view,  the  appellant's  conduct  cannot  properly  be
             classed  as  a  persistent  threat  to  public  order.  Though
             reprehensible, it falls below  the  level  of  seriousness  to
             amount to  so  widespread  a  threat.  No  single  offence  is
             egregious enough to justify deportation. His  criminal  record
             does not indicate that he is more "personally  dangerous"  now
             than he was when the Tribunal decided his 2010 appeal.


The error on a point of law

     12. Each one of those four reasons is factually or legally  inaccurate.
         This was a man who had accumulated 9 convictions, some for multiple
         offences. If by reference to 'public order',  the  panel  meant  to
         infer that the appellant was not a danger to the  public  at  large
         but only to his wife or partner, the panel was legally incorrect. I
         cannot see  how,  rationally,  9  convictions  cannot  properly  be
         classified as persistent. All the offences were a threat to  public
         order; public order  demands  the  appellant  behave  appropriately
         towards  his  wife,  partner  and  son  and  comply   with   lawful
         injunctions made against him  to  protect  them.  Furthermore,  the
         panel clearly misunderstood the effect of  repeated  offending.  It
         goes without saying that if the  appellant  had  only  committed  a
         single  offence  for  which  he  had  been  sentenced  to  8  weeks
         imprisonment, that behaviour would not merit  deportation  if  that
         alone was the reason for the  Secretary  of  State's  decision.  To
         suggest, however, that a number  of  minor  offences  cannot  merit
         deportation because no single offence is serious enough to  justify
         it, entirely misses the point and, in essence,  sanctions  repeated
         offending of a type that is serious but when considered  separately
         is not sufficient to merit removal on  its  own.  Furthermore,  his
         criminal  record  did  indeed  indicate  he  was  more   personally
         dangerous than he was when the Tribunal decided his 2010 appeal. In
         2010, the Tribunal only had regard to 2 offences against  a  single
         victim. By 2014, it had become 9 offences against  2  women  and  a
         worrying pattern of misconduct towards his partners. Regrettably, I
         have concluded that the panel's  conclusion  in  paragraph  29  was
         irrational and Wednesbury unreasonable.


     13. It does not seem to me that it matters that the panel went some way
         in the determination to recognise the seriousness of his  offending
         by saying  it  did  him  'little  credit'  (paragraph  27)  or,  in
         paragraph 29, that


             ...we acknowledge that his persistent flouting of Court orders
             indicates a lack of respect for the law, which aggravates  the
             seriousness of his offending to some extent.


     14. The limitation imposed by the panel in the words 'to  some  extent'
         demonstrates with unquestionable  clarity  that  the  panel  simply
         disregarded the true effect of the appellant's repeated offending.


     15. More important still, was the panel's attitude  towards  the  order
         that was made  by  His  Honour  Judge  Newton  [now  Newton  J]  at
         Chelmsford County Court on  10  October  2013.  The  appellant  was
         described as having "the benefit of" this order  but,  in  reality,
         the order effectively slammed the door against  the  appellant.  It
         was directed that (i) he should have no  direct  contact  with  his
         son; (ii) the appellant should make no further  applications  under
         s. 8 of the Children Act 1989 (that is,  for  either  residence  or
         contact) without leave of the court for  three  years.  The  meagre
         benefit derived from the appellant was  the  Court's  encouragement
         that he write a single appropriate letter not directly to  his  son
         but to the child's guardian and, if the reaction were positive,  to
         send letters or cards once or twice a year.


     16. The Tribunal's classification  of  the  effect  of  this  order  as
         providing the appellant with a meaningful relationship with his son
         appears to have  overlooked  the  implicit  prohibitions  contained
         within the order: the appellant  was  not  to  see  his  son.  This
         situation was to prevail for at least three  years.  The  appellant
         was not to speak to his  son.  He  was  not  to  be  permitted  the
         opportunity to vary this prohibition save with  the  leave  of  the
         court. He was not to be permitted to write to his son directly.  It
         was only if the child's guardian sanctioned it that  the  appellant
         was even able to send his son a letter or card and then  only  once
         or twice a year.


RS (immigration and family court proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 00218

     17. It is  difficult  to  see  how  this  could  be  equated  with  the
         circumstances in RS  (immigration  and  family  court  proceedings)
         India [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC) on which the panel so heavily  relied
         in paragraphs 35 and 36 of its  determination.  In  RS,  the  panel
         (McFarlane LJ, Blake J and Upper Tribunal Judge Martin)  considered
         the interplay between family  proceedings  involving  children  and
         removal proceedings affecting one of the parents  involved  in  the
         family proceedings.


     18. RS had arrived in the United Kingdom in September 2000 but remained
         without leave after March 2001. On 12 November 2004 he married a UK
         born British citizen of Pakistani ancestral origins who gave  birth
         to the couple's daughter, H, on 4 April 2005.  On 27 June 2008  the
         appellant made an application to remain on the grounds of  marriage
         which remained outstanding when, on 29 June 2009, he was  convicted
         of possession of a false identity document and given a sentence  of
         twelve months imprisonment rendering him susceptible  to  automatic
         deportation pursuant to s. 32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.   On
         release, the appellant returned to the matrimonial home.


     19. RS appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  to
         deport him relying on the family life  he  enjoyed  in  the  United
         Kingdom with his British citizen wife and daughter. Whilst  RS  was
         still detained, the local authority had become concerned about  H's
         welfare as a result of concerns about the  mother's  mental  health
         and her ability to cope with the child alone. An  urgent  visit  to
         the house revealed it was in a very poor state of cleanliness,  and
         H had not been fed or clothed properly. The child  was  taken  into
         interim care.


     20. In his immigration appeal, RS said his presence  in  the  household
         was vital to keeping the family together and in  a  good  state  of
         health and, without it, H would remain in care as  his  wife  could
         not cope alone.  This was supported in a statement made by a social
         worker.  A Probation Officer's report revealed that  the  appellant
         had told the author that he used  the  false  Italian  passport  to
         obtain employment to provide for his family pending the outcome  of
         his application for indefinite leave to remain as  a  spouse.   His
         wife was anxious to support  the  appellant  on  his  release  from
         detention.  It was  common  ground  that  his  wife  could  not  be
         expected to look after H on her own if the appellant was  deported.
         His wife's family had not provided assistance to her  with  H  when
         her husband was in prison,


     21. The Tribunal decided H's best  interests  were  likely  to  play  a
         decisive  role  in  the  outcome  of  the  deportation  appeal  and
         adjourned  the  deportation  appeal  until  the  Family  Court  had
         examined the information available to it and determined where those
         best interests lay.  The care proceedings had been outstanding  for
         more than two years but the most important question in the case was
         likely to be resolved within  a  few  weeks.  The  most  favourable
         outcome to the appellant was that a carefully structured plan  with
         continuing local authority involvement would be  needed  if  it  is
         concluded that H was to be returned to her parents.


     22. The panel stated there was no universal obligation that a period of
         discretionary leave had to be granted where family proceedings were
         unresolved but, in the circumstances  of  RS's  appeal,  the  short
         period of adjournment anticipated before decisions were made as  to
         where H's interests lie meant  the  panel  should  not  attempt  to
         decide the immigration appeal  until  after  the  decision  of  the
         Family Court was known. If it were to conclude  that  H  should  be
         permanently removed from the care of her parents,  the  appellant's
         deportation would not be unlawful.  If the  family  court  were  to
         have decided there was a prospect of H returning to her family, the
         panel directed the parties to make written representations  to  the
         Tribunal, on receipt of which the Tribunal would decide  whether  a
         further oral hearing was required. If  it  did  not,  the  Tribunal
         would then make its final determination.


     23. RS is not authority for the proposition that the IAC  should  await
         the outcome of proceedings in the Family Court in all  cases.   The
         decision was plainly justified in the case of RS  because,  due  to
         his wife's inability to look after H, there was  the  stark  choice
         between the child remaining with her parents or  going  into  care.
         Contrast this with the Court's assessment of the  appellant's  role
         with his son, A. There is no suggestion that the appellant appealed
         the order made as recently as 10 October  2013.  He  has,  however,
         applied  to  the  court  for  more  substantial  contact  but  this
         application is barred unless he first obtains  permission  to  make
         that application. The family proceedings in Mr Turhan's  case  have
         already been lawfully determined in such a way that the inescapable
         conclusion is that it is currently not in the child's best interest
         for his father to meet him, see him,  contact  him  or  communicate
         with him.  The appellant  has  no  more  than  an  application  for
         permission  to  seek  to  review   the   earlier   decision.    The
         application, dated 2 April 2014, was made less than 6 months  after
         HH Judge Newton decided the child's best interests  on  10  October
         2013. There is no material before me to suggest that  circumstances
         have changed significantly over so short a period.


     24. The Tribunal in the current appeal noted the  appellant's  'sincere
         wish' to resume contact with his son but  gave no thought at all to
         whether it was in the son's best interest to see his  father  given
         the terms  of  the  order  prohibiting  him  from  doing  so.   (In
         paragraph 15 of the determination, the panel attached no weight  to
         the reference in the Secretary of State's letter to the claim  that
         'social workers reported that A had been exposed to his  aggressive
         and violent behaviour' because no  evidence  had  been  adduced  of
         reports by social workers.  But how could the  Secretary  of  State
         produce those reports?)  In my judgment,  the  order  of  HH  Judge
         Newton went a significant way in establishing that there must  have
         been something wrong in the appellant's relationship with  his  son
         to justify the order the Judge made.


The proceedings in the Family Court at Chelmsford

     25. Mr Mak has produced a copy of the order dated 15 May 2014 that  was
         made in the Family Court at Chelmsford by Her Honour Judge  Murfitt
         in relation to the appellant's application for permission to  apply
         for a contact order in light of the order made on 10 October  2013.
         The timescale for compliance with the various  directions  suggests
         that consideration by the Judge on the  papers  should  take  place
         within the next few weeks. In the event that permission is refused,
         the appellant would have a further right to renew permission at  an
         oral hearing.


The intended effect of the First-tier Tribunal's decision

     26. The second panel allowed the  appeal  both  under  the  Immigration
         Rules and Article 8. I am, however, puzzled by what the  First-tier
         Tribunal was intending to achieve and, in  particular  by  what  is
         meant by allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  This may
         have arisen from its misunderstanding its function in a deportation
         appeal.  The intrinsic  logic  of  the  panel's  finding  that  the
         appellant's record of misconduct did  not  amount  to  sufficiently
         serious misconduct or  a  persistent  threat  to  public  order  to
         justify deportation would suggest that the Tribunal  was  intending
         to challenge the lawfulness of the Secretary of  State's  decision.
         The remedy after such a finding is for the Secretary  of  State  to
         provide the  appellant  with  some  form  of  discretionary  relief
         consistent with the Tribunal's findings.  Paragraph 29, as  I  have
         set out and considered above is not time limited in its effect.


     27. However, in paragraph 37 the panel in its application of RS took  a
         more limited few which is inconsistent with its earlier  view  that
         the decision to deport was itself unlawful because  the  underlying
         offending might properly be disregarded. Such a limited view  would
         not, of course, have been necessary  if  the  Tribunal  had  indeed
         concluded that it was unlawful or disproportionate to  remove  him.
         In paragraph 37, it is clear that the panel is  drawing  back  from
         providing the appellant with  an  indeterminate  right  to  remain.
         Instead, in doing so, the panel appears to  be  confusing  the  two
         quite separate strands of the appeal.


The legal effect of a successful challenge to a decision to deport

     28. In George, R (on the application of) v SSHD [2014] UKSC 28  (4  May
         2014), the Supreme Court considered  the  effect  of  a  successful
         challenge to a deportation order.  The Court posed the question:


             If a criminal who previously  had  leave  to  remain  in  this
             country is liable to deportation because of his offences,  but
             cannot actually  be  deported  because  to  remove  him  would
             infringe his rights under  the  European  Convention  for  the
             Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, with  the
             result that the deportation order  is  revoked,  what  is  the
             status of his previous leave to remain?


     29. Lord Hughes (with whom Lord Neuberger, Lord Clarke,  Lord  Carnwath
         and Lord Toulson agreed) stated that it was common ground that  the
         making of a deportation order rendered his leave to remain invalid.
         It did not say that the decision to make the deportation order  had
         that effect.  This, it was said, is the effect of s. 5 (1)  of  the
         Immigration Act 1971 which provides:


             5(1) Where a person is under section 3(5) or (6) above  liable
             to deportation, then subject to the  following  provisions  of
             this Act the Secretary of State may make a  deportation  order
             against him, that is to say an order requiring  him  to  leave
             and prohibiting him from entering the United  Kingdom;  and  a
             deportation order against a person shall invalidate any  leave
             to enter or remain in the United Kingdom given him before  the
             order is made or while it is in force.


     30. A challenge to the immigration decision (that is  the  decision  to
         make the deportation order) does not invalidate the appellant's pre-
         existing leave.  Once the deportation order is made,  section  5(2)
         of the 1971 Act does not mean that  if  the  deportation  order  is
         revoked, the invalidation by section 5(1) of  leave  to  remain  is
         retrospectively undone; the  previous  leave  to  remain  does  not
         revive. Hence, Mr  George  remained  liable  to  deportation,  even
         though it could not be carried out.  His  position  in  the  United
         Kingdom  had  to  be  regularised,  but  that  did  not  entail   a
         recognition of indefinite leave to remain. The Secretary of State's
         was entitled to grant to him periods of successive limited leave.


     31. In Mr Turhan's case, I am not aware that a  deportation  order  has
         been made; hence, the process has not advanced to the  stage  where
         the appellant's current leave has been invalidated.  This does  not
         amount to his being granted leave to remain under  the  Immigration
         Rules  or  allowing  the  appeal  under  the   Immigration   Rules.
         Paragraph 364 did not offer the appellant a  right  the  breach  of
         which gives rise to a right of appeal.  It defined a process  which
         was itself subject to paragraph 380 of the  Rules  namely  that   a
         deportation order could not be  made  against  any  person  if  his
         removal in pursuance of the order would be contrary to  the  United
         Kingdom's obligations under the ECHR:


             364. ...while each case will  be  considered  on  its  merits,
             where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall
             be  that  the  public  interest  requires   deportation.   The
             Secretary of State  will  consider  all  relevant  factors  in
             considering whether  the  presumption  is  outweighed  in  any
             particular case, although  it  will  only  be  in  exceptional
             circumstances that the public interest in deportation will  be
             outweighed in a case where it would not  be  contrary  to  the
             Human  Rights  Convention  and  the  Convention  and  Protocol
             relating to the Status of Refugees to deport. The  aim  is  an
             exercise of the power of deportation which is  consistent  and
             fair as between one person and another, although one case will
             rarely be identical with another in all material respects.  In
             the cases detailed in paragraph 363A deportation will normally
             be the proper course where a person has failed to comply  with
             or  has  contravened  a  condition  or  has  remained  without
             authority.


     32. Paragraph 364 offers an appellant no substantive  right  to  remain
         and an appellant is not, therefore, entitled to  his  appeal  being
         allowed under paragraph 364 of the Immigration Rules.


Limited leave pending the outcome of the permission application

     33. The panel's decision that the appellant's removal would violate his
         human rights was generous and did not properly reflect  the  highly
         speculative nature of the proceedings he was  engaged  in,  namely,
         the seeking of permission to re-visit  a  decision  that  had  been
         lawfully made only very recently.  There was no  evidence  that  it
         would result in a benefit to A;  the  determination  spoke  of  the
         benefit to the appellant: 'Set against  his  conduct...we  have  to
         consider the nature of  his  relationship  with  [A].'   Mark  this
         approach; it says nothing about the nature of the relationship of A
         with his father.  Yet, the benefit to the appellant is  of  a  much
         lower  order  since  his  own  conduct  has  forfeited  significant
         consideration being given to it.


     34. Nevertheless, if we construe  the  panel  intending  to  grant  the
         appellant a limited right to remain until the outcome of the family
         proceedings, it was  open  to  the  panel  in  accordance  with  RS
         principles to stay removal pending the decision of the Family Court
         at least in the permission application.


     35. If the Family  Court  refuses  permission  to  pursue  any  further
         contact order, that will be the end of the appellant's  claim  that
         removal would violate due respect for his  rights  to  private  and
         family life. There is no suggestion that the private life  that  he
         has developed is sufficient to prevent his removal; his appeal  has
         never been advanced on this basis.  There  is  no  claim  that  the
         relationship with his former  wife  or  partner  currently  renders
         removal disproportionate. It is  only  the  relationship  that  the
         appellant has with his son that forms the basis of  a  family  life
         claim and it is not the appellant's relationship with his son  that
         would render his removal disproportionate but the relationship that
         his son has with the appellant. By refusing permission, the  Family
         Court, on the basis of a much greater understanding  than  the  IAC
         possesses of the  family  dynamics,  will  have  decided  that  the
         child's best interest are not served, even arguably, by  permitting
         a further application to be  made.  In  the  event  of  a  refusal,
         therefore the outcome is  certain.  The  deportation  decision  was
         lawfully  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  effect  of
         deportation is not to violate the human  rights  of  any  of  those
         involved. The current order permits conditional contact  by  letter
         once or twice a year and this can be achieved as well  from  Turkey
         as from within the UK.


     36. If, however, the Family Court grants permission, the IAC will  then
         have to give consideration to the impact of this decision upon  the
         appellant's removal. The fact that permission is  granted,  indeed,
         the fact that the Family Court decides  that  it  is  in  the  best
         interests of the child for his  father  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom, is not determinative. Were it to be so, there could be  no
         deportation of a foreign criminal, however  serious  his  offending
         may be, provided he establishes he has  in  the  United  Kingdom  a
         child with whom he has a normal loving relationship. Where  such  a
         relationship  exists,  it  will  always  be  in  the  child's  best
         interests for it to continue. However, as the case law makes clear,
         where the father's right to remain is weak  (either  because  of  a
         failure to meet the requirements for entry clearance  or  leave  to
         remain or because of criminal offending) removal is permitted where
         it  is  proportionate.  See,  for  example,  Harrison  (Jamaica)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1736.


     37. It will probably require an express finding  by  the  Family  Court
         that the appellant's presence in the United Kingdom is necessary in
         order to avoid significant prejudice to the welfare  of  the  child
         before the interference with family life is sufficiently serious to
         engage Article 8 and the proportionality balance. Nevertheless, the
         Tribunal will always pay the closest attention to what  the  Family
         Court  says  as  to  the  child's  needs  in  deciding  where   the
         proportionality balance  lies,  weighing  the  public  interest  in
         removal of non-nationals whose immigration  history  or  misconduct
         merits removal against the harm  this  will  occasion  to  a  child
         involved in the case.


     38. We are where we are.  The appellant's application has  advanced  at
         least as far as the directions of 15 May 2014  suggest.   There  is
         merit in allowing the application for permission to be  decided  if
         only because were the application to be refused (on paper or  at  a
         renewed oral hearing) the situation will then be clear-cut.  I have
         already found  that  there  has  been  an  error  of  law  but  the
         underlying conclusion of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  await  the
         outcome of the appellant's application to seek permission  to  seek
         further contact with his  son  was  not  in  itself  irrational  or
         unreasonable.  Insofar as the determination permitted the appellant
         to remain 'pending the outcome of the family proceedings' this  was
         too open-ended without knowing more of how long that process  would
         take and whether it would require the  appellant's  presence.   If,
         for example, upon  re-examination,  the  Family  Court  decides  to
         extend the scope of  letter-writing  or  other  forms  of  indirect
         contact, there will be no requirement for the appellant's  presence
         in the United Kingdom, albeit the family  proceedings  will  remain
         pending.  If the Court decides a gradual re-establishment of links,
         it may take years and it may be inappropriate to delay the decision
         on removal indefinitely.


     39. Clearly, if the family proceedings  are  likely  to  be  relatively
         swift, the appellant's presence in the United Kingdom for  a  short
         period will have  little  impact  upon  the  general  principle  of
         enforcement of immigration control. If it is likely that the family
         proceedings will continue for a period of years,  it  may  well  be
         disproportionate to permit the appellant to remain, at least if the
         outcome is speculative.


     40. If permission is granted,  the  decision  to  defer  removal  still
         further would require the Tribunal to be provided with an  accurate
         time-table  as  to  the  likely  progress   of   the   application.
         Consideration will have to be given to the material that the Family
         Court is likely to make available to the Tribunal, perhaps  by  way
         of a summary or an extract from its judgment.  If the  Tribunal  is
         not to receive material that is likely to  assist  it  in  deciding
         where the balance lies, there may be little advantage  in  awaiting
         the outcome of the family proceedings.  If the only  material  that
         is to be released to the Tribunal  is  a  contact  order,  that  is
         unlikely to assist it since a contact  order  by  itself  will  not
         determine  the  appeal  in  the  appellant's   favour.    In   such
         circumstances,  the  Tribunal  may  consider  proceeding   on   the
         hypothetical basis  that  contact  will  be  permitted  and  decide
         proportionality on that hypothesis without  awaiting  the  outcome.
         (If the eventual outcome is that there  be  no  more  contact  than
         presently permitted by the order  of  HHJ  Newton,  this  will  not
         prevent removal because there will be no underlying finding of fact
         that the child's best interests are served by preventing removal.)


Adjournment - an alternative to the grant of discretionary leave

     41. As the decision in RS makes clear, there will be cases where it  is
         disproportionate to remove a parent who is involved  in  litigation
         involving the welfare of his child. In  such  a  case  a  temporary
         grant of leave may be a proportionate means  by  which  the  family
         litigation may be justly determined with a limited impact upon  the
         public interest in immigration control. It should  not  be  assumed
         that it will be the invariable practice.  Given  the  fact  that  a
         decision on permission is likely to be made (if  it  has  not  been
         made already) within a limited period, an adjournment of the appeal
         will achieve the same effect so as to enable a foreseeable stage in
         the process to be reached.  This is what I propose to do  here.   I
         set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow the appeal to
         the limited extent on the basis that the respondent  should  permit
         the appellant a form of leave pending the  outcome  of  the  family
         proceedings and substitute a decision adjourning the  re-making  of
         the decision until the outcome of the application for permission is
         made known.  I shall adjourn the appeal for 6 weeks  but  I  direct
         that the appellant is to notify the Tribunal as soon as he  or  his
         representatives becomes aware  of  a  decision  on  the  permission
         application and if there is to be a renewed oral application.


     42. If permission is refused, I  shall  re-make  the  decision  on  the
         papers.  If permission is granted, the Tribunal will reconsider the
         directions necessary but the  parties  must  not  assume  that  the
         Tribunal will sanction  the  appellant's  presence  in  the  United
         Kingdom pending the eventual  outcome  of  the  family  proceedings
         without being provided reasons for doing so.  It will be  necessary
         for the appellant to persuade the Tribunal  that  this  is  in  the
         child's best interests.  In this regard, material from an objective
         source from the Court or those working for it is  likely  to  carry
         particular weight.


Part 2 - the re-making of the decision

     43. The above are my reasons of 20 July 2014 for finding an error on  a
         point of law.  For the  sake  of  continuity  I  shall  resume  the
         paragraph numbering from the earlier decision.


     44. The appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal  at  a  hearing  on  18
         November 2014, (Mrs Justice  Elisabeth  Laing  and  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Jordan). Mr  Mak  informed  us  that  at  a  hearing  in  the
         Chelmsford Family Court  on  21  October  2014,  HH  Judge  Murfitt
         refused the appellant's application  for  permission  to  make  any
         further application including a contact order.   However,  we  were
         informed that the appellant had renewed his  application  for  oral
         hearing, which by then had not yet taken place.


     45. On 28 November 2014, the renewed  application  for  permission  was
         dismissed by HH Judge Murfitt in the Family Court in Chelmsford.  I
         have now been provided with a copy of the order then made  pursuant
         to the direction given by HH Judge Murfitt.


     46. The refusal of permission by  the  Family  Court  disposes  of  any
         viable claim that the appellant's continued presence in the  United
         Kingdom is required to pursue his  application  for  contact.   The
         refusal also determines any claim that  the  appellant's  continued
         presence in the United Kingdom is in  the  best  interests  of  the
         child.  It is not.  As I indicated  in  paragraph  40  above,  were
         permission to be refused, I intended to re-make the decision on the
         papers pursuant  to  Rule  34  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules  2008,  the  outcome  being  certain.   Rule  34(2)
         provides that before disposing of this appeal  without  a  hearing,
         regard should be had to any view expressed by either party to  that
         course of action.  No response to my proposal  was  made  following
         service of the Reasons for finding an error on a point of law.   No
         request was made for a hearing when the panel sat  on  28  November
         2014.


     47. For the reasons given in my decision that the  First-tier  Tribunal
         made an error of law and, following the decision of  Judge  Murfitt
         which for all practical purposes disposed of any residual claim  to
         remain based on his relationship with  his  child,  I  re-make  the
         decision now.  In doing so, I have regard  to  section  117  but  I
         emphasise that if these provisions did not apply  and  I  were  re-
         making the decision without giving any consideration to  s.117  and
         the alterations in the Immigration Rules, I would  have  determined
         that the appellant's Article 8 claim fails.   I  would  regard  the
         presence of a  minor  child  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  probably
         establishing the existence of family life,  even  if  there  is  no
         physical contact.  On the basis of  the  appellant  establishing  a
         private and family life which would be subject to  interference  by
         his removal, the public  interest  in  his  removal  unquestionably
         outweighs the interference.


     48. Sections 117A-D and the changes to the Immigration  Rules  are  set
         out  and explained by Aikens LJ in paragraph 13-16 of YM (Uganda) v
         SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  1292  (10  October  2014).   Sections  117A-D
         provide:


             117A Application of this Part
             (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal  is  required
             to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
             Acts-
             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and
             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.
             (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
             (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and
             (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.
             (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means
             the question of whether an interference with a person's  right
             to respect for private and  family  life  is  justified  under
             Article 8(2).


             117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in
             all cases
             (1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
             public interest.


             117C Article 8 additional considerations  in  cases  involving
             foreign criminals.
             (1) The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.
             (2) The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.
             (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the    public    interest     requires     C's     deportation
             unless...Exception 2 applies.


             (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


             (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.


             117D Interpretation of this Part
             (1)  In this Part-
             "Article 8" means Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
             Human Rights;
             "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18
             and who-
             (a) is a British citizen, or
             (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
             seven years or more;
             "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
             (a) is a British citizen, or
             (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the  meaning
             of the
             Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).


             (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
             (a) who is not a British citizen,
             (b) who has  been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
             offence, and
             (c) who -


             (iii) is a persistent offender.


             (4)  In this  Part,  references  to  a  person  who  has  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of a certain  length  of
             time-
             (a)  do not include a person  who  has  received  a  suspended
             sentence (unless a court subsequently orders that the sentence
             or any part of it (of whatever length) is to take effect);
             (b)  do not include a person  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
             period of imprisonment of that   length of time only by virtue
             of being  sentenced  to  consecutive  sentences  amounting  in
             aggregate to that length of time;


     49. Section 73(1) of the 2014 Act provides that:


    "The  Secretary  of  State  may,  by  order,  make  such  transitional,
         transitory or saving provision as the Secretary of State  considers
         appropriate in  connection  with  the  coming  into  force  of  any
         provision of this Act".


     50. Paragraph 3(o) of the Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement  No  1,
         Transitory ...sic) and Savings Provisions) Order 2014 (SI  1820  of
         2014) provides that 28 July 2014 is the day appointed  for  section
         19 of the 2014 Act to come into force. There is nothing in the 2014
         Act (particularly Schedule 9  which  is  headed  "Transitional  and
         Consequential Provisions") to indicate whether  the  new  statutory
         rules are to apply to cases or appeals that are  pending  before  a
         court or tribunal.


     51. The 2012 Rules  were  modified  by  Statement  of  Changes  to  the
         Immigration Rules of 10 July 2014 (HC 532) which were  laid  before
         Parliament on 10 July 2014, ('the 2014 Rules'). Set out  below  are
         the relevant 2012 Rules, as amended by the 2014 Rules. The new 2014
         provisions are in square brackets with the provisions of  the  2012
         Rules crossed through which are deleted by the 2014 Rules:


             A362. Where Article 8 is raised in the context of  deportation
             under Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article  8  will
             only succeed where the requirements of these rules as  at  [28
             July 2014] are met, regardless of when the notice of intention
             to deport  or  the  deportation  order,  as  appropriate,  was
             served.'
             ...
             397. A deportation order will not  be  made  if  the  person's
             removal pursuant to the order would be contrary  to  the  UK's
             obligations under the Refugee Convention or the  Human  Rights
             Convention. Where deportation would not be contrary  to  these
             obligations, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that
             the public interest in deportation is outweighed.
             [A.398. These rules apply where:
             (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that  his
             deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the   United   Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;


             398. Where a person claims that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and


             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good [and in the public interest] because,  in  the
             view of the Secretary  of  State,  ...they  are  a  persistent
             offender who shows a particular disregard  for  the  law,  the
             Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,  it
             will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
             interest in deportation will be outweighed  by  other  factors
             [the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.]
             399. This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
             applies if - (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             parental relationship with a child under the age of  18  years
             who is in the UK and (i) the child is a  British  citizen;  or
             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
             the  seven  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of   the
             immigration decision; and in either case (a) it would  not  be
             reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK  [it  would  be
             unduly harsh for the child to live in the country to which the
             person is to be deported]; and (b) there is  no  other  family
             member who is able to care for the child in the UK  [it  would
             be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without  the
             person who is to be deported]; or
             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and  is  a  British  citizen,  [or]
             settled in the  UK,  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
             humanitarian protection, and (i) the person has lived  in  the
             UK with valid leave continuously for at  least  the  15  years
             immediately preceding the date  of  the  immigration  decision
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) and  (ii)  there  are
             insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with  that  partner
             continuing outside the UK [(i) the relationship was formed  at
             a time when the person (deportee) was in the UK  lawfully  and
             their immigration status was not precarious; and (ii) it would
             be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in  the  country  to
             which the person is  to  be  deported  because  of  compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in paragraph EX.2
             of Appendix FM; and (iii) it would be unduly  harsh  for  that
             partner to remain in the UK without the person who  is  to  be
             deported].


             399A. This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
             applies if - (a) the person has lived continuously in  the  UK
             for at least 20 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
             immigration decision (discounting any period of  imprisonment)
             and he has no ties (including social,  cultural  or  family  )
             with the country to which he would have to go if  required  to
             leave the UK; or (b) the person is aged under 25 years, he has
             spent at least half of his life living continuously in the  UK
             immediately preceding the date  of  the  immigration  decision
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he  has  no  ties
             (including social, cultural or family)  with  the  country  to
             which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.
             [(a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most
             of his life; and (b) he is socially and culturally  integrated
             in the UK; and (c) there would be very  significant  obstacles
             to his integration into the country to which it is proposed he
             is deported].


     52. The Statement of Changes in the  Immigration  Rules  HC  532  said,
         under the heading "Implementation", that the  changes  set  out  in
         paragraphs 14 to 30 of this statement would take effect on 28  July
         2014 and would apply to all ECHR  Article  8  claims  from  foreign
         criminals which were to be decided  on  or  after  that  date.  The
         changes in paragraphs 14 to 30 include the new 2014 Rules  set  out
         above.


     53. The appellant is undoubtedly a persistent offender.  There  are  10
         recorded matters against him as set out in paragraph 5 above.  Even
         if the non-custodial sentences are taken out of the account,  there
         remains 6 sentences of immediate imprisonment as identified in  the
         following sub-paragraphs of paragraph 5:


               iv) 27 October 2008: 11 weeks imprisonment;
                v) 3 August 2009: 9 months and one days imprisonment;
               vi) 16 September 2009: 3 months imprisonment;
              vii)
             viii) 7 May 2010: 8 months imprisonment;
               ix) 6 or 8 August or November 2011: 8 weeks imprisonment;
                x) 7 June 2012: 18 weeks imprisonment.


     54. No Secretary of State could rationally find the appellant was not a
         persistent offender.  Hence, the respondent is bound to  treat  him
         as a foreign criminal. The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in
         the public interest.  In the case of a foreign criminal,  like  the
         appellant, who has not been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment
         of  four  years  or  more,  the  public   interest   requires   his
         deportation.   As  the  appellant  does  not  have  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
         subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child  and  the
         effect of his deportation on the partner  or  child  would  not  be
         unduly harsh, he fails to establish he falls within Exception 2.


     55. His deportation from the United Kingdom is conducive to the  public
         good and in the public interest because the Secretary of  State  is
         bound to treat him as a persistent offender being a person who  has
         shown a  particular  disregard  for  the  law.   Hence  the  public
         interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by  other  factors
         where there are very compelling circumstances.  There are none.


     56.  As  a  result  of  the  findings  in  the  Family  Court  and   my
         consideration of the  underlying  claim,  paragraph  399  does  not
         operate as a clog on removal.  The appellant is not  a  person  who
         has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his  life  and  is
         socially and culturally integrated in the  United  Kingdom.   There
         would be no significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into  the
         country to which it is proposed he is deported.   Hence  paragraphs
         399 and 399A do not operate to assist the appellant.


     57. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


DECISION

The Judge made an error on a point of law and I substitute a   determination
dismissing the appeal on all the grounds advanced.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                            16 December 2014

