
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13887/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  16th July 2014                            |On 17th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                            MR JOSEPH ISITEKHALE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss K Anifowoshe, Counsel, instructed by Chancery CS
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 13th November 1975. He
       met Ms Tania Casilda Nunes Ferrera Santos  (a  citizen  of  Portugal
       born on 16th July 1978) in Ikeja, Nigeria in 2007. They were married
       on 19th September 2009 in Nigeria. He came to the UK  with  a  valid
       student visa on 27th September 2009.  His  leave  in  this  capacity
       expired on 30th November 2010.  On 5th September 2013 the  appellant
       applied for an EEA residence card on the basis of his marriage. This
       application was refused on 13th March 2014. His appeal  against  the
       decision to refuse him a residence card was dismissed by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Place in a determination on the papers promulgated on
       the 15th May 2014.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Appleyard on 3rd June 2014 on the basis  that  it  was
       arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in law  in  failing  to
       consider the appellant's bundle of papers which  was  faxed  to  the
       Tribunal on the 6th  May  2014,  the  day  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       considered the appeal.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    4. It was accepted that there was a procedural error  of  law  for  the
       First-tier Tribunal not have considered the  appellant's  bundle  of
       documents. Ms Everett did not concede however  that  the  error  was
       material. She accepted that the evidence went to the issues at stake
       in the appeal but it did not really address the issue of  where  the
       appellant's wife  was  when  the  Immigration  Service  visited  the
       appellant's address. There were also some  possible  anomalies  over
       the addresses on the utility bills and bank statements.

    5. Miss Anifowoshe argued that the documents were material. There was a
       declaration and a statement  by  the  appellant's  spouse  that  the
       marriage was not one of  convenience.  There  was  also  a  detailed
       statement to this affect by the appellant.  The  appellant's  spouse
       had said that she had not applied for a certificate of  approval  to
       marry another man in the UK, and if there was such a thing with  the
       respondent someone must have stolen her identity. The appellant  and
       his spouse had provided bank statements  and  utility  bills  and  a
       tenancy agreement showing their cohabitation.

    6. After submissions I told the  parties  that  I  found  there  was  a
       material error of law for the reasons set  out  below.  The  parties
       were in agreement that it would be appropriate to remit  the  matter
       for an  oral  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  the
       appellant and his wife should attend.

Conclusions

    7. The material in the appellant's bundle was  evidence  going  to  the
       issues in  the  appeal.  In  this  bundle  there  is  material  from
       Companies in the UK website  for  the  appellant's  wife's  employer
       which addresses the respondent's  allegation  that  the  appellant's
       wife did not work at the address she claimed. There is also material
       which goes to the issue as to whether the marriage was genuine.  The
       appellant's wife refutes the allegation that she had applied  for  a
       certificate of approval to marry another man; both the appellant and
       she provide signed statements giving details of  their  relationship
       and confirming it to be genuine; and there are documents showing the
       cohabitation  of  the  couple.   The   evidence   showing   official
       documentation going to the same address for both the  appellant  and
       his wife goes back to 2011 and is for two  addresses.  It  is  clear
       that the failure to consider the 64 pages of  documentation  in  the
       appellant's bundle, all of which is relevant to the  issues  in  the
       appeal, could have made a material difference to the outcome of  the
       appeal and therefore was material.

Decision

    8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

    9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   10. It is appropriate to remit this matter to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       for hearing de  novo  in  accordance  with  the  Senior  President's
       Practice Statement on Remittals at paragraph 7.2 as  the  effect  of
       the error has been to deprive the appellant of  the  opportunity  to
       put his case in full to the First-tier Tribunal.

   11. The matter is listed for  an  oral  hearing  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal at Taylor House on 4th November 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
16th July 2014

