
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13554/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 July 2014                             |On 22 December 2014            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HADDON-CAVE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                     Mr Nikhilkumar Pravinchandra Patel
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Badar, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mr Nikhilkumar Patel, appeals against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese promulgated  on  17  April  2014  in
    which he dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision dated 15 April 2013 to refuse to vary the  appellant's
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant  under  the  PBS  and  to
    remove him by way of Section 41 directions.

 2. Mr Badar, Counsel for the appellant  today,  puts  his  appeal  on  two
    grounds.  The first is that the judge had failed to apply  the  correct
    burden of proof. The second is that the Secretary of State  had  failed
    properly to exercise her discretion.

 3. As regards the first point, the problem for Mr Badar  is  that  he  has
    failed with respect to grapple with the decision  in  NA  [2009]  UKAIT
    00031.  In that case, the court found as  a  fact  that  the  Cambridge
    College of Learning had  never  offered  certain  postgraduate  courses
    including  a  postgraduate  diploma  in  information  technology.   The
    Cambridge College of Learning test case NA was heard in June  2009  and
    the decision was promulgated in August 2009.

 4. Mr Badar's case on behalf of his client, the appellant, is  that  there
    is no evidence that the appellant was dishonest or misleading  when  he
    applied for leave to remain.  As was pointed out to Mr Badar, and as he
    fairly accepted in argument, the problem on this ground  of  appeal  is
    that if the Cambridge College of Learning never offered a  postgraduate
    diploma in  information  technology  how  was  it  that  the  appellant
    obtained such a certificate and relied on it?

 5.  The  judge  correctly  directed  himself  in  paragraph   5   of   his
    Determination and Reasons that the burden of proof is on the  appellant
    in the appeal but the general burden is on the Secretary of  State.  In
    this case, however, it is clear that the evidential  burden  shifts  to
    the appellant to persuade the court as to why it is that he had in  his
    possession a false certificate and was relying  on  it.   As  Mr  Badar
    reluctantly accepted, there is no material before the  court  from  the
    appellant which could begin to explain that  issue,  so  the  appellant
    fails on his first ground.

Discretion

 6. Mr Badar argued, secondly, that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  failed
    properly to exercise her discretion under Rule  322(2).   There  are  a
    number of answers to this point.  The first is as Mr Saunders  for  the
    Secretary of State pointed out, the Secretary of State did exercise her
    discretion and said as much in the letter of 15 April 2013:

         "The Secretary of State is not prepared to exercise  discretion  in
         your  favour  and  your  application  is  therefore  refused  under
         paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules."

 7. Mr Badar criticised the judge for indicating that there  was  to  be  a
    mandatory refusal but the judge was in a sense right to do so because a
    careful examination of the Rules shows that  Rule  322(1A)  comes  into
    operation  "where  false  representations  have  been  made  or   false
    documents or information have been submitted". This, too, was addressed
    by the Secretary of State in her letter dated 15 April 2013.  Following
    the passage quoted above, in which the Secretary of State had exercised
    her discretion under paragraph 322(2), the letter continued:

         "In addition, in this application, you stated in answer to question
         D11 that you have never used deception when seeking leave to  enter
         or remain.  I am satisfied that the statement was false because for
         the reasons stated previously you have used deception when  seeking
         leave  as  a  Tier  1   (Post-Study   Work)   Migrant.   As   false
         representations have been made in relation to your application,  it
         is refused under paragraph 322(1A), of the Immigration Rules."

 8. Accordingly Mr Badar's second ground is also hopeless and dismissed.

 9. There is no substance in either of Mr Badar's grounds of appeal. We are
    bound to observe that it is surprising that any appeal was  brought  in
    this case.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 9th July 2014

Mr Justice Haddon-Cave


