

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13236/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17th July 2014                             |On 24th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                               MARY ANN PINDER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Mr Z Jafferzi (of Counsel) instructed by Burton and Burton
                  Solicitors.
Respondent:   Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal originates in a decision made on behalf of the Secretary of
    State for the Home Department (the  "Secretary  of  State"),  dated  12
    April 2013, whereby the Appellant's application for leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom, based on her marriage to  a  British  citizen,  was
    refused.  The sole refusal reason was based on paragraph E-LTRP.4.1  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, which provides, in material part:

         "If the applicant  has  not  met  the  requirement  in  a  previous
         application for leave as a  partner,  the  applicant  most  provide
         specified evidence that they .....


         (b)  Have passed an English language test in speaking and listening
             at a minimum of level A1 of the Common European  Framework  of
             Reference for Languages with a provider  approved  by  the  UK
             Border Agency."

    The Appellant was deemed not to have  satisfied  this  requirement,  in
    circumstances where she had secured the requisite English language test
    certificate from an agency  which  was  an  approved  provider  at  the
    material time but had its approval withdrawn subsequently.

 2. Before the FtT, the question of whether  the  Appellant  had  satisfied
    this requirement in a previous application for leave as a  partner  (cf
    the opening words of the rule, supra,) was not considered.  However, it
    was raised upon the hearing of this  appeal.   The  point  having  been
    raised, Mr McVeety, on behalf of the Secretary of State,  properly  and
    correctly conceded that the Applicant  had  previously  satisfied  this
    requirement in the terms specified.  It followed inexorably from  this,
    and was not disputed, that:

    (a)  The determination of the FtT must be set aside; and

         (b) In the exercise of remaking the decision, the appeal  must  be
allowed.

         I so order.

 3. In passing, and obiter, I would have required some persuading that  the
    refusal reason had any merit.  Subject to further argument in a  future
    case, I would have been minded to follow the decision of Upper Tribunal
    Judge Lane  in  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Islamabad  -  v  -  Mahmood
    [Unreported Appeal number OA/00985/2013].

 4. I set aside the decision of the FtT, remake same and allow the appeal.







                                                 [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 17 July 2014
