
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13110/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th October 2016                          |On 18th October 2016          |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ABIODUN [A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Legal Representative (the Respondent appeared in
person)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Designated Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  J  G  Macdonald  whose
    decision promulgated on 14th April 2016 allowed the human rights  claim
    of Mr Abiodun [A] (hereinafter 'the Claimant'), against a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State, dated 13th March 2015, refusing his application
    for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2.   The Claimant is a national of Nigeria.  He  first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 29th August 2012 pursuant to  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    entry clearance.  This was valid until 29th December 2014.

3.   On 13th September 2014 the Claimant married Mrs [O]. She,  although  of
    Nigerian extraction, is a British citizen born in the  United  Kingdom.
    On 29th October 2014 the Claimant submitted a further Tier 4  (General)
    Student application but this was refused on 23rd  December  2014.   The
    Claimant  did  not  avail  himself  of  the  option   of   seeking   an
    administrative review of that decision. Rather, on 10th  February  2015
    the Claimant made an application for  leave  to  remain  based  on  his
    family and private life under the ten year route.

4.   The Secretary of  State  refused  the  application  on  several  bases.
    Firstly, the Secretary of State  did  not  find  that  the  Suitability
    requirements contained in the relevant part of  Appendix  FM  had  been
    met. This was because the Claimant had been invited for an interview on
    19th December 2014 which he failed to attend. The  Secretary  of  State
    therefore refused the application on the  basis  that  the  suitability
    requirements specifically S-LTR.1.7 had not been met. The Secretary  of
    State thereafter considered whether the Claimant met  the  requirements
    of Appendix FM. Given that he had not met the Suitability  requirements
    the Secretary of State concluded that  the  Claimant  could  not  avail
    himself of the exception offered in EX.1 of the Immigration Rules.  The
    Secretary of State was of the view that the Claimant could not  succeed
    under his private life pursuant to paragraph  276ADE,  with  particular
    reference to (vi). The Secretary of State  then  went  on  to  consider
    whether there were 'exceptional  circumstances'  sufficient  warrant  a
    grant of leave to remain outside the immigration  rules  in  accordance
    with Article 8 principles but concluded that there were not.

5.   The Claimant was able to appeal this decision and his appeal was  heard
    on 31st March 2016.  On that date the Claimant's wife was approximately
    33 weeks pregnant and was expected to give birth on 18th May 2016.  The
    judge found (at paragraph 30 of his decision) that the Home Office  had
    not proved that the invitation for an interview had  been  received  by
    the Claimant.  The full paragraph reads:

         "Essentially the Appellant decided to stay on in the United Kingdom
         so  that  his  family  life  could  continue  here.   In  all   the
         circumstances the Home Office have not proved that he  received  an
         invitation from them to attend an interview and therefore that part
         of  the  Home  Office  case  against  the  Claimant  in  terms   of
         suitability falls away.  Even if the letter was sent it seems clear
         enough from the evidence that the Claimant did not receive  it  but
         as I have said nothing turns on this."

6.   The judge then went  on  to  consider  whether  the  Claimant  met  the
    requirements of Appendix FM.  The judge noted at paragraph 33:

         "Given  the  late-on  pregnancy  of   the   Claimant's   wife   and
         notwithstanding the lack of any medical evidence  it  seems  to  me
         inconceivable that a person at her late stage of pregnancy could be
         expected to be removed to Nigeria as at the date of the hearing."

7.   Then, at paragraph 34, the judge stated:

         "I cannot say that there are any other reasons for concluding  that
         there are insurmountable obstacles and none were argued before  me.
         There is nothing in the Rules to govern  this  situation  and  each
         case must be judged on its own facts.  I was not  referred  to  any
         IDI guidance on how caseworkers should deal with  a  case  of  this
         nature."

8.    The  judge  allowed  the  appeal  on  the  basis   that   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to the relationship continuing outside the  UK
    because the Claimant's wife's pregnancy prevented her  from  flying  to
    Nigeria. The judge then made reference (at paragraph 35)  to  s.117B(6)
    of the Nationality and Immigration  Act  2002  (hereinafter  'the  2002
    Act'), a self-contained statutory provision governing the relevance  of
    public interest considerations  in  respect  of  relationships  between
    individuals who are subject to  the  Immigration  Rules  and  qualified
    children (including children who are British or are settled in  the  UK
    or have lived here for seven years or more). The judge speculated as to
    what the situation may be for the Claimant and his wife  if  the  child
    was born. The judge's decision was, however, primarily premised on  the
    existence of  insurmountable  obstacles  as  a  result  of  the  wife's
    pregnancy. He therefore allowed the appeal both under  the  Immigration
    Rules and on human rights grounds.

9.   The Secretary of State, aggrieved with this decision, sought  leave  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The Grounds  of  Appeal  drafted  by  the
    Secretary  of  State  essentially  asserted  that  the  judge  was  not
    rationally entitled to find the existence of  insurmountable  obstacles
    on the basis he did in the absence of any medical  evidence  suggesting
    that the Claimant's wife could not travel because of her pregnancy. The
    Secretary of State  also  took  issue  with  the  judge's  reliance  on
    s.117B(6) as the child had not been born when the  decision  was  made.
    The Secretary of State finally asserted that the judge failed to make a
    clear finding as to whether the Suitability requirements of Appendix FM
    were met, criticising the judge's comments that 'nothing turns' on  the
    matter.

10.  I have carefully considered the First-tier Tribunal's  decision.  I  am
    satisfied that the judge did make sustainable findings in  relation  to
    the Suitability requirements.  At paragraph 30 the judge made  a  clear
    finding that the Suitability  challenge  had  not  been  satisfactorily
    established by the Secretary of State. It is unfortunate that the judge
    subsequently said that 'nothing turns' on  this  because,  in  fact,  a
    great deal turned on this point. The Claimant would not be entitled  to
    rely on EX.1 if the  Suitability  requirements  were  not  met.   I  am
    however entirely satisfied that the judge did  make  a  finding  as  to
    whether the Claimant met the Suitability requirements, one  in  respect
    of which he was rationally entitled to reach for the reasons given.

11.  I am however persuaded that the judge did  materially  err  in  law  in
    concluding that there were insurmountable obstacles, by reason  of  the
    wife's pregnancy, preventing the relationship from  continuing  outside
    the United Kingdom.  There was simply  no  medical  evidence  that  was
    capable of entitling the judge to  that  conclusion.  This  was  not  a
    situation where the judge was entitled to take  judicial  notice  of  a
    particular  fact  relating  to  late  stage  pregnancies.  Whilst  some
    airlines may require a doctor's letter for a woman who is more than  28
    weeks pregnant to travel, this is by no means universal.  There  is  no
    general consensus preventing a woman who is pregnant at 33 or  34  week
    from travelling, and the judge was obliged to consider the appeal based
    on the factual matrix in existence at the date of the hearing.  As  the
    judge  was  not  entitled  to  find  the  existence  of  insurmountable
    obstacles for the reasons  he  gave  his  decision  is  vitiated  by  a
    material error of law. Having informed the parties  of  my  decision  I
    indicated that I  would  remake  the  decision  after  hearing  further
    evidence from the Claimant.

12.  In his further evidence the Claimant confirmed that his child,  a  son,
    was born on 21st May 2016. The Claimant's wife and child  attended  the
    Upper Tribunal hearing and remained  throughout  at  the  back  of  the
    hearing room. The Claimant confirmed that he lives with  his  wife  and
    child and he confirmed that his wife is British, a point that was  not,
    in any event, disputed. The Claimant gave details  of  the  interaction
    that he has with his son including a reference to  the  child  clinging
    gymnastically to him. The Claimant  indicated  that  his  wife  was  on
    maternity leave and that she intended to return to her employment  with
    William Hill after a year. He confirmed  that  he  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 29th August 2012.

13.  The immigration  history  that  I  have  set  out  indicates  that  the
    Claimant's  leave  expired  soon  after  29th  December  2014.  He  has
    therefore been as an overstayer since that time. The Claimant  had  not
    broken any of the conditions attached to the leave  previously  granted
    to him. He had been lawfully resident in the UK albeit with leave in  a
    category that did not lead to settlement.

14.  I am satisfied that the Claimant has a genuine and subsisting  parental
    relationship with a British national child.  I  am  satisfied,  on  the
    evidence that I have heard, unchallenged by the Home Office,  that  the
    Claimant lives with his wife and child.  Although I  found  a  material
    error of law in the First-tier's decision there was no reason for me to
    go behind the First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  that  the  Claimant  did
    indeed meet all of the Suitability requirements.

15.  Section EX of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules states:

         This paragraph applies if


             (a)  (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a child who -


                      (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the
                      age of 18 years when the applicant was first granted
                      leave on the basis that this paragraph applied;


                      (bb) is in the UK;


                      (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK
                      continuously for at least the seven years immediately
                      preceding the date of the application; and


                  (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                  leave the UK.

16.  There is no issue in relation to the Suitability  requirements  or  the
    other Eligibility requirements under Appendix FM.

17.  In determining whether or not it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    Claimant's young son to leave the UK I take account of the recent Court
    of Appeal decision in MA (Pakistan) v Upper Tribunal  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    705.  This indicated that, when  assessing  the  term  'reasonable'  in
    s.117B(6) of the 200 Act,  Courts  and  Tribunals  have  to  take  into
    account public interest factors. These public interest factors reflect,
    but are not limited to, the  factors  contained  in  the  remainder  of
    s.117B. In determining whether it is reasonable  for  the  Claimant  to
    leave the UK when he has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
    with a British national child I take account of the factors  listed  in
    Section 117B. I note that there is the public interest  in  maintaining
    firm immigration control. I note additionally  that  the  Claimant  has
    been unlawfully present in the UK since the beginning of 2015 (when his
    leave, as extended by s.3C of the Immigration  Act  1971,  expired).  I
    note that the Claimant has a good grasp  of  English  and  that  he  is
    financially independent to the extent that he is supported by his wife,
    but these are, at the most, neutral factors (AM (S 117B) Malawi  [2015]
    UKUT 0260 (IAC)).

18.  In assessing what is reasonable I must also  take  into  account  other
    relevant factors.  One such factor is  the  Secretary  of  State's  own
    guidance on the circumstances in which it would be reasonable to expect
    a British citizen child to leave the  UK.   At  the  beginning  of  the
    'remade' hearing I gave both parties a copy  of  an  extract  from  the
    Immigration Directorate Instructions (IDIs) 'Family Migration: Appendix
    FM Section 1.0B entitled "Family Life (as  a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
    Private Life: 10-Year Routes"'.  I will refer to this document  as  the
    IDI.  This was published in August 2015 and was current at the date  of
    the Tribunal's decision. It remains current at the date of the error of
    law hearing and this rehearing.

19.   In  her  guidance  the  Secretary  of   State   has   considered   the
    circumstances in which the parent of a British citizen child  could  be
    reasonably required to leave  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Secretary  of
    State's stated position  is  relevant  to  my  assessment  of  what  is
    reasonable within Appendix FM, EX.1 because the Secretary of  State  is
    custodian of the public interest and  her  identification  of  what  is
    reasonable in the public interest must be a very relevant  factor.  The
    relevant section of the IDI is 11.2.3 under the heading  "Would  it  be
    unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the  UK".   The
    paragraph first makes reference to the CJEU judgment in Zambrano  (Case
    34-09).  It then states:

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.


         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer to enable them to remain in the UK with the
         child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence  of  a  genuine
         and subsisting parental relationship.


         It may however be appropriate to refuse to grant  leave  where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such  weight  as  to  justify  separation  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU.


         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:


           . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in  paragraph
             398 of the Immigration Rules;


           . a very poor immigration history, such as where the person  has
             repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.


         In considering whether refusal  may  be  appropriate  the  decision
         maker must consider the impact on the child of any separation.   If
         the decision maker is minded  to  refuse,  in  circumstances  where
         separation would be the result, this decision  should  normally  be
         discussed with a senior caseworker and, where  appropriate,  advice
         may be sought from the Office of the  Children's  Champion  on  the
         implications for the welfare of the child, in order to  inform  the
         decision."

20.  I have taken account of the Secretary of State's policy.  There  is  no
    evidence that the Claimant has engaged in any criminality.  Whilst  the
    Claimant has remained unlawfully in the United Kingdom since the end of
    2014 (or the very beginning of 2015) it cannot  realistically  be  said
    that  his  has  a  very  poor  immigration  history  within  the  terms
    anticipated in  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy.  I  have  attached
    appropriate weight to the Secretary of State's  policy  in  determining
    whether it is reasonable to expect the Claimant's British citizen child
    to leave the UK in accordance with EX.1. Having holistically considered
    the public interest factors in s.117B as outlined above, in my judgment
    the Claimant's child cannot be reasonably expected to leave the  United
    Kingdom in light of the Secretary of State's  written  policy  and  the
    absence of any criminality of a very poor immigration  history  by  the
    Claimant.

21.  In these circumstances I am satisfied that the Claimant does  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules (EX.1). The appeal  is  therefore
    allowed on the basis that the Claimant does meet  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.

Decision

The appeal is allowed under the immigration rules (Appendix FM)

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  17 October 2016

