
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA131412014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice,  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Belfast                                |                                    |
|On 19th October 2015                   |On 13th June 2016                   |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                JIANFENG TANG
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office presenting Officer
Respondent:   Ms B Muldoon, of MSM Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The decision lying at the heart of this appeal was made  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  (the  "Secretary  of
    State") on 03 March 2014.  By this  decision  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the application of the Respondent, a national of China aged  30
    years, for a residence card under the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations  2006  (the  "EEA  Regulations").   The  Respondent's
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") succeeded.  The grant  of
    permission to this Tribunal is couched in the following terms:

         "[Arguably] the Judge has not dealt with/has not  adequately  dealt
         with the question of whether or not the minor child concerned would
         be required to leave  the  United  Kingdom  if  the  Appellant  was
         returned to China.  The Appellant's own evidence is that  he  lives
         ............  with his wife, his child, his father in law  and  the
         father in law's family ....."

EEA Regulations

 2. In this appeal the key provision of the EEA Regulations  is  regulation
    15A, which provides, in material part:

         "(1) A person ("P") who is not an exempt person and  who  satisfies
         the criteria in paragraph (2),  (3),  (4),  (4A)  or  (5)  of  this
         regulation is entitled to a  derivative  right  to  reside  in  the
         United Kingdom for as long as P satisfies the relevant criteria.

         (2) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

           (a) P is the primary carer of an EEA national ("the relevant EEA
           national"); and

           (b) the relevant EEA national-

             (i) is under the age of 18;

             (ii) is residing in the United Kingdom  as  a  self-sufficient
             person; and

             (iii) would be unable to remain in the  United  Kingdom  if  P
             were required to leave.

         (3) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

           (a) P is the  child  of  an  EEA  national  ("the  EEA  national
           parent");

           (b) P resided in the United Kingdom  at  a  time  when  the  EEA
           national parent was residing in the United Kingdom as a  worker;
           and

           (c) P is in education in the United Kingdom and was in education
           there at a time when the EEA national parent was in  the  United
           Kingdom.

         (4) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

           (a) P is the primary carer of a person meeting the  criteria  in
           paragraph (3) ("the relevant person"); and

           (b) the relevant person  would  be  unable  to  continue  to  be
           educated in the United Kingdom if P were required to leave.

         (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

           (a) P is the primary carer of a British citizen  ("the  relevant
           British citizen");

           (b) the relevant British  citizen  is  residing  in  the  United
           Kingdom; and

           (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable  to  reside  in
           the UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave.

         (5) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

           (a) P is under the age of 18;

           (b) P's primary carer is  entitled  to  a  derivative  right  to
           reside in the United Kingdom by virtue of paragraph (2) or (4);

           (c) P does not have leave to enter, or  remain  in,  the  United
           Kingdom; and

           (d) requiring P to leave the United Kingdom  would  prevent  P's
           primary carer from residing in the United Kingdom.

         (6) For the purpose of this regulation-

           (a) "education" excludes nursery education;

           (b) "worker" does not include a jobseeker or a person who  falls
           to be regarded as a worker by virtue of regulation 6(2); and

           (c) "an exempt person" is a person-

             (i) who has a right to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
             result of any other provision of these Regulations;

             (ii) who has a right of abode in the United Kingdom by  virtue
             of section 2 of the 1971 Act;

             (iii) to whom section 8 of the 1971 Act,  or  any  order  made
             under subsection (2) of that provision, applies; or

             (iv) who has indefinite leave to enter or remain in the United
             Kingdom.

         (7) P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person if

           (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of  that  person;
           and

           (b) P-

             (i) is the person who  has  primary  responsibility  for  that
             person's care; or

             (ii) shares equally the responsibility for that person's  care
             with one other person who is not an exempt person.

         (7A) Where P is to be regarded as a primary carer of another person
         by virtue  of  paragraph  (7)(b)(ii)  the  criteria  in  paragraphs
         (2)(b)(iii), (4)(b) and (4A)(c) shall be considered  on  the  basis
         that both P and the person with whom care responsibility is  shared
         would be required to leave the United Kingdom.

         (7B) Paragraph (7A) does not apply if the  person  with  whom  care
         responsibility is shared acquired a derivative right to  reside  in
         the United Kingdom as a  result  of  this  regulation  prior  to  P
         assuming equal care responsibility.

         (8) P will not be regarded as having responsibility for a  person's
         care for the purpose of paragraph  (7)  on  the  sole  basis  of  a
         financial contribution towards that person's care.

         (9) A person who otherwise satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2),
         (3), (4), (4A) or (5) will not be entitled to a derivative right to
         reside in the United Kingdom where the Secretary  of  State  or  an
         immigration officer has made a decision under

           (a) regulation 19(3)(b), 20(1), 20A(1)23A; or

           (b) regulation 21B(2), where that  decision  was  taken  in  the
           preceding twelve months."

    In short, in this  particular  case,  per  regulation  15A(2),  it  was
    incumbent on the Respondent to satisfy four conditions: that he is  the
    primary carer of the relevant  EEA  national;  that  the  relevant  EEA
    national is aged under 18 years; that  the  relevant  EEA  national  is
    residing in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  self-sufficient  person;  and,
    finally, that the relevant EEA national would be unable  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom if the primary carer were required to leave.

The Impugned Decision

 3. In the application for his derivative residence  card,  the  Respondent
    identified the relevant EEA national as a British citizen child born on
    07 May 2012 (hereinafter "the child").  He described their relationship
    as that of father/son.  In response to the question "Are you  the  only
    primary carer for the EEA national child ...?"   he  stated  "No".   He
    identified the other primary carer as  his  wife,  the  mother  of  the
    child.  The Respondent had lived in the United Kingdom for almost  five
    years when making his application.

 4. In the Secretary of  State's  decision,  the  first  reason  given  for
    refusal  was  that  the  Respondent  had  failed  to  demonstrate   the
    availability of the  necessary  funds  to  sustain  the  child  or  the
    existence  of  an  income  from  another  source.   The  second  reason
    proffered was that the child would be able to remain and reside in  the
    United Kingdom with  her  mother  in  the  event  of  the  Respondent's
    departure.

Decision of the FtT

 5. The FtT, in allowing the Respondent's  appeal,  recorded  his  evidence
    that his wife was working and he cared for the  child.   This  involved
    playing, outings, watching television "and so on".  Further, he claimed
    that he "... spent the majority of his time with the child and they had
    a very close relationship". The Judge also adverted  to  evidence  that
    the child's mother is in  full  time  employment.   The  Judge  made  a
    specific  finding  that  there  was  adequate  sickness  insurance  and
    adequate maintenance funds regarding the child.  Next, the Judge  found
    that the Respondent's departure from the United Kingdom would give rise
    to  all  three  family  members  leaving.   This  is  followed  by  the
    conclusion:

         "Having considered all the evidence before me, I am satisfied  that
         the Appellant is the primary carer of the child and that there  are
         sufficient  resources  available  to  sustain  the  child  and  the
         Appellant in the United Kingdom. I accept that the child  would  be
         unable to remain in the  United  Kingdom  in  the  event  that  the
         Appellant returned to China."

     The appeal was allowed accordingly.

 6. The grounds of the Secretary of State's appeal place  emphasis  on  the
    first and fourth of the four statutory requirements summarised  in  [2]
    above.   I shall consider each of these issues in turn.

The Primary Carer Issue

 7. The  definition  of  "primary  carer"  in  regulation  15A(7)  has  two
    components.  First, the person concerned must be a direct relative or a
    legal guardian of the person  concerned.   This  is  satisfied  by  the
    father/son relationship in the present case  and  is  not  in  dispute.
    Second,  the   father   must   demonstrate   that   he   has   "primary
    responsibility" for the care of his son.  The gravamen  of  Mr  Duffy's
    argument was that this is a case of equally shared care.  It was argued
    that even though the mother is in full time employment, she nonetheless
    provides a certain quantum of care for the child.

 8. This is primarily a factual matter in respect whereof the FtT makes  no
    specific finding. However, I consider that it can be  readily  inferred
    from its express findings and conclusions that  the FtT  was  satisfied
    that, and so found, that the Respondent is the child's dominant  carer.




 9. More generally, the provisions of regulation 15A invite  reflection  on
    the terms "primary". "responsibility" and "care".  This is why  I  have
    couched the "primary responsibility" criterion as  primarily,  but  not
    exclusively, a question of fact:  I consider this to be a  question  of
    mixed fact and law.  While these terms are undefined, I  consider  that
    they are unsophisticated and uncomplicated. They import,  firstly,  the
    notion of more than one carer of the person concerned.  There could, in
    principle, be two or more such carers.  It  does  no  violence  to  the
    statutory language to hold that in cases where there is no  finding  of
    equally shared  care,  the  primary  carer  is  the  person  with  main
    responsibility, in fact rather than in theory,  for  the  care  of  the
    child concerned:  the  person who actually attends to the bulk  of  the
    care tasks pertaining to the recipient.  "Responsibility"  denotes  the
    actual provision of services et al, rather than  any legal duty  to  do
    so.  The word "care" is plainly of wide  scope  and  embraces  a  broad
    spectrum of services, assistance, support and supervision.  In any case
    where it is found that there is a primary carer,  who  does  not  share
    equally with another  the  responsibility  of  caring  for  the  person
    concerned, any other carer of such person is, by definition,  providing
    lesser, secondary care services.

10. Having regard to the facts found in the present case, duly augmented by
    appropriate inferences, the Respondent is plainly the primary carer  of
    the child concerned, while his spouse, the  child's  mother,   has  the
    role of secondary, or subsidiary,  carer.   It  follows  that  the  FtT
    committed no error of law as regards regulation 15A(4A)(a).

The Forced Departure Issue

11. There is now ample and authoritive guidance on the correct approach  to
    the words "would be unable to reside in the UK or in another EEA State"
    in regulation 15A(4A)(c).  The derivation of these words  is  traceable
    to the decision of the CJEU in Zambrano v Office National  de  l'Emploi
    [2012] 2 WLR 886 and, specifically, the passage  in  [44]  wherein  the
    Grand Chamber spoke of a situation  wherein  the  EU  citizen  children
    concerned "would have to leave the  territory  of  the  European  Union
    ...".  Later, in Dereci and Others (European Citizenship) [2011]  EUECJ
    C-256-11, the CJEU expressed itself in essentially the same  terms,  at
    [66] -

         "..... situations in which the Union citizen has, in fact, to leave
         ....."

    The overarching criterion is, of course, that  of  the  denial  of  the
    genuine enjoyment of the substance  of  the  rights  conferred  by  the
    status of citizenship of the  Union.   In  Harrison  (Jamaica)  and  AB
    (Morocco) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1736,  the  issue  of  forced  removal
    arose again, in a case where the Court of Appeal decided  that  nothing
    short of forced removal of the EU citizen from the EU will  suffice  to
    engage the Zambrano principle: see [63].

12. In a notable contribution to the jurisprudence belonging to this field,
    the Upper Tribunal, in  its  recent  decision  in  Ayinde  and  Thinjom
    (Carers - Regulation 15A - Zambrano) [2015] UKUT  00560  (IAC)  stated,
    with reference to Zambrano at [45]:

         "On a proper reading of the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Justice,
         however, it was not an assumption that the Court was making  but  a
         finding of fact or a prediction of what would inevitably occur."

    In [48] - [49], it was held that there is no  test  of  reasonableness.
    The correct test, rather, is whether the  EU  citizen  concerned  would
    leave the Union.


    In pithy terms, the test is -

         "... whether the child would,  as  a  matter  of  practicality,  be
         unable to remain in the UK".

     See Hines v London Borough of Lambeth [2014] EWCA  Civ  660,  at  [23],
    per Vos LJ.  The learned Lord Justice added that this  will  require  a
    consideration of, amongst other matters, the impact which  the  removal
    of the primary carer would  have  on  the  EU  citizen  child  and  any
    alternative care available for the child.

13. Having regard to the findings of the FtT, both  express  and  implicit,
    this test is plainly satisfied in the present  case,  with  the  result
    that the FtT has not lapsed into any error of law.  It's key finding is
    that the refusal of the application by the Respondent (the father)  for
    a residence card would result in the family in its entirety leaving the
    Union. As noted above, more extensive findings by the Judge would  have
    been preferable.  However, based on the express findings made,  coupled
    with those which can  reasonably  be  inferred,  I  consider  that  the
    Judge's conclusion relating to the forced  departure  issue  cannot  be
    impugned in law.  In short, he found that the impugned decision of  the
    Secretary of State would result in  both  parents  leaving  the  United
    Kingdom and that, by virtue of age and family circumstances, their  EEA
    national child would be compelled to accompany them to their country of
    origin, China.  This finding cannot be impugned as erroneous in law.


Decision

14. For the reasons elaborated above, the decision of the FtT suffers  from
    no error of law. I dismiss the appeal and affirm the  decision  of  the
    FtT.





                                            Bernard  McCloskey




                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                   Date:    30  October 2015
