
IAC-AH-DN-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13042/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 February 2015                           |On 25 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             PAULINE MAUREEN DAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Malhota, Counsel instructed by Chipatiso
Associates LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent is a citizen of Jamaica and  her  date  of  birth  is  1
    November 1965.  I shall refer to the respondent as the appellant as she
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant came to the UK on 2 April 2002.  On 30 November 2002  she
    was granted leave to remain as a student until 31  October  2003.   She
    remained in the UK until 23 August 2007 when she made  an  unsuccessful
    claim for asylum.  She made an application to remain  under  the  Human
    Rights Act on 28 October 2013 and this application was refused  by  the
    Secretary of State in a decision of 26 February 2014.  The  application
    was refused under Article 8, Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and her appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Iqbal in
    a decision that was promulgated on 13 November 2014 following a hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 15 October 2014.  Judge  Iqbal  allowed  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and Article 8.  Permission was  granted  to
    the Secretary of State in a decision of 5 January 2015 by Judge Parkes.
     Thus the matter came before me.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

4.   The Judge heard evidence from the appellant and her daughter.   He  had
    a report from an independent social worker, Charles Musendo relating to
    the appellant. The evidence was not challenged and it was  accepted  by
    the Judge.

5.   The evidence was  that  the  appellant  lived  in  shared  care  scheme
    because she was not able to live on her own and needed 24 hour care  as
    a result of her health problems.  She has lupus  and  type  2  diabetes
    which has caused blindness and kidney failure.  She developed  stage  2
    renal failure in 2006 and underwent a  cadaveric  renal  transplant  in
    January 2012.  She has undergone a significant depressive illness which
    has required anti-depressant medication and community psychiatric care.

6.   The independent social worker indicated that the appellant  is  anxious
    and worried about who would support her should she return  to  Jamaica.
    She no longer has contact with her extended family there and they would
    not be able to care for her given their own  family  commitments.   The
    appellant has a network of support in the UK where she has lived  since
    2002.  Her daughter and grandson live here.  The appellant is  in  need
    of long term care she has nowhere to live in Jamaica and is  unable  to
    live independently.

7.   The Judge found that the Secretary of State had not  properly  analysed
    paragraph 276ADE(vi).  The Judge found that the length of residence  of
    over twelve years at the date of the application "Is indicative  having
    no ties in Nigeria (sic) and certainly in any case  much  stronger  and
    deeper ties in the UK, including the fact that she has her daughter and
    grandson, who I find still forms part of her family unit,  in  the  UK"
    (see [18]).

8.   The Judge heard evidence that  the  appellant's  diabetes  deteriorated
    and affected her ability to study here and her condition  worsened  and
    she was hospitalised in 2004.  She was hospitalised in  2006  when  her
    kidney failed and it was then discovered she had  renal  failure.   She
    went to the Jamaican High Commission accompanied by  a  nurse  at  this
    time but the High Commission refused to give her a passport because she
    was not in a position to be able to travel.  In October 2007 she became
    blind in both eyes and she is now living in accommodation  provided  by
    the social services with a carer.

9.   The Judge found at [21] that it is clear that the appellant  no  longer
    has ties in Jamaica.  The judge directed himself  in  relation  to  the
    case of Ogundimu (Nigeria) [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC).  The  Judge  made  the
    following findings:

         "22. As I have noted the appellant has been in the  United  Kingdom
             for over twelve years.  She as  (sic)  lost  all  social  ties
             given her illness, which I have detailed above and she has  no
             family ties left in Jamaica.  It was  argued  that  given  the
             appellant had only been here for twelve years she had not lost
             the cultural ties to Jamaica.  However, I have considered that
             the Rule is not exhaustive that is an individual would have to
             show that they had 'lived continuously in the UK for less than
             twenty years ... but has not  (sic)  ties  (including  social,
             cultural or family) with the country to which he would have to
             go ...'


              I find that social, cultural or family ties  are  alternatives
             and furthermore not exhaustive  in  terms  of  what  is  being
             considered in relation to  the  term  'ties'.   Certainly  the
             facts particular to this appellant are quite specific.  She is
             a vulnerable lady who  needs  a  very  strong  support  system
             around her with people  whom  she  can  trust.   What  becomes
             relevant to her then is whether or not she has any  social  or
             family ties upon whom she can rely if she were  returned  back
             to Jamaica.  I find there are no such  ties  and  in  all  the
             circumstances  presented  to  me  therefore  that  she  should
             succeed with reference to 276ADE(vi)."


10.  The Judge  also  went  on  to  consider  Article  8  finding  that  the
    appellant's removal would not proportionate.

The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

11.  The grounds of appeal  argue  that  the  Judge  erred  in  relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE(vi).  It is plain that any "more than merely abstract"
    ties (see Ogundimu (Nigeria) [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC)), including  cultural
    will be sufficient to preclude an appellant  from  meeting  276ADE(vi).
    No  explicit  or  sufficiently  reasoned  finding  was  made  that  the
    appellant has no cultural ties to Jamaica.  Given that  she  had  lived
    there for 36 years it is submitted that no such finding was open to the
    Judge.  It is argued that the Judge gave  undue  weight  to  immaterial
    matters.  At [22] the Judge considered that "What becomes  relevant  is
    whether or not she [the appellant] has any social or family  ties  upon
    whom she can rely if she is returned."  However this is not relevant to
    a decision under paragraph 276ADE(vi).
12.  Ground 3  argues  that  the  Judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  why  the
    appellant's private and family life outweighed the legitimate aim.

13.  I heard oral submissions from both parties. It was  established  during
    submissions that the appellant's daughter has  discretionary  leave  to
    remain in the UK until 2007 on compassionate  grounds  considering  she
    has health problems.  Her son, the appellant's grandson was born on  28
    June 2010 and is a citizen of Jamaica.

Conclusions

14.  The Upper Tribunal in Ogundimu (Article 8  -  new  Rules)  (Nigeria)  v
    SSHD [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC) stated as follows at (123):

         "The natural and ordinary meaning of the word  'ties'  imports,  we
         think, a concept involving something more than  merely  remote  and
         abstract links to the country of proposed deportation and  removal.
         It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country  of
         origin.  If this were not the case then  it  would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  Rule.
         This would render the application of the Rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless."

    The Court of Appeal in YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 stated:

         "51. The UT in that case [Ogundimu] went on to recognise  that  the
             test was an exacting one.  However, the exercise that  had  to
             be concluded was a  'round  assessment  of  all  the  relevant
             circumstances', which were not  to  be  confined  to  'social,
             cultural and family' issues.  The UT concluded, on the  facts,
             that Mr Ogundimu did not have ties with Nigeria,  the  country
             to which he would have  been  deported.   It  noted  that  his
             father might have ties but  they  were  not  the  ties  of  Mr
             Ogundimu himself 'or any ties that could result in support  to
             [him] in the event of his return [to Nigeria]'.


         52.  I agree with the analysis of the UT in Ogundimu.  Whether this
             is  a  'hard-edged'  factual  enquiry   or   a   question   of
             'evaluation' the question in this case is: what ties  does  YM
             himself have with Uganda and would they  support  him  in  the
             event  of  a  return  there.    Ties   of   other   relatives,
             particularly YM's mother, are irrelevant."

15.  In the case of Bossadi (paragraph  276ADE;  suitability;  ties)  [2015]
    UKUT 00042 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal stated as follows:

         "15. Whilst in the instant case it was open to the  FTT  to  accept
             the claimant's and mother's evidence about the claimant's lack
             of social and cultural ties in the DRC,  it  was  (as  already
             noted) part of their evidence that he had four  uncles  living
             there.  Following Ogundimu (and now, for  us  considering  the
             case, YM), the FTT was required to consider in the form  of  a
             rounded assessment whether the claimant's familial ties  could
             result in support to him in the event of  his  return  to  the
             DRC.  In our view  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  understands
             assessment of this matter to  require  the  decision-maker  to
             take into account both subjective and objective considerations
             and also to consider what lies within the choice of a claimant
             to achieve.


         16.  In this case the FTT appears to have approached the matter  of
             family ties as a purely subjective one, reasoning that because
             the two witnesses said there would be no effective family ties
             in the DRC, that must be the case objectively.   This  was  at
             odds with Strasbourg jurisprudence  which  requires  not  only
             that assessment  of  ties  has  an  objective  as  well  as  a
             subjective  dimension  but  also  that  such  assessment  must
             consider, as a relevant consideration, whether ties  that  are
             dormant can be revived.   Thus,  in  Balogun  v  UK  App.  No.
             60266/09 [2012] ECHR 614 at [51] the court noted  that  whilst
             it accepted that the tie between a Nigerian applicant and  his
             mother was 'not a strong familial tie',  nevertheless  'it  is
             one that could be pursued and strengthened by the applicant if
             he chose'.  That assessment was not undertaken by the FTT."

16.  The first challenge is that the Judge did not make a  discrete  finding
    whether the appellant has cultural ties with Jamaica.  In my view there
    was no requirement for him to do so.  In my view what is necessary is a
    rounded assessment and each case turns on its own facts.  The Judge was
    aware that the  appellant  had  spent  36  years  in  Jamaica,  but  he
    considered  ties  with  Jamaica  in  the   context   of   the   unusual
    circumstances in this case,  having  accepted  the  evidence.       The
    Judge considered ties in the context  of  the  appellant's  significant
    health problems including blindness which meant that  she  has  a  high
    level of dependency on the social services and needs 24 hour care.   It
    was open to the Judge to find that the appellant has little  connection
    with Jamaica.  The ties generally must be more than  merely  remote  or
    abstract and considered in the context of the individual  circumstances
    of the particular case.  The appellant here may speak the  language  of
    the country she may have had exposure to the cultural norms  there  but
    in the context of her individual problems it does not follow  that  she
    has "ties" in the natural  and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word.   The
    assessment is fact sensitive (see [125] Ogundimu).

17.  The grounds challenge the findings in relation  to  social  and  family
    ties and asserts that the Judge "artificially imported  an  erroneously
    high threshold" in finding that "what becomes relevant to her  then  is
    whether or not she has any social or family ties upon whom she can rely
    if she were returned back to Jamaica".  The  grounds  assert  that  the
    Judge applied  the  wrong  test.  Having  considered  the  findings  in
    Bossadi, it is clear to me that the Judge has not erred  and  that  the
    correct test was applied.

18.  In my view the Judge did not make a material error of law  in  relation
    to paragraph 276ADE and the decision to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Rules is maintained. In the light of this there is no need  for  me  to
    consider the grounds in relation to Article 8 outside the rules.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 23 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
