
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13754/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4 March 2016                        |On 8 April 2016                     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                               shahidur rahman
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOPR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah, instructed by Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal, brought with the permission of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kimnell, from a decision promulgated on 18 August 2015 of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Jessica Pacey.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and claimed that he was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms Khanom such as  to  provide
    him with the appropriate  status  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Although other matters were in the background,  the  substantive  issue
    for Judge Pacey to determine was whether as a matter of fact there  was
    such a genuine and subsisting relationship.

3.   In the First-tier Tribunal,  the  appellant  relied  on  his  own  oral
    testimony which  supplemented  a  witness  statement.  There  was  also
    evidence given by Ms Khanom.  It is  also  apparent  that  three  other
    witnesses were present in the Tribunal and were available to give  oral
    evidence.  Those three witnesses are referred to in paragraph 3 of  the
    decision namely Zahed Ahmed, Mohamad Tofayel and Mohammed Maruf Ahmed.

4.   The judge recorded at paragraph 3 that these three witnesses:


         "... confirmed  the  contents  of  their  witness  statements.   Ms
         Griffiths [Presenting Officer] helpfully confirmed that she did not
         wish to cross-examine these witnesses so they were not required  to
         give oral evidence".


    It is implicit that the judge herself did not wish to put questions  of
    any of these three witnesses.

5.   In a full and reasoned determination the judge states at paragraph  15,
    "I have also read and taken  account  of  the  witness  statements  and
    letters written in support of the  appellant,  which  are  all  in  his
    bundle".  Further, at paragraph 26, the judge says:

         "The respondent highlighted in the refusal letter the lack of up to
         date evidence of their relationship. The appellant has not  however
         addressed this point by the provision of  independent  evidence  of
         probative value to demonstrate that he  and  Ms  Khanom  are  in  a
         continuing and genuine relationship."

6.   It is evident both from specific comments of the judge and  taking  the
    entirety of the decision holistically that the judge  took  a  somewhat
    dim view as to the credibility of the appellant's evidence. Among other
    things the judge was not impressed by something approaching  an  asylum
    claim which the appellant had sought to bring.  It is abundantly  plain
    that the judge formed the view that the appellant  and  Ms  Khanom  had
    been distinctly less than candid with the court. The judge came to  the
    conclusion that the genuine and subsisting relationship  had  not  been
    made out.

7.   I have been taken to the three witness statements which were  admitted,
    unchallenged, before the judge and which the judge said she  took  into
    account.

8.   First, at page 86 of the appellant's bundle is a letter written  by  Mr
    Mohammed Tofayel Sattar who it has now been confirmed  is  the  Mohamad
    Tofayel referred to above.  I can disregard that letter in its entirety
    because as Mr Shah very fairly and properly accepted before me  in  his
    oral submissions there is nothing within that letter which  touches  on
    the nature of the relationship between the appellant and Ms Khanom.

9.   The other two witness statements do touch upon that relationship.   The
    first is that of Mohammed Maruf Ahmed which begins at page  14  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  Paragraph 4 reads as follows:

         "When I first met the appellant his immigration status was  not  an
         issue.  I always believed he was settled in the UK and this subject
         we never discussed between us. It is within my  personal  knowledge
         for long time he has a relationship with Mrs Aysha Khanom and  they
         subsequently married.  On many occasions I  saw  them  together  in
         many different types of activities where I also attended."


     Then at paragraph 7:

         "The appellant has shared his personal life with me  in  particular
         he lost his parents, his wife is very  upset  in  relation  to  his
         unsettled immigration status, his wife's family not accepted  their
         marriage.  I feel that this appellant's matter may be considered on
         humanitarian grounds.  Further I feel that his continuous  presence
         in the UK is a benefit of kind to the large  Bangladeshi  community
         living in the Midlands area.  He has  the  ability  to  expand  his
         ability and  skills  outside  the  Bangladeshi  community  but  his
         current immigration status is preventing him  from  doing  so.   He
         informed me that he is unable to take any paid employment and  also
         cannot do many official dealings without his immigration status."

10.  Finally there is the witness statement of Zahed Ahmed.   This  is  even
    shorter and I will read it into this judgment in full:

         "1.  The appellant in this matter known to me for long  time  as  a
             community based friend.  As  friend  he  shared  many  of  his
             personal matters with me such he lost his parents, problems in
             his marriage life and lack of immigration status.


         2.   I own the freehold of 105 St.  Saviours  Road,  Birmingham  B8
             1HN.  The appellant previously lived at this address  and  his
             wife also shared the accommodation with  him.   He  no  longer
             living at my address.


         3.   Subject to any unforeseeable events it is my intention to come
             to the Court and give my oral evidence.


         5.   I request the Court and the Home Office  please  consider  all
             the circumstances and allow him to remain in  the  UK  as  his
             future home."


11.  It was also suggested by Mr Shah in oral argument that  each  of  those
    witnesses might have been in a position to give further  oral  evidence
    but they were not invited to do so. The question for  me  to  determine
    sitting as a reviewing judge  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  not  a  re-
    evaluation of the factual situation but whether a material error of law
    can be demonstrated on the face of the judge's decision.

12.  Having looked at the matter with some care and considered the  material
    which Mr  Shah  suggests  might  have  been  overlooked  or  not  given
    sufficient weight by the judge, I am of the view that  this  is  not  a
    case where a material error of law can be demonstrated. To my mind this
    is a  careful  and  balanced  judgment  by  an  experienced  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge for whom  the  assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant and Ms Khanom was of some significance.  The  judge  properly
    made reference to the three witness statements and repeated, albeit  in
    a slightly pro forma way, that she had had regard to all  the  evidence
    and documents which were in front of her.

13.  I have read the content of the witness statements  into  this  judgment
    because in my assessment what is said within  those  statements  is  so
    minor and peripheral that it could have had no bearing on the  eventual
    outcome. The judge properly took it into account but  nonetheless  came
    to the conclusion which she did.  In an ideal world, as  a  counsel  of
    perfection, it might have been preferable for the  judge  expressly  to
    rehearse and then reject the very limited evidence  in  the  statements
    but in my view there is nothing of "probative value" to  have  assisted
    the appellant in his claim. The determination the judge  came  to  sits
    comfortably with what is said in paragraph 26:

         "The respondent highlighted in the refusal letter the lack  of  any
         up to date evidence of their relationship.  The appellant  has  not
         however addressed  this  point  by  the  provision  of  independent
         evidence of probative value to demonstrate that he  and  Ms  Khanom
         were in a continuing and genuine relationship."


12.  What is said in the  two  witness  statements  to  which  I  have  made
    reference does not in any way amount  to  probative  evidence  in  this
    regard.  Issues of credibility and issues of the weight to be  afforded
    to different items of evidence are entirely within the province of  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge to decide.  The conclusions she came to  were
    open to her on the evidence she both heard and read.  Her  decision  is
    unimpeachable and it follows that this appeal must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                               Date     23 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
