
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13957/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th March 2016                   |On 25th April 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                              mr Hamza Benghida
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission granted by the  Upper  Tribunal,
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin  promulgated  on
    27th August 2015 dismissing his appeal for further leave to  remain  in
    the UK.  The appellant, a citizen of Algeria,  born  on  25th  February
    1984 had appealed the decision of the Secretary of State made  on  13th
    March 2014 to refuse him further leave to  remain  in  the  UK  as  the
    spouse of a person present and settled in accordance with paragraph 284
    of the Immigration Rules and a decision was made to remove him  by  way
    of  directions  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum   and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant's immigration history is that he entered the UK  on  29th
    October 2011 with leave to enter as a spouse valid until  19th  January
    2014.  On 9th January 2014 he applied for further leave  to  remain  on
    the basis of his  marriage  to  Linda  Christine  Benghida,  a  British
    national.  They met over the internet in December  2011,  proceeded  to
    take holidays together and visits and married on 26th August 2010.  The
    appellant entered the UK on 29th October 2011 and started working as  a
    chef at various restaurants  in  Margate.   It  is  reported  that  the
    appellant was surprised when his application was refused  by  the  Home
    Office.  When he made his application on 6th March 2014 he had yet  to
    pass the knowledge of the life in the UK test and his then  application
    was supported by a  large  file  of  his  wife's  medical  records  and
    documents.  The appeal was allowed but overturned by the Upper Tribunal
    where he represented himself and at that hearing he was told there  was
    no such file of medical documents on the court file.  He does now  have
    an  English  language  certificate  having  passed  the   entry   level
    certificate in ESOL, skills for life and the life in the UK test.

 3. His wife has chronic kidney disease  and  renal  failure  with  type  2
    diabetes and, it was asserted,  would  not  be  able  to  continue  her
    treatment in Algeria.  The current immigration problems and his  wife's
    health issues had recently taken a toll on their marriage.

 4. The respondent refused the appellant's application on the basis that he
    had failed to provide evidence of having passed an  acceptable  English
    language test, further  to  paragraph  284(ix)(a)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  With regards to Appendix FM the respondent  was  not  satisfied
    that there were insurmountable obstacles preventing the appellant  from
    continuing  his  relationship  with  his  wife  in  Algeria   and   the
    application failed further to EX.1(b) of Appendix FM.

 5. With regards to private life and Paragraph  276ADE  the  appellant  had
    ties in Algeria and there were no very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    return.

 6. The appellant had not provided medical evidence to show  his  wife  was
    suffering from the  claimed  conditions  and  there  was  treatment  in
    Algeria.

 7. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on 5th August  2015,  the
    appellant gave evidence that he and his wife were still  a  couple  but
    just living apart.  She was unable to come to court because she was  so
    ill that she had to stay a night in hospital.  He had no advice from  a
    lawyer to get a statement from his wife.

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin accepted that the appellant had  shown
    that he fulfilled the requirement of  the  English  language  test  but
    proceeded to consider paragraph 284(vi) which refers to  "each  of  the
    parties intends to live permanently with the other as his or her spouse
    or civil partner and the marriage or civil partnership is  subsisting".
    The judge found that in this case the appellant was  no  longer  living
    with his wife although he was less clear when  they  separated  but  it
    appeared to have been in February.  At paragraph  21  the  judge  found
    "the difficulty for the appellant is that there is no evidence from his
    wife to show that she is supporting his claim for an extension of  stay
    as her spouse".  Indeed there was no statement submitted  by  his  wife
    either of the two previous hearings to confirm that  this  relationship
    is subsisting and no statement submitted for this  hearing  to  explain
    why they are no longer living together.  There was no medical  evidence
    submitted to say that  she  could  not  attend  that  hearing  and  the
    evidence was  that  she  travelled  to  London  regularly  to  see  her
    consultant at Guy's Hospital.  The judge proceeded as follows

         "22. Ms Daykin relied on  the  case  of  BK  and  Others  (Spouses:
             Marriage meaning of 'subsisting') Turkey  [2005]  UKAIT  00174
             which held that a  marriage  is  subsisting  if  it  has  been
             lawfully entered into and has  not  thereafter  been  lawfully
             dissolved or annulled. She appreciated that this  was  not  in
             line with the starred decision  in  GA  (subsisting  marriage)
             Ghana * 2006 UKAIT 00046 which held that  subsisting  requires
             that there is a real relationship a opposed to a formal one of
             marriage. I intend to follow the starred decision of GA and in
             doing so I am satisfied that the appellant has  not  shown  to
             the balance of probabilities that he fulfils this  requirement
             of paragraph 284 (vi). I do not find on the evidence before me
             that this is a subsisting marriage.

         23.  The appellant has therefore not shown that  he  satisfies  all
             the requirements of paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules.

         Article 8

         24.  In light of my finding that the  appellant  does  not  have  a
             subsisting  relationship  with  his  wife  in  the  UK,   this
             necessarily means that Article 8 is not engaged on grounds  of
             family life even if the old regime under Part 8 applies to the
             appellant as his previous spouse visa  was  granted  prior  to
             July 2012."

 9. An application for permission to appeal was  made  on  the  basis  that
    there had been a change  of  circumstances  and  since  the  First-tier
    Tribunal the appellant and his sponsor had reconciled  and  were  again
    living together as a married couple.  It was also  submitted  that  the
    judge had not doubted the credibility of the appellant and  that  there
    had not been a complete  breakdown  of  the  relationship  and  it  was
    submitted that subsisting was not an absolute term and that  there  may
    be  degrees  of  subsisting  based  on  the  factors  mentioned  in  GA
    (Subsisting marriage) Ghana.  It was submitted the appellant played  an
    essential and necessary part in the  sponsor's  private  life  and  the
    appellant cared unpaid for the sponsor who would not be  able  to  cope
    without his support  and  considered  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    unreasonable.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer found that the  grounds
    amounted to nothing more than a disagreement with the facts  and  there
    was no error of law and the judge was entitled to make on the  evidence
    that there was no subsisting relationship.

10. Permission was, however, granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Reeds  who
    found that the  judge  had  found  that  the  appellant  could  satisfy
    paragraph 284(ix)(a) but went on of his own motion to consider  whether
    the marriage was subsisting.  It was  unclear  from  the  determination
    whether this was raised by the judge to the appellant's representatives
    so that this could be adequately dealt with and whether the evidence in
    this respect was in fact clarified.  It was arguable that the nature of
    the  relationship  as  a  whole  should  have  been   considered   when
    considering whether or not the relationship was subsisting.

11. A Rule 24 response was served, citing RM (Kwok On Tong HC 395 paragraph
    320) India [2006] UKAIT 00039.  The head note of RM confirmed that Kwok
    On Tong was still good law and the judge cannot allow an appeal on  the
    ground that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules, unless the requirements of the Immigration Rules were or are  as
    appropriate met.  The appeal is not limited to the issues raised in the
    notice of refusal.  Under the circumstances it was open to the judge to
    conclude that the  evidence  before  him  was  wholly  insufficient  to
    conclude that the appellant was party to a subsisting marriage and  the
    parties intended to  live  together.   The  respondent  was  not  in  a
    position to take this point against the appellant as it did not  appear
    to have been disclosed to the respondent that the appellant was  living
    apart from his wife.  It was raised at the hearing that his address was
    different from his wife since February 2015.   There  was  no  evidence
    from his wife in support of the application  nor  did  she  attend  the
    hearing.  No adjournment was sought and the appellant's  representative
    clearly appreciated that there were serious concerns about the state of
    the marriage and seeking to rely on BK (see 22 of the decision).   That
    authority held that marriage is subsisting  if  it  has  been  lawfully
    entered  into  and  has  not  thereafter  been  lawfully  dissolved  or
    annulled.  It was appreciated that  this  was  not  in  line  with  the
    starred decision in GA (Subsisting marriage) Ghana [2006]  UKAIT  00046
    which held that subsisting requires there is  a  real  relationship  as
    opposed to a formal one of marriage.  The judge  followed  the  starred
    decision in GA.

12. At the hearing before  me,  Mr  Jesurum  referred  to  the  complicated
    history as set out above and the wife's  difficult  medical  condition.
    It was acknowledged that at  the  date  of  the  hearing  there  was  a
    temporary separation, but he submitted that  there  was  some  latitude
    between BK and GA and the fact that the appellant and his wife were  in
    a temporary separation did not necessarily mean that this was  the  end
    of the marriage.  There was no rejection of the appellant's credibility
    or his assertion that the marriage was not at an end.  With respect  to
    Article 8 the judge dealt very briefly with Article 8 and having  found
    that  there  was  no  relationship  promptly  dismissed   any   further
    consideration.  There were powerful elements to suggest that there  was
    still a continuing relationship between the appellant and his wife  and
    the private life that should have been considered.

13. Mr Whitwell referred to Kwok On Tong and that it was necessary for  the
    judge  under  paragraph  284  to  consider  the  genuineness   of   the
    relationship.  The evidence was that the appellant had moved out, there
    was no evidence from the spouse and that his wife did  not  attend  the
    previous Upper Tribunal hearing.  On both those occasions there was  no
    input from the spouse and the judge was entitled to  raise  the  point.
    GA Ghana trounced BK and was a starred determination.  The  matter  was
    raised by the judge.  The burden on the appellant was  not  discharged.
    The challenge to the  position  on  Article  8  was  parasitic  on  the
    subsistence of the marriage.

14. In conclusion, and I take the matters in reverse order, the judge  made
    a finding that as the appellant did not have a subsisting  relationship
    with his wife and he found that Article 8 was not engaged  in  relation
    to family life.  He proceeded to find that in relation to  his  private
    life that the relationship had broken down and made  no  assessment  of
    the continuing albeit limited relationship between  the  appellant  and
    his wife.  The judge made a record of the evidence at paragraph 7  that
    the appellant was working as a chef and spent his  time  off  with  his
    wife and his submission that they were still a couple but  just  living
    apart.  The evidence from the appellant and against whom there  was  no
    credibility finding, was such that the wife still considered themselves
    a couple.  Evidence was given that she could not come to court  because
    she was so ill.

15. There was no factoring of the private life into Article  8  assessment.
    That said the reasons for refusal letter made no assertion  that  there
    was no genuine and subsisting relationship and  an  inspection  of  the
    skeleton argument presented to the judge  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    showed that the relationship was not a matter which was raised  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter, and evidence thereto was not  submitted  on
    that point.  As such it is clear that the judge raised  the  matter  at
    the hearing because he refers to his questioning at paragraph 9 of  the
    decision.  There may have been a reference  to  GA  Ghana  and  BK  and
    Others  in  closing  submissions  but  it  is  not   clear   from   the
    determination that the appellant was given the opportunity  to  respond
    to the assertion that the relationship had ended.  The judge states  at
    21 "the difficulty for the appellant is that there is no evidence  from
    his wife to show that she is supporting his claim for an  extension  of
    stay as her spouse".  The judge proceeds:

         "21. This means that I can now be satisfied that the appellant  has
             shown that he fulfils the requirement of the English  language
             test certificate  as  submitted  for  this  appeal.   However,
             paragraph 284 (vi) states: "each of  the  parties  intends  to
             live permanently with the other as his or her spouse or  civil
             partner and the marriage of civil partnership is  subsisting".
             In this case the appellant says that he is  no  longer  living
             with his wife.  Whilst he was less than clear as to when  they
             separated, it seems that this was in  February  2015  although
             they may have spent a  further  month  together  in  June.  He
             maintains  that  this  is  a  'break'  in   the   relationship
             principally requested by his wife and he hopes that  they  can
             be reconciled. The difficulty for the appellant is that  there
             is no evidence from his wife to show that  she  is  supporting
             his claim for an extension of stay  as  her  spouse.   Indeed,
             there was no statement submitted by his wife for either of the
             two previous hearings to confirm  that  this  relationship  is
             subsisting and no statement  submitted  for  this  hearing  to
             explain why they are no longer living together.  There  is  no
             medical evidence submitted to say that she  could  not  attend
             this hearing and the evidence is that she  travels  to  London
             regularly to see her consultant at  Guys  Hospital.  There  is
             also no documentary evidence to show that  the  appellant  and
             his wife even remain in contact as claimed by the appellant."

16. Submission was made that there should have been an application  for  an
    adjournment but I find that even considering Kwok On  Tong  it  is  not
    clear that this was raised such that it could be adequately dealt  with
    and whether the evidence in this respect was in fact clarified.  At the
    outset of the hearing one of the matters in issue was not that  of  the
    relationship.  In effect the appellant was not given the opportunity to
    answer the criticisms made in relation to the evidence and thus a  fair
    hearing on this discrete but fundamental point.

17. I therefore found an error of law and set aside the decision in respect
    of the findings regarding the relationship.

18. I was invited to consider the one issue  under  paragraph  284(vi),  in
    other words whether "each of the parties intends  to  live  permanently
    with the other as his or her spouse or civil partner and  the  marriage
    or civil partnership is subsisting".

19. Both the appellant and his wife attended court and gave evidence before
    me.  There were some minor  inconsistencies  between  the  evidence  in
    relation to council tax but on the whole they gave consistent evidence.
     There were concerns that the appellant's  wife  had  filled  in  forms
    making an application for personal independence payment  in  which  she
    makes no reference to the appellant at all but her explanation for that
    was that the appellant worked six to seven days a week at the date  she
    filled out the application form in July to September 2014 and that  the
    person she relied on for personal care at that time was her daughter.

20. I find that the appellant has been in effect candid with  his  evidence
    to the effect that he acknowledged that they had separated  temporarily
    during 2015 but both the appellant and his wife confirmed that they had
    maintained contact throughout September 2015 and had reunited and  gave
    consistent evidence that they went out for meals together.  Indeed  the
    appellant's wife produced photographs of themselves  from  last  summer
    which postdated their temporary separation.

21. They are currently living together at  [  ]  in  Margate  and  produced
    documentary evidence in the form of a water bill to confirm  that  that
    was indeed the case.

22. I accept therefore that the appellant is in a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship  and  that  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    specifically paragraph 284(vi), have been fulfilled.

23. On a separate basis, even though not required in view  of  my  findings
    above, I also accept on the basis of  the  medical  evidence  that  the
    appellant's wife would have very significant difficulty  in  relocating
    to Algeria bearing in mind that she is listed for a  kidney  transplant
    and her daughter is the donor.  The treatment in Algeria  is  very  far
    away from the appellant's family home and also extremely expensive.   I
    therefore find that in relation to Appendix FM and EX.1 there would  be
    very significant obstacles to the appellant's returning to Algeria.

24. Even if that were not the case further to Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ
    74  that  not  all  the  considerations  had  been  factored  into  the
    proportionality assessment, and I find on the basis of the wife's  very
    poor health that there are compelling circumstances for the  matter  to
    be considered outside the Immigration Rules.  I find the appellant  has
    engaged a family life and private life and reached  the  threshold  for
    that to be engaged.  At the date it  was  taken  the  decision  was  in
    accordance with the law and necessary for the legitimate  aim,  however
    on a proportionality assessment I have found that the appellant can now
    meet the Immigration Rules in terms of paragraph 284 and that his  wife
    suffers very poor health and is due for a  kidney  transplant  and  she
    places heavy reliance on his assistance and care, for example in  terms
    of personal and intimate care and general  domestic  tasks  around  the
    house.

25. His wife explained to the  court  that  her  daughter  had  been  cited
    liberally in the application form because she could  drive  whilst  the
    appellant could not and it was her daughter  that  would  take  her  to
    hospital on the emergency occasions.  I have considered Section 117  of
    the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in  my  proportionality
    assessment and note that the appellant is a chef and can be financially
    independent and he can speak English.  His family life was formed at  a
    time when he had leave.  Following the authority in Huang v SSHD [2007]
    UKHL 11  and taking full account of  all  considerations  weighing  in
    favour of the refusal, I find the  decision  to  remove  the  appellant
    prejudices the family life of the applicant and his wife  in  a  manner
    sufficiently serious to amount to a breach  of  the  fundamental  right
    protected by article 8.

26. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007) and remake the decision  under  section
    12(2) (b) (ii) of the TCE 2007 allowing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8  grounds.



Signed   Date 21st April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because of the complex nature of the case.


Signed   Date 21st April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
