
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13246/2015
                                                               IA/13242/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th December 2016                |On 17th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  mrs Karthika Selvakumar (first claimant)
                  miss Pavisha Selvakumar (second Claimant)
                                                       Respondents/Claimants


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondents/Claimants:  Ms Jegargjah, Counsel instructed by
                             Amirthan & Suresh, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   The main claimant is a citizen of Sri Lanka with her  daughter  as  the
    second claimant.

2.   The first  claimant  sought  indefinite  leave  to  remain,  which  was
    refused by the Secretary of State in a decision  of  13th  March  2015.
    Her daughter was refused in line with her mother.

3.   The first claimant  sought  to  appeal  against  that  decision,  which
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Maka on 3rd March 2016.

4.   Essentially the application had been refused by the Secretary of  State
    on four major grounds.  The first was that of maintenance.  The  second
    that of accommodation, the third in  relation  to  the  absence  of  an
    English language test and  the  fourth  relying  upon  the  fact  of  a
    previous caution seeking to implement paragraph 322 of the Rules and in
    particular (1C), (3)(iv).

5.   The Judge, in a detailed determination, found in favour  of  the  first
    claimant in relation to  maintenance,  accommodation  and  the  English
    language test.

6.   The Judge was in some difficulty however in considering  the  mandatory
    refusal set out  in  paragraph  332.   The  ground  under  322(1C)  was
    introduced in 2015 and provided as follows:-

         "they have, within the 24 months prior to the  date  on  which  the
         application is decided, been convicted of or  admitted  an  offence
         for which they have received a non-custodial sentence or other  out
         of court disposal that is recorded on their criminal record".

7.   Seemingly in July 2014 the first claimant had had an argument with  her
    husband about her daughter who was refusing to eat.   She  smacked  the
    daughter with a wooden spoon.  Her husband became angry and phoned  the
    police.  She was detained and cautioned.  Nothing further has happened.



8.   The  Judge  expressed  concern  that  a  mandatory  refusal  should  be
    implemented for an offence  as  minor  as  that.   The  judge  was  not
    entirely satisfied as to whether a caution amounted to  "other  out  of
    court disposal" and even if so, whether it was fair and proper  without
    more to evoke a mandatory refusal.

9.   Having found in favour of the appellant in any event on  three  matters
    the judge allowed the appeal to the extent that the decision was not in
    accordance with the law.  Thus the decision falls to be remade.

10.  The Secretary of State mounted a challenge against  the  decision,  not
    so much on the basis of the merits of the decision on which  there  has
    been no challenge, but on  the  basis  that  the  judge  was  in  error
    allowing the appeal to the limited extent that it remained  outstanding
    before the Secretary of State for a fresh decision to be made.  Section
    86 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  was  invoked
    which required the Tribunal to determine any matter raised as a  ground
    of appeal and any matter which Section 85 requires it to consider.  The
    case of Greenwood (No. 2) (para 398 considered) [2015] UKUT 00629 (IAC)
    was considered and cited.  It said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  no
    longer has the power to find a decision not in accordance with the  law
    and remit the matter to the Secretary of State.

11.  Permission was granted on that basis.  Thus the matter came  before  me
    to determine the issue of error.

12.  At  the  hearing  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  for  the  Secretary  of  State
    conceded that the grounds were mis-informed.  It is accepted  that  the
    Judge was entitled to find that the decision was not in accordance with
    the law.  Although it was not accepted that the Judge was  entitled  to
    send the matter back  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  nevertheless  the
    obvious conclusion was that a new decision had  to  be  implemented  in
    order to give effect to the findings of fact by the Judge.

13.  The area that was less satisfactory was the  issue  of  paragraph  322.
    Ms Brocklesby-Weller conceded  that  the  guidelines  as  to  how  that
    section should be implemented were not very clear and certainly and did
    not seem to draw any line as to a level of  seriousness,  which  should
    operate before such mandatory refusal.  Ms Jegargjah,  who  represented
    the claimants, invited me to find that reading the determination  as  a
    whole the judge had allowed that aspect of  the  appeal  also,  finding
    that it was not properly open to the Secretary of State to have applied
    paragraph 322(1C)(1)(b).  Reading paragraph 51 of the  determination  I
    do not find that a definite finding was made, but one where concern was
    expressed as to the need  of  clarity  from  the  Secretary  of  State,
    including an explanation of the basis of its application or  otherwise.
    It was always open to a Judge, either to make a finding of fact  or  to
    indicate that finding of fact was not possible, as in this case.

14.  I would simply concur with the concerns as expressed by the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  as  to  the  proper  and  fair  application  of   that
    requirement.  If any misdemeanour, however  trivial  which  receives  a
    caution, is to found a mandatory ground of refusal, such seems to me to
    be altogether too  draconian  and  too  wide  to  have  been  seriously
    intended by the legislature.  As a matter of common sense it would seem
    that there should  be  a  minimal  level  of  seriousness  above  which
    mandatory refusal follows and below which the  exercise  of  discretion
    should be applied. In this case there was a slapping of  a  child  once
    and without injury in the course of an argument and  nothing  more.  It
    seems to me that if such should result in a mandatory refusal  such  as
    to frustrate any further application for leave, it  serves  to  make  a
    mockery of the legislative process.  It is clearly a matter that is  of
    concern as to whether that should properly apply to the first  claimant
    in this particular case to frustrate  her  application  for  indefinite
    leave when she meets all the other  requirements  of  the  Rules.   The
    request by the Judge for anxious consideration  to  be  given  on  that
    matter seems to me to be entirely justified.

15.  Given the concessions that  have  been  made  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer I do not interfere with the decision of  the  Judge.   To  that
    extent the appeal by the Secretary of State against  that  decision  is
    dismissed.  The decision shall stand, namely that the general  decision
    of the Secretary of State was not in accordance with the law.  To  that
    extent the Claimants' appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]    Date 16 Jan 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

