
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/13622/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2015                      |On 22 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                 ANNA ANTWI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms W Bremang, Counsel instructed by Shan & Co,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We see no need for, and do not make, an order  restricting  publication
    about this appeal.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Ghana against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the decision  of  the
    respondent refusing her  a  residence  card  as  the  wife  of  an  EEA
    national.

 3. The grounds criticise the First-tier Tribunal  for  not  accepting  the
    evidence that the appellant and her alleged husband were life  partners
    and not deciding  if  they  were  in  a  "durable  relationship"  under
    Regulation 8(5) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 4.  The  Notice  of  Immigration  decision  quite  clearly  addresses  the
    contention that the appellant had entered into a valid marriage and the
    contention that she was living as the partner in a durable relationship
    with an EEA national.  There is reference  to  both  Regulation  7  and
    Regulation 8(5) of the Regulations in the immigration decision  and  in
    the refusal letter that supports it.  It is perfectly plain to us  that
    it was the appellant's intention to rely on both contentions in support
    of her claim and this ought to have been  apparent  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge who,  we  have  to  say,  neglected  to  deal  with  the
    contention that the appellant lived in a durable relationship with  her
    alleged partner.

 5. What the judge did do, and we find did satisfactorily, was to rule that
    the appellant had not married the alleged partner.  There was  evidence
    that the appellant and her alleged partner had been through  some  sort
    of ceremony but not one that was valid both in the laws  of  Ghana  and
    the law of the  Netherlands,  the  Netherlands  being  the  country  of
    nationality of the alleged husband.

 6. We do not criticise the First-tier Tribunal for doing what it  did  do.
    The criticism is that it failed to deal with the rest of the appeal and
    so did not determine whether in fact the appellant and partner were  in
    a durable relationship.

 7. It is important to emphasise that the Reasons for Refusal  Letter  made
    it plain not only that it had not been established  that  there  was  a
    durable relationship  and  criticised  the  parties  for  the  lack  of
    evidence supporting the claim, but  it  also  referred  to  an  earlier
    application that had been refused for similar reasons.   The  relevance
    of that in these proceedings is limited but it  shows  that  it  should
    have been very obvious to the appellant and  those  advising  her  when
    they prepared this appeal that she was required to prove that  she  was
    indeed in a durable relationship as she claimed.  The substance as well
    as the form of the relationship was very much in issue and it was dealt
    with inadequately in the First-tier Tribunal's Decision.

 8. We find it significant that, even though this was understood  to  be  a
    point of contention between the parties, very close to the day when the
    appeal was listed for an oral hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the appellant's solicitors wrote to the Tribunal  and  said  that  they
    wanted the hearing vacated because the appellant  had  instructed  them
    that she wanted the appeal to be decided on the papers.

 9. The obvious disadvantage of an appeal on papers is  that  there  is  no
    opportunity for supplementary questions and, much more importantly,  no
    opportunity to test the evidence in the statements  by  way  of  cross-
    examination.  That must reduce the weight that  can  be  given  to  the
    contents  in  the  statement  when  those  contents  are  known  to  be
    contentious.

10. There were statements.  They are before us.  They are not  particularly
    illuminating.  The appellant sets out her case in eight paragraphs.  In
    a sense all the things that need to be mentioned are covered.  There is
    an explanation of how the parties to the relationship met  each  other,
    an explanation of the nature of the relationship and of  the  customary
    marriage celebration but there is little information of real  substance
    or detail.  Very similar points can be made about the statement of  the
    alleged partner.  His statement is a little longer and  does  refer  in
    part to what attracted him to his alleged partner  and  the  time  they
    spent together but we do not have any  detailed  evidence  about  their
    lives together.  We are not told  anything  in  any  detail  about  any
    shared relationships, about things they do  together,  about  how  they
    work out their partnership.  This evidence is superficial  and,  as  we
    say, cannot be tested.

11. There is also supporting evidence from an uncle and someone who, it  is
    said, co-habited with the appellant and  her  alleged  partner.   These
    statements are of very limited value because there is no way of testing
    the identity of the alleged authors.  The  persons  concerned  are  not
    present and cannot be  cross-examined.   The  statements  deserve  only
    minimum weight.

12. There is documentary evidence showing fairly persuasively  that  for  a
    time at least the appellant and her alleged  husband  shared  the  same
    address.  It does  not  prove  that  they  live  together  as  partners
    although it does tend to suggest some continuing relationship and  some
    co-operation between them.  This does  not  particularly  surprise  us.
    If, as has been suggested implicitly by the  Secretary  of  State,  the
    relationship relied upon has been described improperly for  immigration
    purposes it is unsurprising that the appellant relied on the support of
    someone she knew.  It may well be that they shared a house for  a  time
    but we see nothing which leads us to think that their  relationship  is
    really more than friendly. We have not been told very much about it  in
    a way that suggests affection and commitment and all  the  things  that
    make a relationship intimate and durable  within  the  meaning  of  the
    Rules.

13. There is no "killer point" in this case.  We  have  seen  nothing  that
    proves that either party is  completely  unreliable.  Our  task  is  to
    decide on the weight to give to particular strands of evidence  and  to
    the evidence as a whole.

14. We have considered the papers carefully.  We remind ourselves that  the
    standard of proof is the balance  of  probability.  Putting  all  these
    things together, although we recognise that there are some points  that
    are in favour of allowing the appeal, cumulatively the evidence is  not
    persuasive.

15. The appellant has not made out her case and we dismiss  the  appeal  on
    all grounds.

16. We are not sure if article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights
    is a live issue before us.  This is an EEA case where there has been no
    removal decision. There is nothing  before  us  to  suggest  that  this
    decision contravenes the United Kingdom's obligations under  the  Human
    Rights Act.

17. We dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

Notice of Decision

18. The First-tier Tribunal erred. We set aside its decision and substitute
    a decision dismissing the appeal on all grounds.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 July 2015                   |

