
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/13728/2015
                                                IA/13729/2015, IA/13730/2015
                                                IA/13731/2015, IA/13732/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 May 2017                                |On 21 June 2017               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                         mr A A s (first appellant)
                         mrs m a (second appellant)
                          mr H S (third appellant)
                           H S (fourth appellant)
                           H a S (fifth appellant)
         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made FOR 3rd, 4TH and 5th APPELLANTS)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Rana, Counsel instructed by Monk & Turner
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants, all citizen of Pakistan,  bring  their  appeal  against
    the decision made by the respondent on 19 March  2015  to  refuse  them
    leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.  The first and second  appellants
    are husband and wife; the other three  appellants  are  their  children
    aged 12, 8 and 4.  Their appeal had originally been heard by First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) Judge Porter who had dismissed  it,  but.  on  24  March
    2017. I set aside that decision for material error of law,  comprising,
    in essence, a failure to apply the guidance set out  in  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  I recorded at paragraph 8 that this  was  "not  a
    case in which there is any challenge to the judge's finding of fact  as
    regards the family's circumstances in the UK or Pakistan."  The judge's
    findings of fact can be classified into  two  segments.   First,  there
    were findings regarding the first two appellants.  The  judge  did  not
    accept that there would be a total absence of support  from  family  in
    Pakistan or that they could seek to rely on the asylum-related fears of
    the second  appellant  on  return,  given  there  had  been  no  asylum
    application.  Second, there were findings concerning the oldest child -
    that he had basic knowledge  of  Urdu;  that  he  had  not  been  given
    information about Pakistan by his parents; and that he was due to start
    secondary school this year; and that he had  written  a  letter  saying
    that he does not want to leave the UK.

2.   It is not in dispute in this case that the  first  two  appellants  and
    the fifth appellant do not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Possible entitlement under the Rules for the third  and  fourth
    appellant hinges on whether they  meet  the  requirement  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) which apply to children who have  lived  continuously  in
    the UK for at least seven years "and it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect [him] to leave the UK".  All five appellants seek to argue  that
    irrespective of whether any of them can succeed under the  Rules,  they
    should succeed in their  appeals  by  virtue  of  being  able  to  show
    compelling circumstances outside the Rules.  In this regard  the  first
    two appellants also seek to rely specifically on S.117B(6) of the  NIAA
    2002 which provides that the  public  interest  does  not  require  the
    person's removal where they have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship  with  a  qualifying  child  and  "(6)  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK".  It is  common  ground
    in this appeal that the key question is whether  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect the two oldest children to leave the  UK.   It  is  also  common
    ground that if the answer to that question is yes, all five  appellants
    are entitled to succeed since it would not be in the public interest to
    remove them.

3.   In time  for  the  resumed  hearing  the  appellants  submitted  recent
    witness statements from the first two appellants and letters written by
    the third and fourth appellants, as well as school reports relating  to
    the third and fourth appellants and several  documents  addressing  the
    issue of the effect of "moving to another country" any children.

4.   Mr Singh relied on the respondent's reasons for refusal.  He  explained
    that the first two appellants had remained  unlawfully  in  the  UK  as
    overstayers since 2009.  As regards the  likely  circumstances  of  the
    appellants in Pakistan, even if they could not look to  family  members
    there for support, the family had remained  in  the  UK  without  their
    assistance and could be expected to do the same back there.  As regards
    the children, it was clear from MA (Pakistan) that their best interests
    were not a trump card.  None were British citizens and all three  could
    be expected, with the help of  their  parents,  to  adapt  to  life  in
    Pakistan.  There was a viable education system in Pakistan.  There  was
    available medical services.  In considering both  the  children's  best
    interests and the issue of the reasonableness of their removal, it  was
    relevant that none of the children had  reached  the  critical  age  of
    their education when they did O levels or A levels. Both the third  and
    fourth appellants had some basic Urdu.

5.   In his skeleton argument and submissions, Mr  Rana  contended  that  in
    line with the guidance given in MA (Pakistan) there had to  be  "strong
    reasons" for refusing leave to the third and  fourth  appellant  and  a
    very strong expectation that their best interests were to remain in the
    UK with their parents as part of a family unit.  The eldest  child  had
    spent over ten years in the UK.  None of the children were to blame for
    the immigration misconduct of their  parents.   The  third  and  fourth
    appellants had both written letters making clear that  they  wished  to
    remain in the UK, that all their friends were here and that  they  were
    fearful of their lives being disrupted if they had to move to Pakistan.
     Neither had more  than  a  basic  grasp  of  Urdu.   Both  were  doing
    extremely well in school.  Both were firmly rooted in the  UK  and  had
    been brought up in the English way of life.  For the eldest  child,  he
    was soon to start secondary school having spent all of his  life  as  a
    school pupil in the UK.  Having to move to Pakistan would significantly
    impact  on  his  education  and  well-being.   The  background  country
    information in the case papers showed that Karachi, the  parents'  home
    city, was unsafe and insecure with high crime rates and occurrences  of
    kidnapping.  Medical treatment was available but  people  had  to  pay.
    The document dealing with the impact on moving to  another  country  on
    children confirmed that for the children there would be real disruption
    to their lives.

My Assessment

6.   So far as concerns the first two appellants, they have resided  in  the
    UK continuously since July 2007 having  been  granted  visit  visas  on
    several occasions between 1999  and  2004  (in  respect  of  the  first
    appellant) and between April 2004 and October 2004 (in respect  of  the
    second appellant).  Both speak English.  However, they previously lived
    in Pakistan for 29 and 23 years respectively and both travelled back to
    Pakistan more than once after coming to the  UK,  taking  their  oldest
    child with them on two occasions.   It  was  submitted  that  they  are
    financially independent.

7.   The returns to Pakistan are significant because  the  second  appellant
    had submitted that she could not return to Pakistan  due  to  the  fact
    that she married the first appellant  without  the  permission  of  her
    family.  In the case of the second appellant she had stated in previous
    application made in 2011 that she could not return to Pakistan  on  the
    expiry of her visa because she would face very serious threats  to  her
    family's life.  Yet despite being informed at that  time  that  it  was
    open to her to make an asylum application, she had never  done  so.   I
    consider that against this background the respondent was fully entitled
    to reject the appellants' claim that their perceived fear of return  to
    Pakistan would breach Article 3 ECHR.  Further, whilst the COI provided
    by the appellants identifies significant  security  concerns  regarding
    conditions in  Karachi,  it  falls  well  short  of  establishing  that
    conditions in that city would pose any significant difficulties to  the
    appellants  when  living  there.  Neither  the  first  nor  the  second
    appellant have been able to establish that they have no family  members
    in Pakistan, but even if that were the case, they have not  shown  that
    they would be unable to support themselves or have  access  to  schools
    and healthcare.

8.   The first two appellants have remained unlawfully in the UK since  2009
    despite repeatedly being required to leave.  Even when they were in the
    UK  on  visit  visas,  their  immigration  status  was  precarious  and
    accordingly little weight can be attached to  their  own  private  life
    ties  with  the  UK.   Both  of  their  cases  depend  heavily  on  the
    circumstances of their children to which I now turn.

9.   I first of all  consider  the  best  interests  of  the  children.   As
    regards the eldest child, he has resided in the UK for most of his life
    and later this year will have resided continuously for ten years.   The
    fact that he has been in the UK for this period of time must  be  given
    significant weight.  There is no doubt that he sees the UK as his  home
    and that he is doing well at  school  where  has  formed  a  number  of
    friendships.  He identifies as English and has little command of  Urdu.
    On the other hand, he was born in Pakistan and  was  taken  back  there
    twice by his parents prior to 2007.  Whilst he has  little  command  of
    Urdu, he does speak some.  It is not suggested that he has been  raised
    by his parents without a good understanding of Pakistan culture and the
    Muslim religion.  These factors make it more likely that  he  would  be
    able to return and integrate in Pakistan society on  return.   Further,
    although he has developed significant social ties through schooling, he
    has not yet completed secondary education and whenever  that  commences
    he will have to adapt and adjust to a new  environment  in  any  event.
    Return of him and the other four appellants will be as a  family  unit.
    It is reasonable to expect that in Pakistan he and his siblings will be
    able to enter the education system there and indeed there is  also  the
    possibility of schools where the education is in English.  In short,  I
    do not consider that his situation demonstrates that the roots  he  has
    put down and the social, cultural and educational links he  has  formed
    in the UK are  such  that  his  removal  would  be  highly  disruptive.
    Considering the relative  strength  of  the  factors  relating  to  his
    welfare and best interests they can be said on balance to be to  remain
    in the UK, but there are factors  such  as  his  nationality,  cultural
    history  and  trips  back  to  Pakistan  which  indicate  that  he  has
    significant links to that country, and is likely to be able to adapt to
    life there relatively quickly.  Understandably he is fearful of  return
    to Pakistan but it is reasonable to  expect  that  his  fears  will  be
    assuaged once he knows removal will take place and that his family will
    be resettling in Pakistan.  In assessing his best interests I  bear  in
    mind that his most important interest is to remain with his parents and
    siblings as a family unit, wherever they are located.

10.  As regards the fifth appellant, it cannot be said that he  has  reached
    an age here his  interests  have  significant  social  or  cultural  or
    religious dimension separate from his parents and siblings.

11.  As regards the fourth appellant, significant weight must also be  given
    in his case to the fact that he was born in the  UK  in  2009  and  has
    spent more than seven years continuously resident in the  UK.   I  have
    already noted the fact that he has done extremely well  at  school  and
    that he has little command of Urdu.  However, his links with the UK are
    less established than his brother and like his brother  I  consider  it
    reasonable to expect that he will be  able  to  readjust  to  life  and
    society in Pakistan like his other two siblings he has  no  significant
    health difficulties.  Whist  on  balance  his  best  interests  lie  in
    remaining in the  UK,  there  are  significant  links  of  culture  and
    religion with his country of nationality and his best interests too are
    primarily to remain living with his parents and siblings.

12.  Carrying forward my assessment of the relative weight  of  the  factors
    pertaining to best interest  of  the  three  children  into  the  wider
    proportionality assessment, I take into account that there were two  of
    them in respect of whom I have attached significant weight to the  fact
    that they have been in the UK for seven years and that as a result  the
    third and fourth appellants are qualifying children for the purposes of
    s.117B(6).  Linking my assessment of the relative strength  of  factors
    relating to their best interests to my assessment of the  situation  of
    the parents I consider that notwithstanding that the third  and  fourth
    appellants have established significant ties  with  the  UK  there  are
    strong reasons for considering that it would be  reasonable  to  expect
    them to leave the UK.   They  are  not  to  blame  for  their  parents'
    immigration misconduct but their own private life ties  which  (outside
    their own family circle) are principally with school friends) have been
    formed when they have had no lawful basis of stay.  Neither  the  third
    or fourth appellant has reached an age when they are engaged  in  life-
    defining school exams.  Whilst they identify with the  British  way  of
    life,  they  appear  to  have  significant   cultural   and   religious
    connections  with  Pakistan,  which  is  of  course  their  country  of
    nationality.  I do not consider that taking  all  relevant  facts  into
    account it would be unreasonable to expect them to leave the UK.

13.  None of the appellants have shown that they meet  the  requirements  of
    the Rules and the third and fourth appellants in  particular  have  not
    shown they meet the requirements of paragraph 176ADE(1)(iv).

13.  The above assessment also serves as a basis for  considering  that  the
    five appellants have failed to establish compelling circumstances  such
    as to warrant a grant of leave to them outside the Rules.   I  consider
    that the decisions refusing them leave to remain were proportionate.

Notice of Decision

14.  For the  above  reasons  I  conclude  that  the  appeals  of  all  five
    appellants are to be dismissed.

Anonymity directions are made in respect of  the  third,  fourth  and  fifth
appellants only.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  third,  fourth
and fifth appellants are to  be  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  them.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date: 21 June 2017
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
