
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14387/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 August 2016                           |On 18 August 2016                |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr Ebiowei Saweigha
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Saweigha in Person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born on 22  October  1980,  as
    the appellant herein.

2.   The appellant entered this country on 8 October 2004 and on  4  October
    2014 applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  long
    residence - the "ten year Rule".  This application was refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 18 March 2015.

3.   In the decision the respondent sets  out  the  appellant's  immigration
    history.  From his arrival on 8 October 2004 the appellant remained  as
    a student until  31  August  2009.   The  appellant  made  an  in  time
    application for leave to remain as a student but this was refused  with
    a right of appeal on 2 October 2009.

4.   The appellant did not exercise his right of appeal but  on  2  November
    2009 made a fresh application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)
    Student.  This application was refused without a right of appeal.

5.   However, on 17 August 2010 he  made  an  application  to  remain  as  a
    student which was granted on 8 September 2010 and he  was  given  leave
    until 11 March 2012.  On application in March 2012 leave was granted as
    a post-study migrant until 25 July 2014.  However, on 17 July  2014  an
    application for leave  to  remain  as  a  student  was  refused  on  23
    September 2014.

6.   The application, the subject of the appeal  herein,  was  lodged  on  4
    October 2014.  The respondent considered that while the  appellant  had
    had lawful leave to remain until 16 October 2009 when his appeal rights
    were exhausted following a refused application the attempt to vary  his
    leave on 2 November 2009 had been submitted out of time  and  had  been
    subsequently refused.  The respondent added:


         "It  should  be  explained  that  any  time  spent  following   the
         submission of an out of time application awaiting for consideration
         of  the  application  is  not  considered  lawful  even   if   that
         application is subsequently granted.  Therefore  you  were  without
         valid leave from 16 October 2009 until your next grant of leave  to
         remain on 8 September 2010 a period of approximately eleven months.
          As such your period of continuous lawful residence  is  considered
         to have been broken at this point."


7.   The respondent considered the exercise of  discretion  but  found  that
    there were no exceptional reasons why his application of 17 August 2010
    was made more than 28 days out of time.  It was  also  noted  that  the
    application of 4 October 2014 was lodged some  eleven  days  after  the
    appellant's lawful leave ceased and accordingly he  could  not  satisfy
    the requirements of paragraph 276B(v).  An application to remain on the
    basis of private life and residence was considered  and  refused  under
    paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Rules.   The  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    residential requirements of these Rules and it was not considered  that
    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   the   appellant's
    integration into Nigeria.   There  were  no  exceptional  circumstances
    warranting the consideration of a grant of leave to remain outside  the
    Rules.

8.   The appellant appealed the decision and his appeal came before a First-
    tier Judge on 20 January 2016 when he was represented.

9.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant.  He confirmed that he  had
    not appealed the refusal on  2  October  2009  but  had  made  a  fresh
    application on 2 November 2009.  He said  he  had  never  received  the
    refusal that the respondent had issued on 2 November  2009.   The  Home
    Office system showed that on 22 December 2009 the  refusal  letter  had
    been sent to the appellant  with  non-valuable  documents  by  recorded
    delivery.  The appellant had assumed that this was the refusal  notice,
    his passport and every other document.  In fact it turned out that  the
    documents had been retained  on  file.   The  judge  records  that  the
    appellant had not appealed the decision on 23 December 2014 (presumably
    a reference to the decision on 23 September 2014 was intended)  because
    he thought he was already qualified for ten years' long residency.   He
    had intended to complete a PhD until the refusal letter came.

10.  In submissions the Presenting Officer argued  that  the  appellant  had
    not appealed the decision taken on 2 October 2009 and had had no  leave
    from that date until 8 September 2010.  It was  irrelevant  whether  or
    not the appellant had received the December 2009 refusal because he had
    not got leave at that time.  He had not traced the Post  Office  letter
    reference and the Home  Office  had  sent  out  the  decision  but  had
    retained the documents on the file.

11.  It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the key dates were  16
    October 2009 to 8 September 2010.  The judge records what was  said  as
    follows:


         "On 23 September 2014 the appellant was entitled to appeal and  was
         not without leave because of Section 3(C) of  the  Immigration  Act
         1971.  The appellant could appeal the decision of 2  October  2009.
         The quickest way was to make a  fresh  application  on  2  November
         2009, within 28 days of his overstaying.  He is  studying  for  the
         same course.  He made contact with the Home  Office  regarding  his
         missing application.  The decision was  not  served  on  him.   ...
         There was a clear administration error.  There should be discretion
         where more then 28 days have elapsed.  None of the decision  errors
         were down to the appellant."


12.  In  the  alternative  the  appellant  should  succeed  under  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) on the basis that there would be very significant  obstacles
    to his integration into Nigeria.  It was accepted that  he  had  family
    ties in Nigeria and spoke English.

13.  The judge turned to consider the  question  of  the  eleven  month  gap
    which the Secretary of State claimed broke  the  period  of  continuous
    residence.

14.  The judge records in paragraph 24 of his decision  that  the  appellant
    had spoken to the Home Office on 12 April 2010 and had been told that a
    decision had been made on 22 December 2009 and that the  documents  had
    been sent to him.  However, it later appeared that the  documents  were
    still in their custody but they had sent them to the  appellant  on  11
    May 2010.  The judge observed that the respondent's notes  stated  that
    the appellant had never received the package of documents dispatched on
    22 December 2009.

15.  The judge refers to the respondent's notes  stating  that  the  refusal
    letter had been sent to the appellant at his then address  by  recorded
    delivery with non-valuable  documents.   The  valuable  documents  were
    retained  on  the  file  including  his  passport,  visa   letter   and
    educational certificate.  There was a letter from the  Home  Office  to
    the appellant on 19 April 2010 confirming that the  decision  had  been
    made and sent to him by recorded delivery on  22  December  2009.   The
    appellant had not made any enquiries of  Royal  Mail  as  to  the  non-
    delivery of that letter or documents.  The judge states:


         "I have some doubt as to whether it was in fact  sent  because  the
         respondent's own notes now suggest that they were  not  sent  until
         April or May 2010.  After the  appellant  eventually  received  the
         decision letter he made a fresh application for leave on 17  August
         2010 which was granted on 8 September 2010 until 11 March 2012."


16.  The judge's decision continues as follows:


         "25. Paragraph 276B(v) of the Immigration Rules allows a period  of
             overstaying by 28 days or less.  There is also a case that the
             Appellant's leave was  automatically  extended  under  Section
             3(C) of the Immigration Act 1971.  The refusals on 2nd October
             and 22nd December 2009 were on the  grounds  that  the  course
             start date was more than one month after  the  expiry  of  his
             previous leave.  There is  a  conflicting  document  from  the
             college,   City   Banking   College,   suggesting   that   the
             commencement date was 15th October 2009 (in its letter of 26th
             October 2009) or 24th September 2009 (in its undated letter at
             page 50 of the Appellant's bundle).   As  his  previous  leave
             expired on 31st August 2009, a start date  of  24th  September
             2009 would indeed have been within the period of one month and
             that would not have been a proper ground for refusal.


         26.   Taking  all  these  factors  into  account,   including   the
             uncertainty as  to  when  the  Respondent  actually  sent  the
             refusal decision of December 2009 (possibly  as  late  as  May
             2010) and the Appellant's continuing leave  while  he  had  an
             outstanding application or appeal, I am satisfied that he  has
             met  the  ten-year  continuous  residence  requirement   under
             paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities.


         27.  If I had come to a contrary  view  on  that  aspect,  I  would
             consider that, while he  cannot  meet  the  Immigration  Rules
             whether in respect  of  family  or  private  life,  he  should
             succeed under Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules  as
             it would be  disproportionate  to  expect  him  to  return  to
             Nigeria after this length of time."


17.  There was an application  for  permission  to  appeal.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted by a First-tier Judge who found it arguable that the
    judge had failed to explain how the continuity of lawful residence  was
    not broken between the application made in  November  2009  (the  judge
    having referred mistakenly to the October 2009 application in paragraph
    24 of his decision) and the next grant of leave on  8  September  2010.
    The judge appeared to have erred in relying on Section 3C of  the  1971
    Act given that the November 2009 application had  been  made  when  the
    appellant had had no current leave.

18.  In relation to Article 8 the First-tier  Judge  found  that  no  proper
    analysis had been made of the issue.  No reference  had  been  made  to
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act and the  judge  had  failed  to  give  any
    consideration to the public interest.  No  adequate  reasons  had  been
    given for the judge's conclusion.

19.   At  the  hearing  before  me  the   appellant   confirmed   that   his
    representatives were no longer acting for him - they had written to the
    Tribunal coming off the record on  5  August  2016.   I  explained  the
    procedures to the  appellant  and  he  proved  to  have  no  difficulty
    representing himself  and  making  submissions  in  a  very  articulate
    manner.

20.  Mr Avery submitted that  there  was  no  lawful  residence  during  the
    period 2009 - 2010.   Following  the  refusal  of  his  application  in
    October 2009 the appellant did not exercise his right of appeal  during
    the fourteen day period following that decision.  He decided to make  a
    fresh application in November.  The appellant's leave to remain was not
    extended under Section 3C as the judge appeared to have thought.  There
    was no right of  appeal  against  the  second  decision  (had  it  been
    adverse) and the appellant had had no leave until he  was  subsequently
    granted leave to remain in September 2010.   However,  the  period  was
    calculated, there was no continuing leave.

21.  He further submitted that the October 2009 decision had  been  properly
    served on the appellant by recorded delivery.  He had not pursued  with
    the Post Office what had happened.  On any view there was a substantial
    gap.

22.  The appellant said he had completed  his  ten  years'  residence  on  7
    October 2014 while it was said that his application on 4  October  2014
    had been made eleven days after his lawful leave had ceased.  The leave
    to remain had lapsed on 23 September 2014 but  there  was  a  right  of
    appeal against the decision and that  period  would  have  ended  on  7
    October 2014.

23.  Dealing with the issue in 2009, while the appellant had decided not  to
    appeal the October decision, he had made his  application  in  November
    within the 28 day period allowed under the Rules.  It did not break the
    continuity  of  residence.   He  had  been  under  restrictions  as  to
    residence and he had not been permitted to work in the meanwhile and he
    could not afford to pay a lawyer.  He said  he  had  not  received  the
    December 2009 decision  which  had  not  been  sent  to  him.   He  had
    regularly checked his previous address.  The documents had been sent to
    him on 11 May 2010.  The documents had been retained on the file.   The
    eleven month delay was not his fault.  He considered he had had  lawful
    residence throughout.

24.  In response Mr Avery submitted that there  were  two  issues  with  the
    question of the service of the decision of 22 December 2009.  The first
    question was whether it was sent and the second  whether  the  decision
    was accompanied by any documents.  Mr Avery's submission was  that  the
    decision had been  correctly  served  under  the  Regulations  but  the
    documents had been retained on the file.

25.  The appellant could not rely on  the  28  period  under  276B(v)  which
    would not have the effect of extending  leave  to  remain.   It  simply
    provided that any period of overstaying for a period of 28 days or less
    would be disregarded.

26.  In response the appellant said that  the  judge  had  made  very  clear
    findings of fact in relation to his leave to remain.  He  had  not  had
    any criminal activity and the appellant had now resided in the  UK  for
    twelve years and had only spent three weeks  outside  the  UK  in  that
    time.  He said that he had not in fact appealed the decision on Article
    8 grounds.

27.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the judge's determination  if  it
    was materially flawed in law.

28.  It does appear to me that the  answer  to  this  case  is  indeed  very
    simple.  It was highlighted in the submissions made to  the  First-tier
    Judge by the Presenting Officer.  The appellant had  made  an  in  time
    application for further leave to remain on  25  August  2009  and  this
    application had been refused with a right of appeal on 2 October  2009.
    That decision had not been appealed.  The appellant did  not  challenge
    the decision but put in a fresh application  instead  as  it  was  "the
    quickest way".

29.  That appears to me to  be  the  crucial  point  in  this  appeal.   The
    appellant's 3C leave came to  an  end  because  the  decision  was  not
    appealed.  The 28 day period does not  assist  the  appellant  in  this
    case.  The ten year Rule requires continuous lawful residence.  Periods
    of 28 days or less are disregarded but  the  Rule  does  not  have  the
    effect of keeping the appellant's previous lawful residence  by  virtue
    of Section 3C alive and the judge erred in failing to  appreciate  this
    important point. The position would no doubt have  been  different  had
    the application made in November 2009 been granted, but it was not.  It
    was refused in December 2009 being sent by recorded  delivery  and  the
    appellant did not take up the issue of service with  Royal  Mail.  Even
    if, on the most favourable assumption from the point  of  view  of  the
    appellant, he received the decision as late as May 2010  he  only  made
    his application on 17 August 2010, some three  months  later.   On  any
    analysis, as Mr Avery submitted, there was a considerable  gap  in  the
    appellant's period of continuous lawful residence within the meaning of
    the Rules. I should mention that rule 276B(v) as set out in the refusal
    letter  provides  also  "that  any  period   of   overstaying   pending
    determination of an application made within that 28 day period" will be
    disregarded but again that does not assist the appellant because of the
    period following the decision when he had no leave  -  either  December
    2009 or May 2010 -  until September 2010.

30.  In relation to service of the decision  on  the  appellant  it  appears
    that the appellant misunderstood what the Secretary of State was saying
    about the valuable and non-valuable documents.  The judge  records  the
    appellant assuming that the appellant had sent  all  the  documents  in
    December 2009 whereas it is apparent that the passport would have  been
    classed together with the other documents as valuable documents.  These
    were retained by the respondent.  The  decision  was  clearly  sent  by
    recorded delivery and the appellant did not chase this matter  up  with
    Royal  Mail.   The  judge   misconstrued   the   effect   of   276B(v),
    misunderstood the effect of Section  3C  and  went  off  on  a  tangent
    concerning the October  2009  decision  which  the  appellant  did  not
    challenge at the time.  On no view could the appellant  have  satisfied
    the ten year continuous residence requirement.

31.  The judge in paragraph 27 of his decision  considered  the  case  on  a
    hypothetical basis had he reached a contrary view on the application of
    the 10 year rule.  This aspect of the decision  is  criticised  on  the
    basis that no meaningful balancing  act  had  been  undertaken  and  no
    reference to the public  interest  had  been  made.  In  particular  no
    reference was made to S117B as required by S117A of the 2002 Act. S117B
    is as follows:


         117B     Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in
             all cases
         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.
         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-
             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.
         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-
             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.
         (4)  Little weight should be given to-
             (a)  a private life, or
             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.
         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-
             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and
             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."


32.  In relation to Article 8 the  appellant  raised  no  particular  issues
    before me. Although at one stage in  a  relationship  as  stated  in  a
    witness statement dated 26 November 2015 that statement  was  withdrawn
    and replaced by another statement dated 14 January 2016.  The appellant
    refers to having made lifelong friends who were  like  his  family  and
    that he had been placed on restriction and unable to work.   He  raised
    no particular points in relation to Article 8 and in effect the  appeal
    was brought on the long residence point.  All the  judge  was  told  in
    submissions was that the appellant had family ties in Nigeria and spoke
    English but that there would be "obstacles to  him  returning  to  that
    country".

33.  I have already referred to the Secretary of  State's  consideration  of
    the appellant's application  based  on  private  life  under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules.  In order to comply with the Rules  in  this  case
    the appellant would  need  to  show  "very  significant  obstacles"  to
    integration into Nigeria.  It is implicit in what  the  judge  found  -
    that the appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules -  that
    he was not satisfied that there were significant  obstacles  preventing
    the appellant's return.  As the respondent noted in  her  decision  the
    appellant had not raised any exceptional circumstances in the case  and
    the judge identified none.  The judge gave no reason for  his  decision
    that mere length of  residence  would  make  it  "disproportionate"  to
    expect the appellant to return.  No reference is  made  to  the  public
    interest.  During his stay in the United Kingdom the appellant has  had
    leave to remain as a student and would have been aware that the  status
    as a student was not a permanent one.  His position would be precarious
    within the meaning of Section 117B(5) - see the following extract  from
    the judgment of Sales LJ in Rhuppiah v Secretary of State  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 803:


         35.   For each individual grant to the appellant of leave to  enter
             or remain, the period of the grant was specifically limited to
             the comparatively short and clearly delimited period  required
             for the completion of a course of study on each occasion. When
             each grant of  leave  was  made,  the  appellant  specifically
             stated that her intention was to  leave  at  the  end  of  her
             period of study. On the occasion of her  application  in  each
             case, she may have had a hope that her leave might be extended
             when it came to an end if she could find another study course,
             but she had no guarantee that she would be able to do  so  and
             no guarantee that the same Immigration Rules would be in place
             when she made her further application. The hope,  if  she  had
             one, of possibly eventually being in a position to  apply  for
             ILR  was  still  more  remote  and  tenuous.   The   position,
             therefore, in respect of each application for leave  to  enter
             or for an extension of  her  leave  to  remain  was  that  the
             appellant had a stated intention to leave the UK at the end of
             the comparatively short period of leave requested, and only  a
             speculative hope that she  might  be  permitted  to  stay  for
             longer at that point.


         36.  On any proper interpretation of section 117B(5)  this  was  an
             immigration status which  was  precarious,  and  the  FTT  was
             correct so to hold.  This  view  also  accords  with  that  of
             McCloskey J sitting in the Upper Tribunal in Deelah and others
             (section 117B - ambit) [2015] UKUT 00515 (IAC) at para. [33].


34.  The appellant is able to speak good English and this  would  appear  to
    be a neutral factor as explained by the Court of Appeal  in  paragraphs
    59 to 61.  The appellant was  financially  independent  until  recently
    when he was not able to work.  Again, this is a  neutral  point  in  my
    view.  The appellant has not given evidence that he is currently  in  a
    relationship and there is no evidence that  he  is  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child.   In  short,
    the appellant has really given no reasons as to why his  appeal  should
    succeed outside the Rules on the basis of his private life  established
    in this country while he  was  a  student.   The  respondent  found  no
    exceptional circumstances for considering matters in  the  exercise  of
    her discretion outside the Rules.  Whether considered under  the  rules
    or by addressing the questions posed in the Opinion of Lord Bingham  of
    Cornhill in Razgar v Secretary of State [2004] UKHL 27 at paragraph  17
    the answer would be the same. Assuming Article 8 was engaged  and  that
    the appellant had established that removal  would  interfere  with  his
    private life (both perhaps generous  assumptions  in  this  case)  such
    interference would clearly be lawful and necessary. The  appellant  has
    put forward no compelling or other personal circumstances  which  would
    make such interference in any way disproportionate.

35.  The judge erred in law in reaching a contrary decision.

Notice of Decision

    For the reasons I have given, the appeal of the Secretary of  State  is
    allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is reversed.




Anonymity Direction

    The First-tier Judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

    The First-tier Judge stated that he would have made an award if  a  fee
    had been paid.  It is not clear what happened in this case and  in  the
    premises I will not disturb the judge's order on this aspect.





Signed                                  Date 17 August 2016


G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

