
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14697/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 September 2017            |On 26 September 2017            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 KELLIA [B]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N. Mallick, Counsel, instructed by Cleveland Law
                    Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Jamaica, born on [ ] 1991. She  arrived
in the United Kingdom on 4 December 2009 as a visitor,  accompanied  by  her
younger sister and grandmother and was granted leave to enter  until  9  May
2010. An in-time application for leave to remain as  the  dependant  of  her
mother, [EG], was unsuccessful and she became appeal rights exhausted  on  7
July 2011. On 17 November 2011, the Appellant applied for  leave  to  remain
outside the Immigration Rules but this  application  was  refused,  however,
following judicial  review  proceedings,  the  Respondent  reconsidered  her
application and in a decision dated 5 January 2015, upheld her  decision  to
refuse the Appellant leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

2.    The Appellant appealed against  this  decision  and  her  appeal  came
before Judge of the First tier Tribunal Sullivan for hearing on  2  November
2016. By this time the Appellant had given birth to  twins  on  31  December
2015, by [KS], a family friend. The Appellant was in a relationship  with  a
British citizen, [BH] and they planned her  pregnancy.  The  Appellant,  her
partner, her mother and her sister, [N], gave evidence.

3.    In a  decision  promulgated  on  25  November  2016,  the  First  tier
Tribunal Judge dismissed  the  appeal.  An  application  for  permission  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made on the following bases:

    (i)    the Judge erred in failing to give any consideration to  whether
    the Appellant's children are British, in light of  the  fact  that  the
    biological father of the twins was given indefinite leave to  enter  on
    24 December 2008, thus the twins are British by birth. The  Judge  thus
    further erred in failing to consider section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002;

    (ii)   in failing to consider whether it was reasonable to  expect  the
    Appellant's partner to leave the UK, in light of the fact that she is a
    British citizen of Guyanese origin;

    (iii)  the Judge's decision is inadequately reasoned and/or perverse in
    respect of her consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules,  including
    at [22] a misdirection as to the position  of  the  Appellant  and  her
    partner in Jamaica in light of the  documented  difficulties  faced  by
    same sex partners;

    (iv)   in failing to take account of material evidence viz  the  status
    documents of [KS];

    (v)    in failing to make any or  adequate  findings  as  to  the  best
    interests of the Appellant's children.

4.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused by  First  tier
Tribunal Judge Robertson but upon renewal to the Upper Tribunal,  permission
to appeal was granted by UTJ Grubb on 27 July 2017 in the following terms:

    "2.    There appears to be a fundamental error in the Judge's  approach
    to the position of the appellant's two children. The Judge accepted the
    evidence of [KS] who was their father. However, contrary  to  what  the
    Judge states in para 20, his  Jamaican  passport  showed  he  had  been
    granted indefinite leave to enter (p141 of the bundle). As a result, as
    he was living in the UK, he was arguably "settled" and as both children
    were born in the UK and, as a result, British citizens  (s  1(1)(b)  of
    the BNA 1981) not as the Judge found only Jamaican  citizens.  On  that
    basis they were each a "qualifying child" for the purposes of  Part  5A
    of the NIA Act 2002. The Judge  found  they  were  not  (para  24).  In
    particular, therefore, s117B(6) was relevant and was not considered  by
    the Judge. That was an arguable error of law."

    3.     Whilst the remaining Grounds may be less  meritorious,  I  would
    grant leave generally as the s.117B point is central to the case."

5.    The rule 24 response from the Respondent dated 11 August 2017  asserts
inter alia that: "it will be submitted that there was no evidence from  [KS]
in relation to his passport and little evidence in Home  Office  systems  to
verify this claim."

Hearing

6.    At the outset of the hearing Mr Tarlow helpfully  informed  the  Upper
Tribunal that he was not seeking to rely on the rule 24  response  and  that
he accepted that at page 141 of the bundle there is a vignette to show  that
[KS] was granted Indefinite Leave to Enter [ILE] and entered the  UK  on  13
February 2009. Mr Tarlow further provided copies of [KS]'s GCID notes  dated
8 February 2015, which confirmed that he had been granted ILE.

7.    In light of Mr Tarlow's concession I indicated to the parties  that  I
found a material error of law in the decision of  the  First  tier  Tribunal
Judge and that I proposed to re-make the  decision.  Ms  Mallick  sought  to
rely upon further evidence relating to [KS]'s status and  contact  with  his
daughters, thus I gave the parties time to prepare for the  further  hearing
and for Ms Mallick to have [KS]'s  statement  faxed  through  to  the  Upper
Tribunal.

8.    I also heard submissions from the parties in respect of the  remainder
of the grounds of appeal, given that  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal was granted  in  general  terms.  I  also  found  that  First  tier
Tribunal Judge Sullivan further erred:

    8.1.   in applying an incorrect legal test at [22] in  respect  of  her
    finding that the Appellant (and her partner) would not be  at  risk  of
    persecution in Jamaica because she would be discreet about  her  sexual
    orientation, without making any findings on the key issue  of  why  the
    Appellant would be discreet. She thus misapplied the guidance  set  out
    in SW (lesbians - HJ & HT applied) Jamaica CG [2011] UKUT 251 (IAC);

    8.2.   in  finding  that  this  is  not  a  case  in  which  there  are
    sufficiently compelling circumstances to justify a grant of leave under
    Article 8 outside the  Rules,  which  fails  to  take  account  of  the
    evidence of the Appellant's mother, sister and partner and  of  course,
    the fact that the Appellant's twin daughters are British.

9.    For the avoidance of doubt, I do not find that the  challenge  to  the
Judge's findings of discrepancies in the evidence [Ground  3]  is  made  out
nor that the Judge erred in failing to consider whether  it  was  reasonable
for the Appellant's partner to leave the United Kingdom,  in  light  of  her
sustainable  finding  at  [21]  that  whilst  the  Appellant  and  [BH]  had
established family  life  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8,  she  was  not
satisfied that they had cohabited for 2 years, due to discrepancies  in  the
evidence as to when the relationship had started and when  the  parties  had
begun to  live  together  and  thus  the  Appellant  was  ineligible  for  a
consideration of leave under the Immigration Rules as a partner.

10.   It materialised (from the Appellant's evidence) that her  relationship
with [BH] has broken down and that the Appellant  moved  back  in  with  her
mother and sister in February 2017.

11.   Thus the issues to be determined upon reconsideration are:

    11.1.  whether the Appellant meets the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules viz R-LTRPT;

    11.2.  in the alternative, whether there are  compelling  circumstances
    justifying consideration of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules and
    consequently consideration pursuant to section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002
    of whether  it  is  reasonable  for  the  Appellant's  British  citizen
    children to leave the United Kingdom;

    11.3.   whether  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  of  ill-treatment
    amounting to a breach of Article 3 of ECHR on return to Jamaica due  to
    her sexual orientation.

12.   The Appellant attended and gave evidence before  me.  Her  mother  and
sisters  were  not  present,  having  apparently  been   informed   by   the
Appellant's solicitors that there was no need for their  attendance.  I  was
shown texts and video recordings showing that  [KS]  was  caring  for  their
children whilst the Appellant attended the Upper Tribunal and  that  he  was
in regular contact with the children. I was also provided with  an  unsigned
statement from [KS] (confirmed by him by way of a text message).

13.   The Appellant confirmed the contents of her unsigned statement  of  25
October 2016, with two material changes: firstly, that she is now living  at
her mother's house with her children, her mother and one of her sisters  and
secondly, that she is no longer in  a  relationship  or  living  with  [BH],
although [BH] continued to have contact with the children.

14.   In  respect  of  the  relationship  between  the  children  and  their
biological father, [KS], she stated that  he  had  not  attended  the  Upper
Tribunal as they were simply unaware that he  was  required  to  attend  and
that he was looking after the children  because  she  had  to  attend  Lunar
House that morning and only became aware that she should  attend  the  Upper
Tribunal hearing  when  she  telephoned  her  barrister  that  morning.  The
Appellant confirmed that [KS] visits the children at the weekends, at  least
two or three times a month; that he spent the whole week of  their  birthday
last December with them and that he has stayed over  and  spends  time  with
them during the University holidays. The Appellant stated that their  father
changes their  nappies;  takes  them  to  the  park  and  he  took  them  to
McDonald's but they did not like the food because  she  normally  cooks  for
them. The Appellant stated that the twins are learning to  speak;  they  are
swimming on their own and that both she and [KS] take them swimming as  well
as her sister and that they  go  once  a  week  every  week.  The  Appellant
confirmed that they saw their grandmother every day since they  were  living
with her.

15.   In cross-examination, the  Appellant  confirmed  that  the  twins  are
currently 20 months. When asked if there was any reason why they  could  not
go with her to Jamaica, she replied that it would only be her looking  after
them and it is hard just being her. She said there  was  nowhere  she  could
stay in Jamaica. The Appellant acknowledged that she had spent a large  part
of her life in Jamaica, until 2009 and whilst  she  was  familiar  with  the
customs and culture there she did not know how much has  changed  since  she
left.

16.   In response to  questions  from  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  Appellant
stated that she has an aunt living in Jamaica but she is not sure where  she
lives because they do not really speak. The Appellant stated she  previously
lived in Clarendon. She stated that she  has  not  worked  formally  in  the
United Kingdom - she  had  done  some  babysitting  but  never  a  job  with
payslips. The Appellant stated that she has not formed a  relationship  with
anyone else in the United Kingdom and that she  did  not  get  over  someone
that easily.

17.   Mr Tarlow made brief submissions that the Appellant  has  acknowledged
she has spent time  in  Jamaica  and  is  familiar  with  the  culture.  Her
children are still  very  young  and  she  could  relocate  to  Jamaica  and
recreate a life there. She is  a  resourceful  person  and  could  create  a
family environment in Jamaica and there is  no  reason  why  she  could  not
return there.

18.   Ms Mallick submitted that in respect of the  requirements  of  R-LTRPT
of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  only  issue  is  that  of
reasonableness. This had  not  been  considered  in  the  refusal  decisions
because the Appellant's children were born after the second  decision  of  5
January 2015. She submitted that it was not reasonable for the  children  to
be separated from their biological father and  their  mother's  family,  her
sisters and her mother and that there are  strong  emotional  bonds  between
them, particularly given that the Appellant's aunts do  not  have  children.
Ms  Mallick  submitted  that  it  was  clear  that  the  children   have   a
relationship with their father, whose evidence was  that  he  says  he  sees
them at every opportunity he gets when  he  is  not  at  the  University  of
Buckinghamshire. He provides financial support for them every two weeks  and
sees them on a regular basis.

19.   Ms Mallick submitted that, in respect of  the  family  in  the  United
Kingdom, the Appellant has three sisters  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
Appellant's mother is here. All  are  British  except  for  the  Appellant's
younger sister, [MB], who has ILR. Even if  there  were  family  members  in
Jamaica, the twins' father is in the  United  Kingdom  and  it  would  be  a
disproportionate breach of their  family  life  and  in  turn  that  of  the
Appellant. The children's father visits and assists with  the  children  and
this is all the more  important  given  the  breakdown  of  the  Appellant's
relationship with [BH]: the Appellant has been truthful about this  and  has
provided an account of how often their father visits. The best interests  of
the children are to be considered and it  is  in  their  best  interests  to
remain in the United Kingdom as they should  not  be  separated  from  their
extended family.

Findings of fact

20.   I consider first whether the Appellant qualifies for leave  under  the
provisions of R-LTRPT of the Immigration Rules as the parent of children  in
the United Kingdom. This  is  not  a  matter  that  was  considered  by  the
Respondent in the refusal decision of 5 January 2015 in light  of  the  fact
that the Appellant's daughters were not born until 31 December 2015. It  was
also not considered by the First tier  Tribunal  in  light  of  the  Judge's
erroneous understanding of the immigration status  and  nationality  of  the
children. The parties were in agreement that all the provisions of the  Rule
were met except for the provisions of  EX1  (ii)  viz  taking  into  account
their best interests as a primary consideration, it would not be  reasonable
to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.

21.    I  have  carefully  considered  the  evidence  before  me   and   the
submissions of both parties and I  have  concluded  that  it  would  not  be
reasonable to expect the Appellant's children to leave the  United  Kingdom.
My reasons are as follows:

    21.1.  The Appellant is a single parent who is residing with her mother
    and one of her sisters. I accept  her  evidence  that,  as  the  single
    mother of twins now aged 20 months, caring  for  them  on  her  own  is
    challenging and that she is supported by her mother,  sisters  and  the
    twins' biological father. The children  also  remain  in  contact  with
    their mother's former partner, who took on a parental role  during  the
    first year of their life. I bear in mind and  take  into  account  that
    none of those individuals  would  be  returning  to  Jamaica  with  the
    Appellant and her children, given that they are  British  citizens  and
    thus the Appellant would be returning to Jamaica with her  children  on
    her own. I also bear in mind that none of her extended family  continue
    to live in Jamaica apart from an aunt with whom she is not in  contact.
    The Appellant's grandmother has relocated to Grand Cayman to live  with
    her son and the Appellant and her children are  not  eligible  to  join
    them. The Appellant has never been employed apart from informally as  a
    babysitter.

    21.2.  I also take into account  the  Appellant's  sexual  orientation.
    Whilst she has not made a claim for asylum on this basis, it  is  clear
    from the manner in which  her  case  was  put  before  the  First  tier
    Tribunal that she feared that she would be at risk of harm  in  Jamaica
    due to her same sex relationship. Whilst that relationship is no longer
    subsisting, it is reasonable to suppose that, if returned  to  Jamaica,
    the Appellant would at some  stage  in  the  future  form  a  same  sex
    relationship. The CG decision in SW (lesbians  -  HJ  and  HT  applied)
    Jamaica CG [2011] UKUT 251 (IAC)  was  considered  by  the  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge who found that, because the Appellant said she would not
    tell people about her relationship because  they  are  judgmental,  she
    would be discreet and thus not at risk of persecution. The FtTJ failed,
    however, to consider why the Appellant would be  discreet  and  whether
    this would be motivated in part by a fear of harm, as she  had  stated.
    The circumstances have now changed however and the Appellant  would  be
    returning to Jamaica without her former partner.  However,  given  that
    this aspect of the appeal was not the subject of additional argument, I
    simply find that the Appellant's sexual orientation is a factor,  along
    with those set out at 21.1.above,  to  be  considered  in  the  overall
    assessment of whether or not it would be reasonable for her children to
    leave the United Kingdom with her,  bearing  in  mind  the  context  of
    Jamaica, as is set out in the country guidance case.

    21.3.  The most important factor, however, is where the best  interests
    of the Appellant's twin daughters lie. They are  British  citizens  and
    are aged almost 21 months. The Appellant is their primary carer  and  I
    find it would be in their best interests to remain  with  her.  I  have
    considered Mr Tarlow's submission that the children are young enough to
    adapt to life in Jamaica and that the Appellant is  familiar  with  the
    customs and culture having lived there throughout her childhood. I have
    also had regard to the Home Office guidance Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life
    (as a Partner or Parent): 10-Year Routes, August  2015.  I  note  that,
    unlike the 5 year route guidance, which was  updated  in  August  2017,
    this has not been updated. Section 11  makes  provision  for  the  best
    interests of a child and provides inter alia as follows:

          11.2.3. Would it be unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child
          to leave the UK?

          Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
          take a decision in relation to the parent or primary  carer  of  a
          British Citizen child where the effect of that decision  would  be
          to force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age
          of that  child.  This  reflects  the  European  Court  of  Justice
          judgment in Zambrano ...

          Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
          or primary carer to return to a country outside the EU,  the  case
          must always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable
          to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent
          or primary carer.

          In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
          parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the  UK  with
          the child, provided that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
          genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

          It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the
          conduct  of  the  parent  or   primary   carer   gives   rise   to
          considerations of such weight as to  justify  separation,  if  the
          child could otherwise stay  with  another  parent  or  alternative
          primary carer in the UK or in the EU.

          The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

             (   criminality  falling  below  the  thresholds  set  out  in
             paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules;

             (   a very poor immigration history, such as where the  person
             has  repeatedly  and  deliberately  breached  the  Immigration
             Rules."

    21.4.  I find that, whilst  the  Appellant  is  an  overstayer,  having
    arrived as a visitor with her sister and grandmother on 4 December 2009
    at the age of 18 years, she made an in-time application  for  leave  to
    remain as a dependant of her mother and when this was refused, she made
    a further application for leave to remain on the basis of  her  private
    and family life, which lead ultimately to the extant proceedings.  This
    is not, therefore, a case where the Appellant has "gone to  ground"  or
    sought  to  evade  immigration  control  but  has  actively  sought  to
    regularise her stay. In these circumstances, I find that the  Appellant
    does not have a "very poor" immigration history, so as preclude a grant
    of leave on the basis of the fact that she is an overstayer. No  issues
    of criminality arise on the facts of the  case.  Consequently,  I  find
    that  the  effect  of  the  decision  to  remove  the  Appellant  would
    effectively force the Appellant's British citizen children to leave the
    EU, to return to Jamaica with her and this would be unreasonable.

22.   In light of my decision that the Appellant meets the  requirements  of
the Immigration Rules for leave to remain as a parent, there is no  need  to
go on to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling  circumstances  meriting
consideration of the appeal outside the  Immigration  Rules  in  respect  of
Article 8 of ECHR.

Decision

23.   For the reasons set out above, I find that  the  Appellant  meets  the
requirements of R-LTRPT 1.1. (a), (b) and (d) of the Immigration  Rules  and
is thus entitled to the grant of leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as
the parent of British  children.   I  further  find  that,  whilst  this  is
ultimately a matter for the Respondent having  regard  to  D-LTRPT.1.2.  and
GEN  1.11A,  consideration  should  be  given,  upon  receipt  of  requisite
evidence from the Appellant, to  waiving  the  prohibition  on  recourse  to
public funds at least in respect of the first period of leave of 30  months,
given that the Appellant has no income of her own, is  the  sole  carer  for
twins under the age of 2 years, is living with her mother  and  is  entirely
supported by her mother, siblings and in  respect  of  the  children,  their
biological father.

Notice of Decision

24.   The First tier Tribunal Judge made  material  errors  of  law  in  her
decision of 25 November 2016. I substitute a decision allowing the appeal.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman     25 September 2017
