
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH--V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14340/2014
                                                               HU/13699/2015
                                                               HU/13708/2015
                                                               HU/13703/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 November 2016                   |On 14 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between
                                 AKWASI KUSI
                           AFIA ACHEAMPONMAAH KUSI
                            ADJEIOWUSU KOFI KUSI
                                 AKWASI KUSI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams, counsel instructed by The Legal Resource
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Monson, promulgated on 23 May 2016. Permission to appeal was granted by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge on 28 September 2016.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. On 19 September 2003, the first appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom
    with entry clearance as a student.  His  wife,  the  second  appellant,
    entered on 21 July 2004 and the third and fourth appellants entered the
    United Kingdom on 26 January 2006, aged 12 and 6, all as dependants  of
    the first  appellant.  Initially,  the  leave  of  all  appellants  was
    extended, however there were a number of invalid applications made from
    2008 onwards. The appellants were, eventually, granted leave to  remain
    until 15 January 2014; the first appellant as  a  Tier  2  Minister  of
    Religion and the remainder of the family as his dependants.  The  first
    appellant applied for  settlement  on  long  residence  grounds  on  25
    October  2013,  whereas   the   remaining   appellants   made   invalid
    applications for further leave to remain as dependants  on  14  January
    2014, which were rejected on 26 February 2014. On  26  June  2015,  the
    second, third and fourth appellants applied for leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis  of  their  private  lives  in  the  United
    Kingdom and family lives with one another and the first appellant.

 4. The Secretary of State concluded that the  first  appellant  could  not
    meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276B  of  the  Rules  because  he
    remained without leave to enter between 30  April  2009  and  10  March
    2010.  The  family  life  claim  of   all   appellants   was   refused,
    notwithstanding that the fourth appellant, then aged 17, had resided in
    the United Kingdom for more than 7 years. The respondent considered  it
    was not unreasonable to expect the fourth appellant to leave the United
    Kingdom and it was considered to be in his best interests to refuse him
    leave to remain so that he could return to Ghana with his  family.  The
    long residence of the third and  fourth  appellants  was  not  said  to
    amount to exceptional circumstances.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, all four appellants gave
    evidence as did a trustee of the Pillar of Truth Chapel. An issue arose
    during the respondent's submissions as  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    inability to locate all the applications made by  the  first  appellant
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom and thus there  had  been  no
    compliance with directions made by a judge at  an  earlier  hearing  in
    relation to this matter. The judge rejected an argument made on  behalf
    of the first appellant, that is  that  he  had  been  a  victim  of  an
    injustice regarding whether an earlier application dating from 2008 was
    validly rejected. The judge concluded that it was reasonable to  expect
    the fourth appellant to leave the United  Kingdom.  In  relation  to  a
    submission that by the time of the hearing the fourth appellant met the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v), the judge noted that  this  was
    not the case at the date of the application and it remained open to the
    fourth appellant to make such an  application.  Considering  Article  8
    outside the Rules, the judge noted that the  fourth  appellant  was  no
    longer  a  qualifying  child  and  did   not   accept   that   it   was
    disproportionate to require the other appellants  to  return  to  Ghana
    notwithstanding the fourth appellant being in a position  to  meet  the
    requirements of 276ADE(1)(v).

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of  appeal  in  support  of  the  application  argued  that
    particularly strong reasons were required to justify  the  interference
    with the fourth appellant's private  life  and  no  such  reasons  were
    provided by the judge. Furthermore, it was argued that the judge failed
    to take into account  a  number  of  relevant  matters  and  failed  to
    consider whether contemplating the fourth appellant  remaining  in  the
    United Kingdom alone, without his parents and sibling,  amounted  to  a
    breach of Article 8.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that factors set  out  by
    the judge at [72] of his decision were;

         "relevant to the consideration of the (fourth appellant's) position
         outside the Immigration Rules  and  that  they  were  not  properly
         considered. It  is  arguable  that  a  different  outcome  for  the
         Appellant  might  have  affected  the   outcome   for   the   other
         Appellants."

 8. The respondent's  Rule  24  response,  received  on  17  October  2016,
    indicated that the appeal was opposed. It was argued, essentially, that
    the grounds were merely seeking to reargue the appeal.

The hearing

 9. Mr Lams sought to rely on the skeleton argument  he  produced  for  the
    appeal, dated 4 May 2016. The bulk of  his  submissions  concerned  the
    fourth appellant, whose circumstances engaged paragraphs  276ADE(1)(iv)
    and potentially (v). In addition, he argued that the residence  of  the
    fourth appellant, between the ages of 6  and  18  was  a  very  weighty
    factor to be taken into account. He relied on  [36]  of  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705, where it was said that a child's  residence  of  7
    years should be given significant weight, let alone the  12  years  the
    appellant had been in the United Kingdom when the  decision  was  made.
    With regard to the  judge's  findings  on  the  public  interest,  with
    respect to section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, that he was over 18 at  the
    time of the hearing did not cure an unlawful decision. Mr  Lams  argued
    that the respondent did not take into consideration the public interest
    but went on a search for exceptional circumstances, which  was  not  in
    accordance with MA and did not engage with section 117B.  He  submitted
    that the judge did not engage with  these  arguments  and  at  [72]  he
    ignored the proportionality issue by concluding that it  was  realistic
    to contemplate that the fourth appellant could  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on his own with accommodation provided by church members  until
    he finished his education and began working.

10. Mr Lams relied on Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012]
    UKUT 00160 (IAC) and asked me to note that the appellant in  that  case
    was aged 23 and lived with his parents and siblings all his life,  like
    the fourth appellant who was dependent upon his father  who  still  had
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier  2  minister,  extended
    under section 3C of the 1971 Act. At the time of the hearing the fourth
    appellant was just 18 and still a young adult.  Mr Lams submitted  that
    the judge did not consider the proportionality of the fourth  appellant
    having his nuclear family split up and being left on his own in UK. His
    reasoning at [72] was inadequate.  Mr Lams emphasised  that  the  first
    appellant still had leave to remain and other than where there had been
    difficulties with the Tier 2 system, he  had  remained  here  lawfully.
    There was an unresolved issue at the time of the hearing regarding  the
    date  of  application  of  an  earlier  application,  nonetheless,  the
    appellants were granted leave to remain subsequently.

11. Looking at the wider picture including the immigration history  of  the
    appellants, following  MA,  Mr  Lams  emphasised  that  the  appellants
    comprised a family who complied with immigration  control.  He  posited
    that it was unfortunate that an application for  ILR  was  made  rather
    than extensions of leave.  The  second,  third  and  fourth  appellants
    became overstayers because they could not  be  dependent  upon  an  ILR
    application. This was not a case of the appellants  showing  disrespect
    for immigration  control  as  in  MA  and  the  facts  were  completely
    different. Mr Lams asked me to note that positive findings were made by
    the judge regarding the first appellant building up a congregation  and
    that the children were involved in voluntary work [78], however all  of
    these matters should have come into the equation regarding  the  fourth
    appellant.

12. Mr Lams explained that in his view the judge did not grapple  with  the
    respondent's  decision  in  relation  to  the  fourth  appellant  which
    focussed solely on 276ADE(1)(iv) and did not see any relevance to  (v).
    The judge found that the fourth appellant could develop an  alternative
    private life in Ghana, which ignored the weight to be attached  to  the
    private life already built up in the United Kingdom. This was  a  clear
    error.

13. Ms Isherwood argued that the judge made no material error of  law.  She
    submitted that the judge dealt with the invalid applications, was aware
    of the  immigration  history  and  did  not  err  in  noting  that  the
    appellants' leave was precarious. The judge had set  out  parts  of  EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874, however the judge found it would  be
    reasonable for the fourth appellant to go back  to  Ghana.  These  were
    findings it was open to the judge to make.  Ms  Isherwood  also  listed
    various paragraphs in MA before reiterating the  respondent's  position
    that the  grounds  amounted  only  to  disagreement  with  the  judge's
    conclusions,

14. In reply, Mr Lams distinguished the facts of the appellants' case  from
    those of the claimants in MA. In that case,  he  submitted,  the  child
    concerned had never had leave to remain and the leave of the  remainder
    of the family was considerably shorter. The child in MA was aged 8  and
    had no independent social life. He relied on  Azimi-Moayed  and  others
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)[2013]  UKUT  00197(IAC),
    with reference to the importance attached to 7 years from the age of  4
    whereas in this case the length of time was longer from the age  of  6.
    These were points made in the skeleton argument which  was  before  the
    judge. He argued that the judge made a clear  error  to  the  point  of
    irrationality in making the findings he did at [70]. It  mattered  that
    the fourth appellant could continue to reside in the  same  place  with
    the same people. While the judge looked at reasonableness test at [77],
    he erred in not looking at section 117B(6). The original  decision  had
    referred to insurmountable obstacles, which was  not  the  right  test.
    Furthermore, the paragraph 276ADE(v) point was raised in  the  skeleton
    argument.

15. At the end of the hearing, I indicated that I  would  be  reserving  my
    decision  as  to  whether  there  was  an  error  of  law.   In   these
    circumstances, Mr Lams indicated that if I was to find an error, he was
    content for me to remake the decision and determine the matter  on  the
    facts as found by the judge. Ms Isherwood queried whether  I  would  be
    seeking written submissions from the respondent.  I  indicated  that  I
    would not be assisted by any further submissions.

Decision on error of law

16. It is the case, that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved
    the making of a material error of law for the following reasons.

17. The judge's findings in relation the fourth appellant, at [70], include
    the following

         "He has thus established a rich private life in the UK. But he  can
         continue to enjoy a private life in  Ghana  in  all  its  essential
         elements, albeit with a different set of  friends,  church  members
         and fellow students."

18. The aforementioned finding does not  recognise  the  protection  to  be
    accorded to the private life developed in the United  Kingdom  where  a
    child is involved.

19. On the latter point, the Upper Tribunal in PD and others (Article  8  -
    conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT  00108  (IAC)  said  the
    following at [37]

         "Thus there is a long standing recognition that, with  the  passage
         of time, children progressively establish roots  and  integrate  in
         the host country. This is the rationale of the "seven  year  rule."
         As the Secretary of State's guidance states:

             "The longer the child has resided in  the  UK,  the  more  the
             balance will begin to swing in terms of it being  unreasonable
             to expect the child to leave the UK and strong reasons will be
             required  in  order  to  refuse  a  case  with  continuous  UK
             residence of more than seven years." (my emphasis).

20. In the case of the fourth appellant, his residence went well beyond the
    seven-year point in that at the time of the application,  he  had  been
    continuously residing in the United Kingdom for around 11  and  a  half
    years. No "strong reasons" were identified by the  Secretary  of  State
    for refusing the application and nor did the judge  identify  any.  The
    fact that that  paragraph  276ADE(1)(v)  Rules  recognises  that  young
    people aged between 18 and 25 and who have spent at  least  half  their
    lives continuously living in  the  United  Kingdom  would  normally  be
    granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom without any  need  for  a
    reasonableness test, was not a matter which was  adequately  considered
    by the judge, if it was considered at all.

21. The judge's finding that the fourth appellant could start  his  private
    life from scratch in Ghana failed to take into consideration  the  high
    level of his integration in the United  Kingdom,  the  contribution  he
    made to his church and  community  and  the  education  and  linguistic
    drawbacks involved in him returning to Ghana.

22. The judge found that it was in the fourth appellant's best interests to
    return to Ghana, however it is difficult to  see  how  that  conclusion
    could be reached in relation to a young adult in the fourth appellant's
    position who had yet to complete  his  education.  In  considering  the
    reasonableness of the fourth appellant's removal to  Ghana,  the  judge
    did not take into consideration the fact that the first  appellant  was
    not an overstayer owing to the fact that he had extant leave to  remain
    under Tier 2 at the time of his own  application  for  settlement.  The
    Secretary of State made a similar error in the notice of  decision,  in
    that the first appellant was described as having no leave to remain.

23. The judge suggested, at [72] that the fourth appellant could remain  in
    the United Kingdom  alone  and  make  an  application  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(v) of the Rules, stating as follows;

         "It is realistic to contemplate him remaining here on his own as  a
         young adult, being maintained and accommodated  by  church  members
         until he finishes his education and enters the world of work."

24. There was no recognition by the  judge  in  making  the  aforementioned
    finding, as to whether this scenario amounted to a breach of the fourth
    appellant's family life and that of the other appellants.

25. Mr Lams' skeleton argument which was before the judge and  referred  to
    in passing at [50], devoted two  pages  to  arguments  and  authorities
    concerning the consideration of family life as a whole and the position
    of young adults who remain within and dependent upon the  family  unit.
    In view of the fact that the appellant had turned eighteen just  before
    the hearing and continued to live with his parents  and  older  sibling
    and  was  not  financially  independent,  there  ought  to  have   been
    consideration of these facts as well as the authorities cited, both  in
    relation to the judge's decision regarding paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  and
    also in relation to his proportionality findings.

26. Owing to the said errors, the decision  of  the  judge  is  set  aside,
    albeit with his findings of fact preserved.

Remaking of decision

27. This appeal involves the claims of parents and their two sons, now aged
    18 and 24. The family unit has lived in the United Kingdom continuously
    since January 2005. The first and second appellants began  residing  in
    the United  Kingdom  in  2003  and  2004,  respectively.  Guidance  was
    provided by the Upper Tribunal in PD and Others  as  to  how  conjoined
    appeals should be considered and the following was stated:

         "In considering the conjoined Article 8  ECHR  claims  of  multiple
         family members decision-makers should first apply  the  Immigration
         Rules to  each  individual  applicant  and,  if  appropriate,  then
         consider Article 8 outside the Rules. This exercise will  typically
         entail the consideration and determination of all  claims  jointly,
         so as to ensure that all  material  facts  and  considerations  are
         taken into account in each case."

28. Mr Lams did not argue that the first, second and third  appellants  met
    the requirements of the Rules at the time their applications were made.
    It is worth recording that there remains an unresolved issue  regarding
    the timing of an application made on behalf of the  appellants  at  the
    time of the closing of the minister of religion category on 27 November
    2008. The position of the fourth appellant, who was aged  seventeen  at
    the time of his application, is different, in that it turns on  whether
    he is able to demonstrate that it would not be unreasonable  to  expect
    him to leave the United Kingdom notwithstanding the fact  that  he  has
    lived in this country continuously for at least seven years.

29. Before  embarking  further,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the fourth appellant  which  are,  of  course,  a  primary
    consideration, ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4, applied.  There  was
    no dispute as to the facts before the First-tier Tribunal,  however  it
    is useful to rehearse them here.

30. In his signed  witness  statement  dated  29  April  2015,  the  fourth
    appellant recalls how he came to the  United  Kingdom  with  his  older
    brother in January 2005, aged 6. He considers the United Kingdom to  be
    his only home and states that he has very little memory of  Ghana.  The
    fourth appellant describes how he attended primary and secondary school
    in the  United  Kingdom,  achieving  9  GCSE's.  He  refers  to  having
    commenced a 3-year BTEC diploma in Information Technology  at  Richmond
    upon Thames College and indeed there is correspondence  from  the  said
    College which confirms that he is in fact  enrolled  at  and  attending
    that establishment from 2014 onwards. Therefore, he  is  at  least  two
    years into that course.   The fourth  appellant  refers  to  using  his
    technical skills to volunteer at Pillar of Truth Chapel, along with his
    brother. He also attends a local youth centre with his school  friends,
    where he  volunteers  by  helping  children  with  their  homework  and
    reading. The fourth appellant mentions his social life with his  school
    and college friends, many of whom he had known  since  primary  school.
    When contemplating returning to Ghana, the fourth appellant  says  that
    he does not know  "the  language,"  he  fears  as  to  his  ability  to
    integrate and refers to the absence of a family home in Ghana. He  also
    wished to continue with his education in the United Kingdom  and  would
    feel "devastated" to leave his home and friends in the United Kingdom.

31. It is in the best interest of  the  fourth  appellant  to  continue  to
    reside in the United Kingdom so that he can continue his private  life.
    Owing to the fact that he lives with his parents and elder brother  and
    is not independent, financially or otherwise, it is also  in  his  best
    interests that his parents  and  brother  also  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a family unit.

32. In MA, in terms of applying the reasonableness test, the following  was
    said by Elias LJ;

         "Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the  fact  that  a
         child has been here for  seven  years  must  be  given  significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed,  the
         Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of
         Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled "Family  Life  (as  a
         partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in which it is
         expressly stated that once the seven years'  residence  requirement
         is satisfied, there need to be "strong reasons" for refusing  leave
         (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force when the cases
         now subject to appeal were determined, but in my view  they  merely
         confirm what is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature. After
         such a period of time the  child  will  have  put  down  roots  and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK. That may be less so when  the  children  are  very
         young because the focus of their lives will be on  their  families,
         but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
         Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong  expectation
         that the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
         his parents as part of a family unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
         primary consideration in the proportionality assessment"

33. At [46] of MA, Elias J accepts that wider  considerations  need  to  be
    taken into account in addition to the child's best interests, saying:

         "In my judgment, if the court should have regard to the conduct  of
         the applicant and any other matters relevant to the public interest
         when applying the "unduly harsh" concept under section 117C(5),  so
         should it when considering the  question  of  reasonableness  under
         section 117B(6)"

34. Nonetheless, at [49],  the  Court  referred  to  the  powerful  reasons
    required for a qualifying child to face removal.

         "However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK  for  seven
         years  would  need  to  be  given   significant   weight   in   the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary"

35. It is also relevant to recall what was said in headnote (iv) of  Azimi-
    Moayed regarding the greater significance  of  seven  years'  residence
    from the age of four, rather than the first seven  years  of  life.  In
    this instance, the fourth appellant has spent 11 years  in  the  United
    Kingdom from the age of 6 and it follows that the private life which he
    has established during those years will be  even  more  significant  to
    him.

36. Considering  the  wider  picture,  there  is  no  question  of  a  poor
    immigration history in relation to any of the appellants in this  case.
    Indeed, the Secretary of State has never put forward such an  argument.
    All members of the family entered the United Kingdom between  2003  and
    2005, with leave, and have made a  series  of  applications  to  extend
    their stay under the Rules. It is  the  case  that  the  leave  of  the
    appellants lapsed following invalid applications at stages between 2008
    and 2009. This short period of time without leave does  not  amount  to
    any reason at all to justifying the removal of  a  child,  particularly
    when the position was regularised by the grants of leave to  remain  in
    2010 and 2013.

37. The first appellant has had his leave to remain extended under  section
    3C since he applied for settlement in 2014 and accordingly no criticism
    can be made of his  situation.  It  is  the  case  that  the  remaining
    appellants are overstayers. The reason for this  state  of  affairs  is
    owing to an unwise and indeed, invalid, application being made for them
    to be dependent upon the first appellant's application for  settlement.
    By the time those invalid applications were rejected, their  leave  had
    expired and thus their human rights applications were made  at  a  time
    when they had no leave to remain. Having regard  to  the  wider  public
    interest in effective immigration control, the  balance  is  struck  in
    favour of fourth appellant. It would be unreasonable to expect  his  to
    leave the United  Kingdom.  He  therefore  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

38. As recognised by the Court in MA, the result of  the  fourth  appellant
    meeting the requirements of 276ADE(1)(iv)  or  falling  within  section
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  is  that
    the parents  effectively  "piggyback"  on  the  rights  of  the  child.
    However, it is necessary for me to proceed to a  consideration  of  the
    proportionality of the proposed removal of the entire family  owing  to
    the third appellant, who would not benefit, being an adult  sibling  at
    the time of the human rights  applications.  In  addition,  the  fourth
    appellant is now an adult at the time of this hearing; the date of  the
    hearing being the relevant time for considering the impact  of  section
    117B(6). I consider there to be compelling reasons for considering  the
    appeals outside the Rules, which do not make allowance for  the  entire
    family to be granted leave notwithstanding that the minor member of the
    family met the requirements of the Rules.

39. As indicated above, both the third and fourth appellants are now  young
    adults. The circumstances of the fourth appellant are  set  out  above.
    His elder brother is in a similar position apart from the fact that his
    studies have ended prematurely because of his  immigration  status.  He
    also lives at home with his parents, volunteers at church and has built
    up strong friendships and at the same time lost ties with Ghana.

40. The decision in Ghising decried any general proposition that Article  8
    can never be engaged with regard to adult children, stating  that  each
    case should be analysed on its own facts. In this instance, I find that
    there is a close parental relationship between  the  first  and  second
    appellants and the third and fourth  appellants.  This  bond  has  been
    built up over a period of eleven years of living as a  family  unit  in
    the United Kingdom.

41. The adult children are  financially  dependent  on  their  parents  and
    volunteer in the church  led  by  the  first  appellant.  There  is  no
    indication of the third and fourth appellants having commenced any form
    of independent life. There is therefore, a family life to be respected.
    It is not in dispute that the removal of the appellants to Ghana  would
    amount to interference with their private lives in the United  Kingdom,
    in particular. There  were  no  submissions  made  on  the  appellants'
    behalves with regard to the third and fourth stages of the Razgar test.

42. In considering proportionality, I  have  had  regard  to  all  material
    matters including those set out in section 117B of the  2002  Act.  All
    appellants are English speaking and owing to the first appellant's role
    in the church and continued  leave  to  remain,  they  are  financially
    independent as a family unit, albeit the second and  third  and  fourth
    appellants are dependent financially upon the  first  appellant.  These
    factors do not reduce the weight to be attached to the public  interest
    concerns.  It is the case that the private lives of all appellants have
    been established while the stay of the adult appellants was precarious.
    Given what was said at [53] of MA, it would be unfair to  describe  the
    status of the third and fourth appellants in  those  terms  while  they
    were minors. The stay of the family as a whole has been  overwhelmingly
    lawful. A valid application was made for under paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
    in relation  to  the  fourth  appellant  and  as  set  out  above,  the
    requirements of those Rules were met and thus  the  first,  second  and
    fourth appellants ought to be granted leave to remain on that basis. On
    the face of it, at the time of the hearing, the  fourth  appellant  now
    qualifies for leave to be granted under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(v).   The
    appellants enjoy a strong family life with one another.

43. Considering all the public interest concerns,  all  the  evidence,  the
    respondent's decisions and submissions cumulatively, the removal of the
    appellants would not be proportionate. Their residence has been  lawful
    for the vast majority  of  the  time;  there  is  no  question  of  any
    disrespect for the laws of  this  country  and  any  breaks  in  lawful
    residence relating to the first appellant must be viewed in the context
    of a subsequent grant of leave to remain as a minister of religion. The
    appellants are socially  and  culturally  integrated  into  the  United
    Kingdom; the third and  fourth  appellants  have  attended  school  and
    college here and the third appellant has now spent around half  of  his
    life in the United Kingdom.   The  fourth  appellant  was  continuously
    resident for over 7 years and it at the time of the  application,  when
    he was still a minor, it was unreasonable to expect him  to  return  to
    Ghana. The removal of the appellants would cause significant disruption
    to the private lives of all of the appellants, particularly the  fourth
    appellant given his young age when he arrived in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The fourth appellant is now eligible to apply for leave to remain under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) where the question of reasonableness of  return
    does not arise. It is no answer to the circumstances of the family,  to
    suggest that the fourth appellant should seek to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom alone in order to take up the opportunity  of  making  such  an
    application.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision to be re-made, while  preserving  all  findings  of
fact.

I substitute a decision allowing the appeal on the  basis  that  the  fourth
appellant met the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  the
Secretary of State's decision breached the appellants' Article 8 rights.

No application for anonymity was made and I saw no reason  to  make  such  a
direction.



Notice of Decision

The appeal of the fourth appellant is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

The appeals of all appellants are allowed on human rights grounds.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to a whole  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable for the  following  reason.
The evidence submitted with the applications was sufficient for the  appeals
to be allowed.


Signed                                  Date:

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
