
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14329/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 June 2016                               |On 1 July 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             miss Bhupinder kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Whitwell - Home office presenting officer
For the Claimant :  Mr A Arayn ( legal representative Farani Javid &
Taylor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State in respect  of  a  decision
    and reasons of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Walker) who in a decision
    promulgated on 7 December 2015 allowed the  appeal  against  a  refusal
    under the points-based system,  to  the  extent  that  the  matter  was
    remitted to the Secretary of State for reconsideration.

2.   In this decision I shall refer to the  parties  as  the  "Secretary  of
    State" who is the appellant in these proceedings and to  Miss  Kaur  as
    "the claimant".

3.   In a decision and reasons the FtT set out the reasons  for  refusal  of
    the claimant's application, namely that she did not have  a  valid  CAS
    assigned.  The FtT heard evidence from the claimant which it  found  to
    be credible and findings of fact were made accordingly.   There  is  no
    dispute as to the sequence of events as follows.  The claimant prepared
    for her application in September 2014 and received an offer to study at
    the London College of Business.  She was required to  take  an  English
    language test  following  a  change  in  the  Rules.   The  first  test
    available was on 18 October 2015 and her leave expired  on  14  October
    2015.  She submitted her leave application without an  English language
    test or a valid CAS  and  intended  to  forward  the  documents  later.
    Having been notified that she had passed the test she was informed that
    the London College of Business had been suspended  from  the  sponsor's
    list.  She did not apply to any other college because she had submitted
    her original documents with her application.

4.   The FtT concluded that the claimant had suffered  unfairness  and  that
    it would accordingly be necessary for the Secretary of State to provide
    her with the 60 day period in which to find a fresh sponsor and make  a
    fresh application.  Reliance was placed  on  Patel  [2011]  UKUT  00211
    (IAC).

Grounds of Application for Permission

5.   The Secretary of State contended that the FtT's approach to  the  issue
    of common law unfairness was flawed and amounted to an error of law.

Ground 1

6.   In relying on Patel the FtT failed  to  take  into  account  EK  (Ivory
    Coast) v the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ
    1517 in which it was made plain that the principle could not extend  to
    cases in which the SSHD bore no direct or  knowing  responsibility  for
    the alleged unfairness.  Further the FtT  failed  to  provide  adequate
    explanation as to how the length of time taken to  obtain  the  English
    language test was the "fault" of the SSHD and/or how  this  could  have
    any bearing on common law fairness.  It was further  contended for  the
    same reasons  that  the  FtT  failed  to  explain  how  the  claimant's
    relationship with her former college had any bearing on  the  Secretary
    of State's duty.

Ground 2

7.   The claimant never requested documents from the Home  Office  in  order
    to apply for a college course elsewhere.  In reality the claimant  very
    likely did have a 60 day period in which to find a new college  as  the
    Secretary of State made the refusal decision on 10 March 2015  and  the
    claimant became aware of the college's suspension in October 2014.

Permission to Appeal

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever  on
    9 May 2016.  Judge Lever concluded


         "It was arguably an error of law for the  judge  to  have  remitted
         this case back to the respondent for the reasons given as  much  of
         the features do not necessarily reflect blame on the  part  of  the
         respondent and the Immigration Rules represent a clear  structure".



Error of Law Hearing

Submissions

9.   Mr Whitwell  expanded  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  produced  the
    judgments of EK (Ivory Coast) and Marghia (procedural fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT 00366 (IAC).  There had been no consideration by the  FtT  of  how
    the Secretary of State could be seen  to  have  been  involved  in  any
    unfairness.  The facts found by the FtT established that  the  claimant
    had been affected  by  matters  outside  of  her  control,  namely  the
    decision to take the English language test and the fact  that  she  may
    have been misled by her college.

10.  Mr Whitwell cited Marghia which referred to procedural  unfairness  and
    emphasised that ordinary unfairness had no place in this consideration.
     There was no procedural unfairness identified by the FtT on  the  part
    of the Secretary of State.

11.  As to the 60 day period, Mr Whitwell submitted that there was no  clear
    evidence on the dates but subject to any further  information  on  this
    point it was clear that the claimant had had 60 days and had not  taken
    the opportunity to make any further application.

12.  Mr Arayn relied on Dasgupta (error of law - proportionality - correct
    approach) [2016] UKUT 0028  (IAC)  and  Miah  (interviewer's  comments:
    disclosure: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00515 (IAC).  He argued that the  FtT
    had properly made findings of fact and given reasons why a  common  law
    duty of care arose.  The sequence of events was  unchallenged  and  the
    fact of having to take a further English language test resulted from  a
    change of  Rules.   It  was  accepted  that  there  was  no  procedural
    unfairness but the claimant relied on  the  principles  in  Thakur  and
    Patel where the Tribunal considered circumstances in which a common law
    duty of fairness arose.  There was no material error of law on the part
    of the FtT.

13.  Mr Whitwell briefly responded that there  had  been  no  issue  of  the
    Statement of Changes (HC 1025) raised  in  the  decision  and  reasons.
    Dasgupta was not relevant.  There  was  no  perversity  challenge,  the
    error of law was a misdirection of law.

Decision

14.  I was satisfied that the Secretary of State had made out her case  that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by relying on the  principles  set
    out in Patel (cited above) without further reference to  the  Court  of
    Appeal review of the same in EK (Ivory Coast) v SSHD  [2014]  in  which
    consideration was given to Patel, Thakur and the general principles  in
    Doody.  Lord Justice Briggs stated

         "the necessary starting point is that a clear distinction must  be
         made between the unfairness in outcome, viewed from the  standpoint
         of the applicant, to which a particular set  of  circumstances  may
         give rise, and the separate question of whether  the  Secretary  of
         State's participation in those circumstances involved a  breach  of
         her common law duty to act fairly".


     He further stated at [58]


         "First, the courts should in  my  view  be  slow  to  rigidify  the
         essential fact-sensitive flexibility of the duty to act fairly,  as
         summarised in the Doody case, in the passage  quoted  by  Sales  LJ
         above.  The unpredictable variety of factual  situations  in  which
         the duty may arise is such as to  make  it  dangerous  to  seek  to
         identify any more rigid principle as applicable to  any  particular
         class of situation.  Secondly like Sales  LJ,  I  consider  that  a
         fairness principle which would lead to success for the applicant in
         the  present  case  would  make  too  great  an  inroad  into   the
         simplicity, predictability and relative speed of the  PBS  process,
         contrary to the thrust of the  PBS  regime  as  laid  down  by  the
         Immigration Rules, particularly in a situation such as the present,
         where the Secretary of State bears no responsibility at all for the
         mistake, or the lack of communication  of  it,  which  led  to  the
         unfair outcome for the applicant. "

15.  In my view the FtT erred by focusing on the outcome  for  the  claimant
    which  resulted  in  unfairness  in  the  general  sense,  rather  than
    consideration of the role and responsibility of the Secretary of  State
    in respect of any of the alleged fairness.  It is clear from the  facts
    found that there was no responsibility or fault  on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State and that the claimant was in the position  that  she
    was because of circumstances with which the Secretary of State  had  no
    involvement.

16.  Accordingly I set aside the decision and reasons. I then heard  further
    submissions from both representatives which are set out in  the  Record
    of Proceedings.  I have  taken  these  into  account  in  remaking  the
    decision.

17.  The claimant did not submit a valid CAS with her application for  which
    she had an explanation to the extent that she did not  have  a  current
    English language certificate.  Once  she  had  obtained  the  same  the
    college to which she had applied was suspended  as  a  sponsor.   These
    factors were to an extent beyond her control although  in  reality  she
    had a choice as to the timing  and  location  of  where  she  took  the
    English language test and the circumstances were such  that  she  could
    have sought to apply to a new college notwithstanding that the original
    documents had been submitted with her  application.   I  find  that  no
    procedural unfairness arose as a result of any action or fault  on  the
    part of the Secretary of State and that the facts  establish  that  the
    claimant would in reality have had 60 days in which  to  make  a  fresh
    application from the time she knew that the college had been  suspended
    until the date of refusal in March 2015.

Notice of Decision

18.  There is a material error in law by the First -tier  Tribunal  and  the
    decision is set aside. I remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    by dismissing the appeal on immigration grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date 1.7.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




GA Black

Signed                                  Date 1.7.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
