
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14651/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 January 2015                            |On 9 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES

                                   Between

                                 ram prakash
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Read, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 5  January  1965.   He  was
    issued with a visit visa on 19 April 2002 and he used that to enter the
    UK on 1 May 2002, using his  own  Indian  passport.   Any  leave  as  a
    visitor that was granted to him would have expired  no  later  than  19
    October 2002 and thereafter he was an overstayer.   The  evidence  does
    not suggest he returned to India.  The Appellant's claim  was  that  he
    remained as an overstayer, working illegally in the  UK  until  he  was
    arrested on 3 November 2013.

 2. On 11 November  2013  he  made  an  application  for  ILR  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  The basis for that claim was said to be the private
    life that he had created or enjoyed as an overstayer.  I was instructed
    to look at the witness statement that he filed in support of that claim
    which says:

         "I started working with a number of different builders  and  worked
         as a labourer.  I am now self-employed and  I  have  never  been  a
         burden on the state.  I have been within this trade since 2002.   I
         assert I have a successful business which I run.  I assert  that  I
         pay my tax every year and I assert I am a productive and  committed
         member of society.  I assert it has been very difficult to name all
         the builders I have worked for, however I have worked  on  projects
         throughout London.  I am heavily involved with the local  community
         and am a significant life member with the local Gurdwara and  Hindu
         temple in the Tooting and Croydon area.  I am heavily  involved  in
         the work of the Gurdwara and do something there on a regular basis.
          I have provided donations to the Gurdwara and I am a committed and
         loyal member.  I assert that I have established a life and it would
         be disproportionate for me to be uprooted from my  life  here.   It
         would destroy my life and my business.  I assert I have nothing  to
         return to in India.  I have lost all my ties there.  I assert  that
         my case is exceptional, taking into account the risk that I have on
         my return and although I  did  not  claim  asylum  this  should  be
         considered as the exceptional aspect of case and  support  my  case
         for consideration under Article 8."

    That last sentence appears to be  a  reference  to  a  claim  that  the
    Appellant travelled to the UK after divorcing his wife, which  in  turn
    followed his entry into a marriage that was not accepted by his  wife's
    family.

 3. The Appellant's private life appeal came before Judge  Nicholls  on  16
    October 2014 and it was dismissed  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  22
    October.

 4. The Appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal,  relying  on  three
    grounds.   Designated  Judge  Zucker  on  11  December   2014   granted
    permission in relation to what appears to be  both  Grounds  2  and  3,
    given the way the Appellant's case has been  advanced  this  afternoon.
    The grant makes no reference to Ground 1.  So the matter  comes  before
    me.

 5. Put simply, there is absolutely nothing in Ground 1.  It is  true  that
    the determination of Judge Nicholls starts with the  first  sentence  -
    "The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan" which is obviously  an  error,
    and indeed a regrettable error.  I am satisfied,  and  indeed  Mr  Read
    does not seek to persuade me otherwise, that this is however  simply  a
    typographical  error.  The  text  of  the  determination  that  follows
    paragraph 1 makes  repeated  reference  to  India  as  the  Appellant's
    country of origin and no further reference to Pakistan is made at  all.
    It is quite clear that the typographical error in paragraph  1  had  no
    operative bearing on the judge's mind at all and as a result  Ground  1
    is wholly misconceived.

 6. Ironically the draughtsman of the grounds made  his  own  typographical
    error in numbering Grounds 2 and 3 both as Ground 2.  Mr  Read  accepts
    they can, and should, be advanced together and  that  they  in  essence
    raise only one criticism of the judge's approach to paragraph 276ADE of
    the Immigration Rules.

 7. The operative version of paragraph 276ADE is that which  was  in  force
    prior to July 2014 as the judge noted and bore in mind - see  paragraph
    17 of the decision.  The requirements to be met  by  an  applicant  for
    leave to remain on  the  grounds  of  private  life  in  the  UK  under
    paragraph 276ADE were that at the  date  of  the  application,  amongst
    other things, the applicant at (vi) had to  show  he  was  aged  18  or
    above, had lived continuously in the UK for less than twenty years  but
    had no ties including social, cultural or family with  the  country  to
    which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.  Notwithstanding
    Mr Read's valiant attempts to criticise the judge's  approach  to  this
    provision, there is no merit in his criticisms.  This is a man who came
    to the UK as an adult, had extensive family in India and who appears on
    his own case to have maintained his religious ties to the Gurdwara  and
    the Sikh temple in the area in which he has settled in  London.   There
    was no basis upon which the judge could properly have found that he had
    lost all ties to India.

 8. In paragraph 20 of the decision the  judge  notes  that  there  are  no
    categories within the Rules on which the Appellant could rely for leave
    to remain and that he had admitted under  cross-examination  to  having
    three brothers and four sisters,  all  living  in  India,  although  he
    claimed that his  mother  had  died  in  March  2014  which  the  judge
    accepted.  He also maintained that he did not keep in  touch  with  his
    siblings.   Whether  he  had  done  so,  or  not,  was  really  of   no
    consequence; they were there, they were available for him  to  contact,
    he had not fallen out with any of them, and he did not suggest  to  any
    degree that he was unable to renew his contact with them.   That  is  a
    long way short of the requirement in paragraph 276ADE(vi) of having  no
    ties to the country of origin.  I bear in mind the decision in Ogundimu
    but the facts of this case are not on all fours with the facts of that.



 9. In summary therefore this is a man who gained entry  to  the  UK  as  a
    visitor, kept his  head  down,  and  successfully  avoided  immigration
    controls, working illegally throughout. He relied  on  the  charity  of
    those he  encountered  in  the  local  Sikh  community  and  Gurdawara,
    presumably both to support himself when he did not have  work,  and  to
    find the work which he did pursue as a builder.   There  is  absolutely
    nothing in this history that would engage the approach to private  life
    Article 8 appeals set out by the Supreme Court in Patel and so there is
    no basis on which I should interfere  with  Judge  Nicholls'  decision.
    There is simply no material error of law disclosed on the decision, and
    that being so the decision of the Tribunal is confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
