
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/14008/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th October 2014                            |On 20th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            Ekaterina Gorlacheva
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss V Sharkey of Medivisas

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a determination of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Camp promulgated on 10th February 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I will refer to her as the claimant.

 3. The claimant is a Russian citizen born 24th September 1983 who on  17th
    February 2012 applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside
    the Immigration Rules, relying upon Article  8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 4. The application was refused on 15th April 2013, the  Respondent  having
    considered Article 8 under Appendix FM, and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. The Respondent did not accept that the family life  that  the  claimant
    claimed to have with her mother, brother and stepfather in  the  United
    Kingdom constituted family life under Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, and therefore considered the application only with reference  to
    private life, under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    application was refused with reference to paragraph 276ADE(iii) because
    the Appellant had not lived continuously in the United Kingdom  for  at
    least twenty years.

 6. The Secretary of State did not accept that the claimant  satisfied  any
    of the other requirements within paragraph  276ADE,  not  accepting  in
    relation to sub-paragraph (vi) that the claimant did not have any  ties
    to Russia.

 7. The claimant's appeal was heard by Judge Camp on 28th January 2014  who
    allowed the appeal with reference to paragraph 276ADE(vi) finding  that
    the Appellant did not have any ties to Russia.

 8. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, contending in brief summary that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for his finding that the claimant had no  ties
    to Russia and that he had misinterpreted the test to be applied on this
    issue, and misdirected himself in law, and that he  had  erred  in  his
    approach to consideration of Article 8 outside the rules.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted and following a hearing before  me  on
    20th May 2014 I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    concluding that Judge Camp had not followed the principles and guidance
    set out in Ogundimu Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC).

10. The hearing was adjourned for  further  evidence  to  be  given.   Full
    details of the application for  permission  to  appeal,  the  grant  of
    permission, and my reasons for finding an error of law are set  out  in
    my written decision dated 30th May 2014, which was promulgated  on  5th
    June 2014.

11. The next hearing was on 20th July 2014,  the  purpose  of  the  hearing
    being to remake the decision.  However Miss Sharkey raised a new issue,
    in relation to Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402, and wished to  argue  that
    Judge Camp had in fact erred in considering paragraph  276ADE,  as  the
    application for leave to remain had been made prior to the introduction
    of paragraph 276ADE into the Immigration Rules on 9th July 2012.   Miss
    Sharkey had given no prior notice that this point was to be raised, but
    explained that it had been raised because  Edgehill  had  been  decided
    after the decision of the First-tier Tribunal had been promulgated.

12. Mr Smart on behalf of the Secretary of State  did  not  object  to  the
    point being raised, but requested an adjournment to prepare a response,
    as the Secretary of State's position was that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had been correct to consider paragraph 276ADE.

13. In the interests of fairness I adjourned the hearing and directed  that
    both parties file skeleton arguments as to the application of paragraph
    276ADE in the light of Edgehill.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing - 14th October 2014

Preliminary Issues

14. I ascertained that I had  all  documentation  from  which  the  parties
    intended  to  rely.   I  had  the  Respondent's  bundle  of   documents
    containing Annexes A-C, two bundles served on behalf of  the  claimant,
    one comprising 40 pages, and  the  other  17  pages.   I  had  received
    skeleton arguments from both parties.  Mr Smart produced  Rafiq  [2014]
    EWHC 1654 (Admin).

15. I proposed that I hear evidence, and at the conclusion of oral evidence
    I would hear oral submissions which would  include  submissions  as  to
    whether the appeal should  be  decided  under  Article  8,  or  whether
    paragraph  276ADE  should  be  considered  notwithstanding   that   the
    application for leave to remain was made in February 2012.

16. I was told that the claimant would be giving evidence together with her
    mother, stepfather, and brother.  No interpreter  was  required.   Both
    representatives indicated that they were ready to proceed and there was
    no application for an adjournment.

Oral Evidence

17. The claimant adopted her witness statement dated 26th  June  2014,  her
    mother Alla Lawlor, her brother Vladim Gorlachev,  and  her  stepfather
    Steve Lawlor all gave evidence and adopted their witness statements  of
    26th June 2014.

18. The claimant and the witnesses were questioned by both representatives,
    and I  have  recorded  all  questions  and  answers  in  my  Record  of
    Proceedings.  It is not necessary to repeat the evidence here.

The Respondent's Submissions

19. At the commencement of his submissions Mr Smart submitted Nnyanzi v The
    UK - 21878/06 [2008] ECHR 282.  The hearing was  briefly  adjourned  to
    allow Miss Sharkey time to consider  this  authority  and  the  hearing
    resumed when she indicated that she was in a position to proceed.

20. Mr Smart submitted that both the Secretary of State and the  First-tier
    Tribunal were correct to consider paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules despite the application for leave to remain having been  made  in
    February 2012, and relied upon his skeleton argument on this point.  Mr
    Smart also relied upon paragraph 12 of Rafiq.

21. I was asked to  dismiss  the  appeal.   Mr  Smart  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's evidence that she had no family or friends in Russia should
    not be accepted as this was unlikely.  I was asked  to  note  that  her
    brother, who had attended the same school  in  Russia,  had  stated  in
    evidence that he had returned to Russia in the summer  of  2014  for  a
    school reunion.

22. I was asked to accept that the claimant speaks  Russian,  that  she  is
    educated to degree level in Russia, and  that  she  has  qualifications
    obtained from  her  studies  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  she  would
    therefore be able to find employment in Russia.  Any interference  with
    the  Appellant's  private  life  in  the  United   Kingdom   would   be
    proportionate, and Mr Smart relied upon Nnyanzi on this issue.

The Claimant's Submissions

23. Miss Sharkey relied upon  her  skeleton  argument  and  submitted  that
    Edgehill indicated that the appeal should  be  determined  in  reliance
    upon Article 8 only, without reference  to  paragraph  276ADE.   I  was
    specifically referred to paragraphs 32 and 33 of Edgehill.

24. I was asked to find the claimant and  her  witnesses  credible  and  to
    accept that the claimant had no family or friends  in  Russia.   I  was
    asked to accept her evidence that she had encountered  difficulties  by
    being bullied both at school and university.  The  claimant  had  three
    close friends when she was in Russia, but those friends had  now  moved
    away and were living in different countries, and her friend  living  in
    Germany had attended a previous hearing, and had submitted a  statement
    in support of the claimant.

25. Miss Sharkey submitted that the claimant had  explained  that  although
    she had a degree in Russia, that was obtained ten years  ago,  and  she
    had no employment experience in Russia, and that Russia did  not  adopt
    international accounting standards and therefore the claimant would not
    be able to find employment in that field.

26. I was asked to accept that the claimant had established a  family  life
    in the United Kingdom as well as a private life and  that  her  removal
    would be disproportionate.  Miss Sharkey pointed out that the  claimant
    has always been in the United Kingdom lawfully,  and  has  studied  and
    worked when she had permission to do so.

27. If paragraph 276ADE was to be considered, I was asked  to  accept  that
    the Appellant satisfied paragraph 276ADE(vi) as  she  had  no  ties  to
    Russia,  and  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   her
    reintegration into that country.

Findings of Fact

28. The claimant's mother and brother came to the United  Kingdom  in  2003
    following the mother's marriage to a British national, Mr Lawlor.   The
    claimant remained in Russia, living with her paternal  grandmother,  in
    order to finish her studies at university.

29. Following the settlement of  her  mother  and  brother  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the Appellant was granted visas  enabling  her  to  visit  the
    United Kingdom between July 2003 and July 2005.

30. The Appellant was granted a student visa on 28th July 2005, and arrived
    in this country on 15th August 2005.  She was 21 years of age.  She had
    completed her studies in Russia and commenced  studies  in  the  United
    Kingdom, initially for an ACCA qualification.

31. Since arriving in the United Kingdom the claimant has  lived  with  her
    mother, brother and stepfather.  Her mother and brother are now British
    citizens.  The claimant was financially supported by her family  whilst
    she studied here, and has been  financially  supported  by  them  since
    ceasing employment in 2012.

32. The claimant has returned to Russia twice since 2005,  the  first  time
    being for approximately a week when her grandmother was taken ill,  and
    the second time for approximately nine days following her grandmother's
    death.

33. The claimant's paternal grandmother owned her own home, and neither the
    claimant  nor  her  family  know  what  happened  to  that  home.   The
    claimant's paternal grandmother had a son, the claimant's father, and a
    daughter who had a son.  The claimant and her mother and  brother  have
    had no contact with relatives in Russia and  have  no  relatives  other
    than those just mentioned.  The claimant's mother  is  originally  from
    Ukraine, and her family members reside there.

34. The claimant has now achieved her ACCA qualification,  and  an  MBA  in
    financial services.  Following her studies in this country the claimant
    was granted leave to remain as a Tier 1 post-study worker,  and  worked
    with Coventry Building Society from August 2010, until 2012.

35. The claimant has always had leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  She
    has not breached either immigration law or criminal law.

36. This is not an appeal where there are any relevant medical issues,  and
    the claimant is not in a relationship and does not have children.

37. I am satisfied that the claimant does not have contact with any  family
    member or friends in Russia.

My Conclusions and Reasons

38. In my view Edgehill is authority for finding that this appeal should be
    determined with regard to Article 8, outside the Immigration Rules, and
    not with reference to paragraph 276ADE, for the following reasons.

39. The implementation of the changes to the Immigration Rules is  referred
    to in paragraph 7 of Edgehill which refers to the  following  paragraph
    contained in the Statement of Changes in  Immigration  Rules  (HC  395)
    under the heading of "implementation";

         "However, if an application for entry clearance, leave to remain or
         indefinite leave to remain has been made before 9th July  2012  and
         the application has  not  been  decided,  it  will  be  decided  in
         accordance with the rules in force on 8th July 2012."

40. The question to be decided in Edgehill was;

         "Is it lawful to reject an Article 8 application  made  before  9th
         July 2012 in reliance upon the applicant's failure  to  achieve  20
         years' residence, as specified in the new rules?"

41. I set out below paragraphs 32 and 33 of Edgehill;

         "32. The Immigration Rules  need  to  be  understood  not  only  be
             specialist immigration counsel, but also  by  ordinary  people
             who read the rules and try to abide by them.  I do  not  think
             that Mr Bourne's interpretation of the transitional provisions
             accords with the  interpretation  which  any  ordinary  reader
             would place upon them.  To adopt the language of Lord Brown in
             Mahad,  'the  natural  and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  words,
             recognising that they  are  statements  of  the  Secretary  of
             State's administrative policy,' is that the Secretary of State
             will not place reliance on the new  rules  when  dealing  with
             applications made before 9th July 2012.

         33.  Accordingly, my answer to the question posed in this  part  of
             the judgment is no.  That answer is subject to  one  important
             qualification.  A mere  passing  reference  to  the  20  years
             requirement in the new rules  will  not  have  the  effect  of
             invalidating the Secretary of State's decision.  The  decision
             only becomes unlawful if the decision maker relies  upon  rule
             276ADE(iii)  as  a  consideration  materially  affecting   the
             decision."

42. My view is that  the  decision  maker  in  this  case,  did  rely  upon
    paragraph 276ADE(iii) in the reasons  for  refusal  letter  dated  15th
    April 2013, as a consideration materially affecting the  decision,  and
    this was not a mere passing reference.  Although Rafiq  is  a  decision
    made after Edgehill, it is not  a  decision  that  overrules  Edgehill,
    which was a decision made by the Court of Appeal and which  is  binding
    upon the Tribunal.

43. I have  considered  paragraph  A277C  which  was  introduced  into  the
    Immigration Rules after 9th July  2012  which  states  that  where  the
    Secretary of State deems it appropriate, any application to  which  the
    provisions of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  do  not  already  apply
    will be applied in line with those provisions.  This however is subject
    to paragraphs A277 to A280 and A280(c)(i) appears to indicate that  the
    new rules will not apply to persons who have made an application before
    9th July 2012 under Part 8 of the Immigration Rules, which  application
    was not decided as at 9th July 2012.

44. In considering Article 8 I have  adopted  the  step  by  step  approach
    advocated by the House of Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 which involves
    answering the following questions;

         "(1) Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?"

45. If I find that the claimant has established family life  which  engages
    Article 8, I must consider the family life of all of  her  family,  not
    only the claimant, following the decision in  Beoku-Betts  [2008]  UKHL
    39.

46. In my view it is clear that the claimant has established a private life
    since her arrival in the United Kingdom.  She has  now  lived  in  this
    country for just over nine years.

47. I have to consider whether she has established a family life.   She  is
    not in a relationship, nor does she have children, but she  lives  with
    her stepfather, mother and brother.  I  have  to  decide  whether  that
    amounts to family life that would engage Article 8.

48. My starting point is to consider Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31  in  which
    at paragraph 25 it was stated;

         "25. Because there is no presumption of family life, in my judgment
             a family life is not established between an  adult  child  and
             his surviving parent or other siblings unless  something  more
             exists than normal emotional ties."

49. I next consider Ghising Nepal [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) in which  it  was
    accepted that  the  judgment  in  Kugathas  had  been  interpreted  too
    restrictively in the past  and  ought  to  be  read  in  the  light  of
    subsequent decisions of the domestic and Strasbourg  courts  (paragraph
    56).

50. The Upper Tribunal in Ghising reviewed jurisprudence on this issue  and
    noted the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v  HK  (Turkey)
    [2010] EWCA Civ 583 in which the Court of  Appeal  considered  Kugathas
    and found that an individual who had reached his majority in  September
    2005 but continued to live at home or with his family, undoubtedly  had
    family life while he was  growing  up,  and  that  this  would  not  be
    suddenly cut off when he reached his majority.

51. The Upper Tribunal in Ghising also considered RP (Zimbabwe) [2008] EWCA
    Civ 825 in which it was found that two  individuals  aged  23,  and  25
    enjoyed family life with their parents as they still lived  with  them,
    and referred to a number of European authorities in which it  had  been
    accepted that the relationship between young adults who had not founded
    a family of their own, and their parents or other close family  members
    constituted family life that would engage Article 8.

52. The principal in Ghising, is that there should be no blanket rule  when
    considering family life between adult  siblings  living  together,  and
    each case should  be  analysed  on  its  own  facts,  and  whilst  some
    generalisations are possible, each case is fact sensitive.

53. In this case I conclude that the claimant is  extremely  close  to  her
    brother and mother.  It is true that her mother and  brother  left  the
    claimant in Russia in 2003 and the claimant lived apart from them until
    August 2005.  However since that date she has lived  continuously  with
    her family.  She does not have children of her own or a partner.  I  am
    satisfied there are more than emotional ties.  It  is  clear  that  the
    family are  very  much  emotionally  dependent  upon  each  other,  the
    claimant is also dependent upon her family  at  the  present  time  for
    accommodation and financial support.

54. The claimant was dependent upon family for financial support throughout
    her studies in the United Kingdom although the financial support ceased
    whilst she had employment, but that has now resumed and this  has  been
    the case since 2012, and the claimant has always  been  dependent  upon
    her family for accommodation.

55. As the claimant has not founded a family  of  her  own,  and  has  been
    living with her mother and brother all of her life, with the  exception
    of approximately two years between 2003 and 2005, I  conclude  that  on
    the facts of this case, she has established a family life which engages
    Article 8.

56. Dealing with the five stage approach advocated in Razgar, I  find  that
    the claimant's proposed removal would be an interference with her right
    to respect for her private and her family life,  with  consequences  of
    such gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.

57. I find that the proposed interference would be in accordance  with  the
    law because the  claimant  cannot  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  in
    relation to her application for leave to remain.

58. I then have to consider whether the interference is necessary  for  one
    of the reasons set out in Article 8(2) and proportionate.

59. I take into account section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 which provides  that  the  maintenance  of  immigration
    control is in the public interest.  It is also in the  public  interest
    that an individual who seeks leave to remain can speak English, and  is
    financially independent.

60. Little weight should be given to a private  life  established  when  an
    individual  is  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  or   when   their
    immigration status is precarious.

61. The  claimant  can  speak  fluent  English.   She  is  not  financially
    independent at present because she is  unable  to  work  owing  to  her
    immigration status, but I am satisfied that she  would  be  financially
    independent if given leave to remain and permission to work.

62. I do take into account that the public interests means that there  must
    be effective immigration control.  I also take into  account  that  the
    claimant is highly qualified.  She has  not  claimed  benefits  and  if
    allowed to work in the United Kingdom, there would be no  detriment  to
    the economic well-being of this country.

63. The claimant has an  excellent  immigration  history.   She  has  never
    overstayed or breached any immigration law.  There is no evidence  that
    she has ever committed any criminal offence.

64. I have taken into account the numerous letters of support  produced  on
    behalf of the claimant, and I accept that she is fully integrated  into
    British society.

65. I accept that she has no family or friends in Russia  and  if  returned
    would have no accommodation and no employment.  I  find  that  although
    well qualified, she may find it difficult to find employment in  Russia
    because of her lack of work experience.

66. It is clear that the claimant and her family very much wish for her  to
    remain in the United Kingdom so that they  can  continue  their  family
    life and the Appellant can return to employment here.

67. When conducting the balancing exercise I take  into  account  that  the
    claimant has only ever had limited leave  to  remain,  initially  as  a
    visitor, then as a student, and  thereafter  as  a  Tier  1  post-study
    migrant.  She has no legitimate expectation that she would  be  allowed
    to settle in this country.

68. It is however clear that she has made the United Kingdom her  home  and
    fully integrated here.  I have to decide whether her removal  would  be
    disproportionate.  In my view the appropriate test is  still  that  set
    out in paragraph 31 of VW (Uganda) [2009] EWCA Civ 5 when the Court  of
    Appeal approved the following;

         "But recognition should be given, as Richard Drabble  QC  for  both
         Appellants readily accepted, to the conclusion  at  which  the  AIT
         arrived  (para  44)  that,   if   a   removal   is   to   be   held
         disproportionate, 'what must be shown is more than a mere  hardship
         or a mere difficulty or mere obstacle.  There is a seriousness test
         which requires the obstacles or difficulties to go  beyond  matters
         of choice or inconvenience.'  I would  respectfully  endorse  this.
         The  question  in  any  one  case  will  be  whether  the  hardship
         consequent on removal will go far enough beyond  this  baseline  to
         make  removal  a  disproportionate  use   of   lawful   immigration
         controls."

69. The  claimant  has  waited  a  considerable  period  of  time  for  her
    application made in February 2012 to be finally determined.  There  was
    a delay in deciding her application, which was not initially decided by
    the Secretary of State until 15th April 2013.  There has  then  been  a
    further delay because of the Tribunal proceedings.  It  is  clear  that
    the uncertainty has very much affected the  claimant  and  her  mother.
    The period of time has however strengthened her ties to her family  and
    the United Kingdom.

70. If this appeal was based only upon the claimant's private life, I would
    find the decision to remove her proportionate.  However I find  that  a
    combination of her family life and her private  life,  means  that  the
    decision to remove would be disproportionate,  on  the  facts  of  this
    particular case and would therefore breach Article 8.

71. If I am wrong in concluding that the Immigration  Rules  introduced  on
    9th July 2012 should not be considered, my finding would  be  that  the
    Appellant could not succeed under paragraph  276ADE(vi)  which  was  in
    force at the date of refusal which provided that  the  Appellant  would
    have to prove she had no ties to Russia.  I would have found  that  the
    appeal could not succeed on that basis, as the Appellant had  lived  in
    Russia for the greater part of her life, and was 21 years of  age  when
    she left and was  educated  to  degree  level  in  Russia,  and  speaks
    Russian.

72. If I had considered paragraph 276ADE(vi) as at  the  date  of  hearing,
    which provides that she would be entitled to succeed if there would  be
    very significant obstacles to her integration into Russia I would  have
    found in her favour.  This is because I believe  that  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles if the Appellant had to  return  to  Russia.
    She has no friends and  no  family.   She  has  no  employment  and  no
    accommodation.  She has no work experience in Russia.  On that basis  I
    would have allowed her appeal.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.  I allow  the  claimant's
appeal on human rights  grounds  in  relation  to  Article  8  of  the  1950
Convention.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no application for anonymity and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
order.





Signed                              Date 15th October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been allowed mainly due to evidence produced to the  Tribunal
that was not before the Secretary of State.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 15th October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




