
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/14050/2013
                                                               IA/16450/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16th January 2014                          |On 5th September 2014        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                              MR KASHIF QURESHI
                             MASTER FARAZ KASHIF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms K M McCarthy (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants' appeals (the first  appellant  is  the  father  of  the
    second) against decisions to refuse to issue them with residence cards,
    confirming a permanent right of residence in the United  Kingdom,  were
    dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Thomas  ("the  judge")  in  a
    determination promulgated on 8th November 2013.

2.   In January 2010, the appellants were issued  with  residence  cards  as
    family members of the first appellant's former wife, a Spanish national
    exercising treaty rights here.  The couple were married in August 2009.
     The first appellant and his wife separated in November 2012.  On  18th
    December that year, he applied for a residence card confirming a  right
    to reside permanently, on the basis that he had been living with an EEA
    national for a period of five years, in accordance with the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").  He
    lived with her initially as an extended family member  and  then,  from
    August 2009, as a spouse.

3.   The judge noted that the first appellant appeared  to  have  relied  in
    the past on retained rights of residence under  Regulation  10  of  the
    2006 Regulations.  However, there was  no  evidence  showing  that  the
    marriage had terminated.  She found that the  first  appellant  had  to
    show that he fell within Regulation 15(1)(b) of  the  2006  Regulations
    and took into account guidance given in PM [2011] UKUT 89.   The  first
    appellant's residence card was issued on the basis of his marriage  and
    not on the basis that he was in a durable relationship as an  unmarried
    partner of an EEA national.  Regulation  15(1)(b)  applied  where  both
    parties had resided in the United Kingdom  for  five  years  since  the
    marriage and where the claimant had resided as the family member of  an
    EEA national.  The residence card  currently  possessed  by  the  first
    appellant was issued on 28th January 2010  and  was  valid  until  28th
    January 2015.  Five years since the marriage in August 2009  would  not
    elapse until August 2014 at the earliest.  The judge concluded that the
    appellant did not fall within Regulation 15 and was not entitled  to  a
    residence card confirming a right to reside here  permanently.   As  he
    still possessed his residence card, valid until January  2015,  and  as
    there was no decision to remove  him,  the  adverse  decision  did  not
    interfere with his Article 8 rights (or those of anyone else).

4.   An application was made for permission to appeal.  The  author  of  the
    grounds identified the issue  as  whether  time  spent  as  a  "durable
    partner" could count towards the accrual of time under Regulation 15 of
    the 2006 Regulations.  The evidence showed that the first appellant and
    his partner began to live together in August  2008,  before  they  were
    married.  On this basis, the first appellant could show five continuous
    years' residence, in accordance with the 2006 Regulations, initially as
    a durable partner and then as a spouse.  Regulation 15 simply  required
    a continuous period of five years' residence.

5.   It was also contended in the grounds  that  the  EU  law  principle  of
    equal treatment, confirmed in Reed [1986] EUECJ  R-59/85  mandated  the
    United Kingdom to provide at least the  same  residence  rights  for  a
    durable partner as a spouse.  It would  be  unreasonable  to  deny  the
    appellant "permanent residence" because he did  not  hold  a  residence
    card while present here as an  unmarried  partner,  whereas  such  time
    would have counted, had he been a spouse.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted on 2nd  December  2013.   In  a  short
    rule 24 response, the Secretary of State requested an oral hearing  and
    indicated that she opposed the appeal as the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    had directed herself appropriately.

Submissions on Error of Law

7.   Ms McCarthy (who was not the author of the  grounds  and  who  did  not
    appear before the First-tier Tribunal) said that in issue was the first
    appellant's status between 2007 and about  2010.   The  residence  card
    issued to him and which he still possessed was evidence of the right to
    reside rather than something conferring the right itself.  It  appeared
    to recognise that the appellant was an extended family  member,  within
    the 2006 Regulations, prior to his marriage.

8.   Ms Kiss handed up a copy of the Directive,  which  showed  clearly  the
    right of permanent  residence  for  union  citizens  and  their  family
    members (in Article 1), the definition of a family member  (Article  2)
    and the wider class of beneficiaries (Article 3.2).

9.   There then followed a short discussion on the 2006 Regulations and,  in
    particular, Regulation 15(1)(b).  This identifies as a person acquiring
    the right to reside in the United Kingdom permanently "a family  member
    of an EEA national who is not himself  an  EEA  national  but  who  has
    resided in the United Kingdom with the EEA national in accordance  with
    these Regulations  for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years".   This
    Regulation must be read with Regulation 7(3),  which  provides  that  a
    person who is an extended family member "and has been  issued  with  an
    EEA family permit, a registration  certificate  or  a  residence  card"
    shall be treated as the family member of the relevant EEA national, for
    so long as certain conditions set out in Regulation 8 are met  and  the
    permit, certificate or card has not ceased to be valid or been revoked.



10.  It is clear that the first appellant cannot show that he  falls  within
    Regulation 15(1)(b).  He became a family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    following his marriage in August 2009.  Before  his  marriage,  he  co-
    habited with his partner but, as no residence card or similar  document
    was issued to him at the time,  although  he  was  an  extended  family
    member, he did not fall to  be  treated  as  a  family  member  of  the
    relevant EEA national.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11.  No error of law has been shown in the decision.   The  judge  correctly
    found that the first appellant  was  not  entitled  to  the  particular
    residence card he applied for as he does  not  fall  within  Regulation
    15(1)(b) of the 2006  Regulations  and  so  both  appeals  fell  to  be
    dismissed.  The skeleton argument before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal make
    no mention of Regulation 7(3) of the 2006 Regulations.  In the  present
    case, the application of this Regulation shows that although the  first
    appellant was in a durable relationship with his  partner  before  they
    married, he was not to be treated as  her  family  member,  because  no
    residence card or similar document was issued to him.

12.  The broader discrimination point raised  in  the  grounds  and  in  the
    skeleton argument has not been made out.  The Directive itself, and the
    2006 Regulations, provide for rights of residence to family members and
    extended family members and there is nothing  in  Reed  supporting  the
    proposition that our domestic code, contained in the 2006  Regulations,
    unlawfully discriminates  against  extended  family  members  or  those
    falling within Article 3.2 of the Directive.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of  law
    and shall stand.

ANONYMITY

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


