
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14186/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27 January 2017                       |On 03 February 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr Okechukwu Michael Diribe
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dhanji, Counsel, instructed by Rashid & Rashid
                    Solicitors (Merton High Street)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the claimant.

2.   The claimant, a national of Nigeria, date of birth 30  September  1982,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated  27  March  2015,  to
    make removal directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 1999, a form IS.151A having been served on 13 November 2014.

3.   The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Martins  (the  judge),
    who, on 22 August 2015, allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules,
    with reference to the Appellant's private life, and also under  Article
    8 ECHR.  The Secretary of State challenged the decision (D) essentially
    on two grounds.  First, that the judge had failed to give  adequate  or
    sufficient reasons for his acceptance of the Appellant's sexuality  and
    problems faced by the Appellant in the past.   Secondly,  the  way  the
    judge addressed Article 8 ECHR outside of the Rules.

4.     Mr Bramble rightly accepts that the permission  to  appeal  that  was
    given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett, dated  20  December  2016,
    does not really address either the grounds or the decision  itself  and
    it is by no means clear how  permission  was  ever  really  granted.  I
    consider the grounds as they have been  made  and  no  application  was
    made, for perfectly proper reasons, to amend  them.   It  is  therefore
    also the case that the Respondent's decision letter  (the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter) does  not  particularly  highlight  credibility  issues
    going to the core of the Appellant's claim as to his sexuality and past
    events in Nigeria.  The position is, I find that, for good or ill  even
    if they would not have been the way I express them, the judge  at  [D68
    to 70] set out the basis on which he  concluded  that  the  Appellant's
    private life  justified  his  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom  with
    reference to the Rules.

5.      Some of the language used by the judge may  be  a  trifle  difficult
    but the fact is the substance of  the  decision  is  one  that  he  was
    entitled to make, did make and no other Tribunal seems to me likely  to
    have reached, on those same bases, a different decision to  that  which
    he did.  Mr Bramble therefore, perfectly sensibly, accepts that if  the
    Appellant succeeded on that basis the issue of whether the judge  erred
    over the considerations of Article  8ECHR  outside  of  the  Rules  add
    nothing to the matter.

6.     For my part, had it been necessary to do so I would  have  taken  the
    view that the judge did conflate issues of private life and family life
    which were not sustainable and  I  would  have  felt  it  necessary  to
    interfere with the Original Tribunal Judge's decision.  However, in the
    light of the submissions made it seems to me that no purpose is  served
    in doing so and a remaking of it would make no difference ultimately to
    the fact that the  Appellant  was  found  to  have  complied  with  the
    Immigration Rules.  Accordingly the appeal of the Secretary of State is
    dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity order was made nor is one required or necessary.


Signed                                  Date 2 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The judge made a fee order and that decision also stands.


Signed                                  Date 2 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

