
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/14646/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 January 2019                      | On 13 March 2019                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                              Satya Dev sharma
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mold, Counsel, instructed by MT UK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant,  a  widower  age  84,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
decision of Judge Kimnell of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  sent  on  28
August  2018  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  made  by  the
respondent on 12  March  2014  to  refuse  to  issue  a  residence  card  as
confirmation of the right of residence under EU law as father-in-law  of  an
EEA national exercising treaty  rights  in  the  UK.   The  vintage  of  the
decision is a result of there having been an earlier  decision  of  the  FtT
promulgated on 11 December 2014 dismissing his appeal; a  decision  made  by
Upper Tribunal Rimington finding an  error  of  law  in  that  determination
confined to the issue of dependency: and a consent order  by  the  Court  of
Appeal directing that there should be a hearing before the FtT  de  novo  on
all issues.

2. The basis of the appellant's  application  is  that  he  qualifies  as  a
direct family member by virtue of being a dependent on  his  son-in-law  who
was exercising treaty rights in Belgium but has not returned to the  UK.  It
is not in dispute in this case that the appellant has never lived  with  his
son-in-law in Belgium.  Nor is it in dispute that he is a  dependent  direct
relative in the ascendant line and so a "direct family member".

3. Judge Kimnell noted at paragraph 8 that the respondent did not  challenge
the evidence that the appellant's son-in-law and  sponsor  Mr  Tramboo,  has
been exercising Treaty rights in Belgium.   At  paragraph  8  Judge  Kimnell
said that as a result  the  appeal  was  confined  to  two  matters,  namely
whether or not regulation 9(2) of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
EEA Regulations applies in this case; and whether  or  not  the  "Centre  of
Life Test" in regulation 9(3) was satisfied. I should  clarify  that  it  is
common ground that the applicable Regulations are the Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as amended from  1  January  2014,  not  the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 (the text of  the  new
regulation 9(1)-(3) is set out below in a footnote to paragraph 15).

4. Having considered the evidence, the judge found at paragraph 17 that  the
appellant did meet the "Centre of Life" requirement of  regulation  9(2)(c).
At paragraphs 18 and 19, the judge stated:

         "18. The real question on  which  this  case  turns  is  regulation
             9(2)."


Regulation 9 (1)-(2), as it applied  at  the  date  of  the  decision  under
appeal[1], is reproduced at paragraph 9 of Mr Mold's  skeleton  argument  as
follows:


                  '9.  Family Members of British Citizens


         (1)If  the  conditions  in  paragraph  (2)  are   satisfied   these
         Regulations apply to a person who is a family member of  a  British
         citizen as if the British citizen (P) were an EEA national.


             .. .  (2)The conditions are that=



                            a) P is residing in an EEA State as a worker or
                               self-employed  person  or  was  so  residing
                               before returning to the United Kingdom;


                            b) If the family member of P is P's  spouse  or
                               civil  partner,  the  parties   are   living
                               together in the EEA  State  or  had  entered
                               into the marriage or civil  partnership  and
                               were living together in the EEA State before
                               the British citizen returned to  the  United
                               Kingdom; and


                            c) The centre of P's life is transferred to the
                               EEA State where P resided  as  a  worker  of
                               self-employed person."

5. Judge Kimnell concluded that regulation 9(2)(b) applied to the  appellant
and contained a test that the appellant could not meet because he had  never
lived with his son-in-law in Belgium.  At paragraph 20 the judge recorded:

         "20. It appears obvious from a plain reading of regulation  9  that
             this applies to all family members in sub-sub-paragraphs  (a)-
             (c), but in the case of a family member who is a spouse  of  a
             civil partner, not only must  that  family  member  have  been
             residing in the EEA State, but  must  in  addition  have  been
             living 'together' in that EEA State with the UK citizen wo  is
             residing there.  The provision is clearly designed to  prevent
             a person who is separated from the  UK  national  from  taking
             advantage of the provision in order to gain admission  to  the
             United Kingdom when in reality there is no  substance  to  the
             marital relationship with the UK sponsor."



6. Judge Kimnell added a further reason at  paragraphs  25  and  26  why  he
considered his reading of regulation 9(2)(b) to be the correct one.


         "25. From the facts it is perfectly obvious  that  the  appellant's
             son-in-law, Mr Tramboo, has not in any way been  prevented  or
             impeded or discouraged from exercising free movement rights as
             an EEA national, hence his decision to live  on  his  own  and
             work in Belgium, so it is not the case that the appellant  was
             returning from another European country to the United  Kingdom
             with his son-in-law, keeping the family intact.  The appellant
             and his son-in-law never lived  together  in  Belgium  and  of
             course the underlying purpose of Regulation  9  is  to  permit
             freedom of movement.


         26.  Mr Mold made the point that a  Member  State  is  entitled  to
             adopt national  Regulations  that  go  further  than  European
             directives require but I do not think that  the  intention  of
             regulation 9, as I have said, did intend to go  further.   The
             intention was to impose an additional requirement that in  the
             case of a spouse of civil partner the two people  in  question
             had not only to be  living  in  the  European  country  before
             return to the UK, but also living together  in  that  European
             country."


7. The appellant's grounds of appeal maintain that  the  judge  misconstrued
regulation 9(2).  Regulation 9(2)(b)  only  applied  to  spouses  and  civil
partners and so did not apply to the appellant.  As the judge  had  accepted
that the appellant met the conditions set  out  in  regulation  9(2)(c),  he
came within regulation  9.  In  amplifying  the  written  grounds,  Mr  Mold
submitted that the language of regulation 9(2)(b)  was  clear  and  explicit
and must therefore be given effect.

8. I heard full submissions from both Mr Mold  and  Mr  Kotas.  Both  agreed
that the only live issue concerned regulation 9(2)(b). It  was  agreed  that
Judge Kimnell's decision finding that the appellant met the Centre  of  Life
conditions set out in regulation 9(2)(c) was not the  subject  of  challenge
by either party. It was not in dispute that the appellant met the  condition
set out in regulation 9(2)(a) by virtue of his son in law exercising  Treaty
Rights in Brussels.

9. Mr Kotas urged that  I  endorse  the  point  made  by  Judge  Kimnell  in
paragraph 25 that the regulation was only intended to  assist  those  family
members whose free movement would be prevented or  impeded  or  discouraged,
which, he submitted, was not the case on the facts of this case.  He  prayed
in aid the Upper Tribunal decision in Osorio  [2015]  UKUT  593  (IAC).   He
pointed  out  that  the  Regulation  transposed   the   Citizens   Directive
2004/38/EC and that it was Article  7  of  that  Directive  wherein  the  EU
legislator set out the rights of direct family  members  and  it  imposed  a
requirement of "accompanying  or  joining".   Mr  Mold  contended  that  the
Directive did not address the issue of the rights of direct  family  members
of EU nationals returning to their own Member States.  Such rights had  only
been identified by the Court of Justice in Surinder Singh [1992] ECR  I-4265
and later cases.  The Court of Justice in Surinder Singh had derived such  a
right, not from the Directive, but from EU primary law.  Whether or not  the
UK government and Parliament when enacting the EEA Regulations had  intended
to simply give effect to Court of  Justice  rulings  or  be  more  generous,
there  was  no  basis   for   attempting   to   construe   regulation   9(2)
(b)purposively, when its ordinary meaning was unequivocal.

10. During the hearing both  parties  made  reference  to  the  respondent's
policy  guidance,  Free  Movement  Rights:  Direct  Family  Members  of  EEA
Nationals, Version 6, 24 July 2018.  Neither,  however,  could  produce  the
document.  At the end of the hearing I  gave  an  oral  direction  that  the
respondent produce it together with any equivalent  documents  in  existence
since January 2014 (the month when the respondent first made  her  decision)
and I also directed that the respondent have  a  specified  period  to  make
further submissions regarding it and  that  the  appellant's  representative
have a further specified period to respond. I  received  responses  from  Mr
Kotas and Mr Mold and  I  have  taken  both  into  account  in  reaching  my
decision.

My analysis

11. In my  judgement,  the  wording  of  regulation  9(2)(b)  is  clear  and
unambiguous and as a result I must construe it in accordance with its  plain
and ordinary meaning. Not only is the meaning of  regulation  9(2)(b)  clear
on its face, but there would have been no point  in  the  drafters  limiting
its personal scope to "P's spouse or civil partner" if  they  had  meant  to
include all categories of direct family  members.   If  that  had  been  the
meaning intended, they would simply have referred to  "P's  [direct]  family
member."

12. Mr  Kotas  submits  that  Mr  Mold's  argument  as  to  the  meaning  of
regulation 9(2)(b) relies on an absence of wording to justify  his  proposed
construction. I  cannot  agree.  The  express  wording  of  regulation  9(1)
provides that the Regulations will apply to a family  member  of  a  British
citizen if the conditions in regulation 9(2) are met. Regulation  9(2)  sets
out expressly the conditions that need to  be  met  and  these  confine  the
personal scope of regulation 9(2)(b) to spouses and civil partners. As  such
the conditions specified in regulation 9(2)(b) cannot be applied  to  direct
family members who are not spouses and civil partners.

13. There being no lack of linguistic clarity about the plain  and  ordinary
meaning of regulation 9(2)(b), it is not open to me  to  apply  a  purposive
approach.

14. Mr Kotas  is  right  to  point  out  that  the  Court  of  Justice  when
construing the Directive has highlighted the  importance  of  Member  States
avoiding measures that  would  have  a  deterrent  effect  on  EU  nationals
exercising their treaty rights (he cited in this connection the case  of  C-
456/12 O and B at paragraphs 48 and  49),  but  that  cannot  assist  me  in
construing a domestic provision that is clear and unambiguous.  Even  though
the 2006 Regulations were introduced to transpose the Directive, Article  37
of that Directive permits Member States to enact national law measures  that
are more generous. What I have to interpret is not the  Directive,  but  the
2006 Regulations. Accordingly, the fact that  the  sponsor  in  this  appeal
has never been discouraged from leaving the UK to work  in  Belgium  because
of the position of his father-in-law is irrelevant.

15. I do not consider Mr Kotas can derive any assistance from  Osorio  since
at paragraph 20 of that case it was not in dispute that the appellant  could
not meet the requirements of  regulation 9. (In any event  if  the  analysis
in Osorio is at odds with mine, I most respectfully disagree with it).   Nor
do I consider that Mr Kotas's submission that the appellant's  position,  if
accepted, would create unjustified discrimination between spouses and  other
family members, gets anywhere, since as already stated, it is  the  text  of
regulation 9(2)(b) that creates the discrimination (if any).

16. It can only be a point of secondary relevance going to  the  legislative
context,  but  it  is  instructive  that  the  respondent  has  now  amended
regulation 9 so that in the 2016 Regulations, the requirement to  have  been
"residing in an EEA State" with the EEA national  exercising  treaty  rights
in another Member State is imposed on all direct  family  members:  see  the
new regulation  9(1)  and  (2),  applicable  to  decisions  taken  after  25
November 2016[2]. If Mr Kotas's  submission  were  correct,  such  amendment
would not have been necessary. Insofar as it might  be  suggested  that  the
amendment  was  purely  intended  to  be  clarificatory,  that   presupposes
agreement that the previous text was unclear, which I have rejected.

17. Can any assistance be derived from the Home Office  guidance  on  direct
family members? From the further responses, I received from the parties,  it
is clear that the only relevant Home Office guidance is the  2014  Guidance,
European Economic Area (EEA) and  Swiss  nationals:  free  movement  rights,
v10.0EXT valid from 24 February 2014. The 25 October 2017 and  the  24  July
2018 Guidance relate to a differently formulated  version  of  regulation  9
applicable only in respect of decisions taken after 25  November  2016:  see
footnote 2.

18. For the most part, the 2014 Guidance mirrors the text  of  regulation  9
(as it then was). Whilst at page 34 this Guidance states that direct  family
members must have been living with the British national  as  part  of  their
household,  this  is  followed  by  the  sentence:  "[f]or  information   on
conditions to be satisfied by  family  members  of  British  nationals  from
outside the EAA, you must read regulation  9...".  .  Somewhat  confusingly,
the guidance given later at p.37 makes no mention of a  condition  that  the
family member must have lived with the British  national  exercising  treaty
rights in another Member States.

19. Taking into account internal confusion in  this   Guidance,   I  do  not
see that it assists the  respondent's  case  regarding  the  constraints  of
regulation 9(2), since what is said at p.37, which states that it  describes
the principles established in Surinder Singh, at least  casts  doubt  on  Mr
Kotas' view that the intentions behind regulation 9(2)  must  have  been  to
impose a requirement that all direct family members had  to  show  they  had
lived together with the EEA national before returning to  their  own  Member
State.

20. Even  if  I  had  found  the  2014  Guidance  to  be  crystal  clear  in
maintaining that direct family  members  must  have  been  living  with  the
British national as part of their  household  in  another  Member  State,  I
would have concluded that, in line with established principles of  case  law
(see e.g. Ahmed Mahad and others [2009] UKSC 16),  it  is  inappropriate  to
use such guidance  as an aid to interpretation of a domestic provision  that
is clear and unambiguous.

21. For the above reasons, I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
law.

22. For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT judge materially erred  in
law.

23. It follows from my analysis that I can proceed straightforwardly to  re-
make the decision on this appeal by determining  that  the  appellant  fully
met the applicable conditions of regulation  9(2).  As  already  noted,  the
respondent concedes that this is the only live issue as  it  was  previously
accepted that the appellant met the test  relating  to  exercise  of  treaty
rights by the son-in-law in another member  state,  set  out  at  regulation
9(2)(a) and also met the Centre of Life test set out in regulation 9(2)(c).

24. To conclude:

The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.

The decision I re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal.


No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 11 March 2019
[pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
-----------------------
[1] Regulation 9 was substituted from 1 January 2014, subject to
transitional provisions (SI/2013/3032)
  "[2] 9.-(1) If the conditions  in  paragraph  (2)  are  satisfied,  these
Regulations apply to a person who is the family member ("F")  of  a  British
citizen ("BC") as though the BC were an EEA national.

  (2) The conditions are that-

(a)BC-

(i)is residing in an EEA State as a worker, self-employed person, self-
sufficient person or a student, or so resided immediately before returning
to the United Kingdom; or

(ii)has acquired the right of permanent residence in an EEA State;

(b)F and BC resided together in the EEA State; and

(c)F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine."



