
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14483/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 June 2015                          |On 15 July 2015                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                             MD KAMAL UDDIN KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Islam, London Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Md Kamal Uddin Khan, was born on 3 November 1989 and  is
    a male citizen of Bangladesh.  He appealed against the decision of  the
    respondent dated 14 June 2014 refusing him leave to remain as a Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur)  Migrant.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge   Carroll,
    determining the appeal on the papers) in a decision  dated  9  December
    2014 dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant made his application for leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant in September 2012.  It was refused  on  4  March
    2013 and the appellant had appealed that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Boyes) who heard the appeal at Hatton Cross on 25  July
    2013.  In a determination which was  promulgated  on  22  August  2013,
    Judge Boyes considered that the  respondent's  "evidential  flexibility
    policy" had not been considered at all by her in this  instance  either
    in respect of the appellant or his partner (his  co-appellant  in  that
    appeal).   The  judge  allowed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that   the
    immigration decisions were not in accordance with the law  and  on  the
    limited basis that they should remain outstanding before the respondent
    pending their lawful consideration.  Accordingly, on 14 March 2014, the
    respondent wrote to the appellant to tell him that the application  had
    been reconsidered.  The appellant  had  been  awarded  0  points  under
    Appendix A (Attributes) as regards access to funds.  The  letter  noted
    that the appellant had,

         "... in your appeal bundle ...  supplied  a  Barclays  Bank  letter
         dated 17 July 2013 confirming the third party  funds  available  to
         you.  However, the bank letter is not dated within three months  of
         the application date of 8 September 2012 and does not  include  the
         account number ..."

 3. Judge Carroll recorded that the appellant's legal  representatives  had
    submitted a fax with his notice of appeal and  had  also  indicated  in
    that notice that other "documents will  follow  in  due  course".   The
    judge noted there were "no further documents on the court  file".   The
    judge found that the letter from Barclays Bank  of  17  July  2013  "is
    neither dated  within  three  months  of  the  application  date  of  8
    September 2012  and  nowhere  does  it  include  the  relevant  account
    number".   The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  could  not  satisfy
    paragraph 245DD(b) of HC 395 (as amended).

 4. The grounds of appeal assert that,

         "... by a determination dated 22 August 2013, Judge  Boyes  clearly
         ....mitted  the  application  date   effectively   and   thus   the
         application date should have  been  calculated  from  the  date  of
         submitting the bank letter (i.e. from 17 July 2013 and not  from  8
         September 2012) and  thus  no  question  about  the  three  months'
         limitation should arise or apply in this regard."

    That is an assertion without any support from  the  decision  of  Judge
    Boyes himself.  Whilst the judge noted in his determination  that  "the
    respondent did not give the appellants the opportunity to  provide  the
    missing documentation before the application was refused"  he  did  not
    indicate that the provision requiring  the  evidence  to  be  submitted
    within three months of the original application date (8 September 2012)
    was to  be  ignored  or  overridden.   He  simply  indicated  that  the
    Secretary of State should consider all the  evidence  produced  by  the
    appellant and reject it or accept it, giving reasons accordingly.  Even
    if the appellant is right and the respondent (in the letter of 14 March
    2014) had been wrong to reject the letter from Barclays Bank of 17 July
    2013 on the basis that it had not been written before 8 September 2012,
    the respondent was still entitled to reject the evidence on  the  basis
    that it was a letter from the bank that did  not  include  the  account
    number of the appellant.  Mr Islam, in his submissions, sought to  rely
    upon Khatel [2013] UKUT 44 (IAC) as authority for the proposition  that
    the appellant's application was "continuing" until it had been decided.
     Given what I have said above, I am not sure of the relevance  of  that
    submission but, in any event, Mr Islam should be aware that Khatel  was
    reversed by the Court of Appeal in Raju [2013] EWCA Civ 754.

 5. Mr Islam also submitted that the appellant's "team  mate"  or  business
    partner Mr Golam Rabbi had also submitted a separate appeal on  similar
    grounds which had been allowed by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   However,
    neither the First-tier Tribunal nor the Upper Tribunal are in  any  way
    bound by unreported decisions made by different judges  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and involving different appellants.

 6. Finally, the grounds  of  appeal  invoke  the  concept  of  "fairness".
    Essentially, this is nothing more than  a  re-statement  of  the  other
    grounds of  appeal  together  with  a  general  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Neither this nor the  other
    grounds pleaded have any merit.  The appellant still seeks to rely upon
    the Barclays Bank letter which, as I have  noted  above,  is  seriously
    deficient in not bearing an account number and was  correctly  rejected
    by the respondent for that reason even if (which I do not  accept)  the
    respondent was wrong to reject it for failing to pre-date the  original
    application.  Accordingly, I can  identify  no  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of Judge Carroll either pleaded in the grounds of appeal or at
    all.  This appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 10 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
