
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14951/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th August and 8th October 2015  |On 18th December 2015                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                              mr umair rasheed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    Mr Wilding - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Umair Rasheed, a  citizen  of  Pakistan  born  2nd
    August 1988.  He appeals against the decision of the Respondent made on
    11th March 2014 to refuse his application for a  residence  card  under
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  2006
    Regs) on the basis of his relationship as the unmarried partner of Anna
    Kulaswzska, a Polish national born 4th November 1985 who he claimed had
    been exercising Treaty Rights in the UK as a worker since August 2010.

 2. The Appellant appealed against that decision and the appeal  was  heard
    on 14th November 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver who dismissed
    it and set out the reasons for his decision in a  determination  issued
    on 8th December  2014.  Neither  the  Appellant  nor  his  partner  had
    appeared at  the  hearing.   Judge  Oliver  found  that  there  was  no
    explanation for the Appellant's absence but subsequent to  the  hearing
    evidence was produced that he had had to go to hospital on the  day  of
    the hearing because he had collapsed in  a  public  place.  In  setting
    aside the decision  of Judge Oliver I said:

         'The Appellant did appear at the hearing before me.   He  confirmed
         that he had been ill on the day of the hearing.  Judge  Oliver  had
         made much of the fact that the Appellant's partner did not turn  up
         at the hearing either but she was apparently at the  hospital  with
         the Appellant.  It was clear from speaking to the Appellant that he
         had had  no  legal  advice  and  did  not  really  understand  what
         documents he ought to  have  provided  to  the  Tribunal.   He  had
         previously had leave to remain in the  UK  as  a  student  but  his
         application for an extension of stay was refused because more  than
         one of his applications had been rejected by  the  Home  Office  as
         invalid.  He claimed that at that  time  he  was  living  with  his
         Polish partner and  did  not  understand  that  he  could  make  an
         application on the basis of her residence in the UK.

         Given that Mr Kandola confirmed that he had no  objection  to  this
         case being reheard I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal on the basis that the Judge ought in all the circumstances
         to have granted an adjournment.  I did consider remitting this case
         to the First-tier Tribunal but I do not  think  it  is  appropriate
         because the Judge did consider the evidence that was before him and
         found it seriously wanting.  Judge  Oliver  was  justified  too  in
         taking account of the fact that the Tribunal had not  been  advised
         that the Appellant would not be attending.'

 3. Judge Oliver took the view that the absence of the  Appellant  and  his
    partner was deliberate and designed,  as  he  said,  to  "put  off  the
    judgment".  Judge Oliver noted that the couple had said that they  were
    going to marry but had not done so.  They had provided no answer to the
    reasons for refusal and no evidence to substantiate their claim  to  be
    in  a  durable  relationship.   The  reasons  given  for  refusing  the
    application by the Secretary of State were that  insufficient  evidence
    of  the   Sponsor's   identity   had   been   submitted;   insufficient
    documentation had been submitted to suggest that they were in a durable
    relationship; there was no evidence of the actual relationship  in  the
    form of, for example, photographs.  The Respondent's system showed that
    the Sponsor had recently sponsored another non-EEA national and claimed
    to be in a durable relationship with that person.   The  Appellant  had
    provided a bank statement showing a transaction from a  person  with  a
    different  name  from  his  claimed  partner  and  with  the  reference
    "Girlfriend" by it suggesting that he might be in a  relationship  with
    somebody completely different.

 4. The reason given by the Appellant for  not  having  submitted  original
    documents was that they were needed for their marriage which they  were
    planning.  His partner had needed her own documents  to  go  to  Poland
    where her mother had been diagnosed with cancer.  They had  been  in  a
    durable relationship since February  2012.   The  person  mentioned  as
    "Girlfriend" was his cousin and the reference was a joke.

 5. The rehearing of the appeal first came before me on 12th  August  2015.
    The Appellant attended.  Mr Jarvis was representing  the  Home  Office.
    The Appellant produced  a  handwritten  note  from  the  Sponsor,  Anna
    Kulaswzska, apologising for not attending that day.  She said  she  had
    just got a new job round the corner from Field House and had asked  for
    the day off to attend the hearing but this was refused.  She  had  been
    threatened with dismissal if she  left  to  attend  the  hearing.   Her
    mother has cancer.  She has had to go home to help with her care.   She
    had submitted photographs to show that she and the Appellant are  in  a
    genuine relationship.  He gets money from his father in Pakistan.   She
    said the Appellant is very stressed by the situation and suggested they
    go to Pakistan but she does not want to do that.  She  said  they  were
    about to get married but then she heard he was cheating on her  so  she
    decided not to go ahead with the marriage.  They have now been together
    for more than three years and she wants him to be with her.   She  said
    she would try to call the Tribunal during the hearing but she  is  part
    of the catering staff and is not allowed to make a phone call.

 6. I talked to the Appellant at length at the hearing on 12th August.   He
    confirmed that he is living with Anna at the address he gave.  She  had
    provided a P60 for the period up to April 2015 on which her address was
    different.  He said that that was an old address.   She  had  just  not
    told her employers of the change.  He had produced photos and was asked
    where they were taken.  He said they were taken at  Gretna  Green.   It
    seems that they had gone to Gretna to get married and had been taken in
    for an interview by Immigration Officers who were there.  The Appellant
    said that the interview took three hours and the  Interviewing  Officer
    accepted that he and Anna were in a genuine relationship.  He said they
    started living together in July 2013 but they were together before that
    when she lived in Romford.  In August 2013 he took a  flat  in  Ilford.
    She had provided a contract confirming her job.  He said they could not
    get married because his passport was with the Home Office.   Mr  Jarvis
    appeared to know nothing about the interview at Gretna.

 7. The Appellant had told me that Anna had intended to come to court  that
    morning but her boss would not let her come.  He said  his  father  was
    very ill in Pakistan with heart problems and  he  needed  his  passport
    back so that he could go and visit him.  He appeared to very distressed
    and was adamant that he was fed up with the whole situation and  wanted
    to go back to Pakistan see his father.  He  said  that  he  was  really
    disappointed that Anna had not come to give evidence.  Because  of  the
    state the Appellant was in I said I would give him the  opportunity  to
    get Anna to the court to confirm  their  relationship.   The  case  was
    therefore adjourned.

 8. On 8th October the Appellant turned up late in the  morning  at  10.50.
    He was alone.  Anna Kulaswzska was not there.  She did not attend.   He
    confirmed  that  there  had  been   some   discussion   about   getting
    representation but he had not got any.  He said that he  and  Anna  are
    still in a relationship and have been for more than three years.

 9. The position of both Mr Jarvis and Mr Wilding was  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant and Anna were in a relationship.  This  was
    the third hearing  and  the  Sponsor  had  not  once  turned  up.   The
    Appellant  had  had  numerous  opportunities  to  establish  a  genuine
    relationship.

10. I have given careful consideration to all the evidence put before me in
    this case.  I accept that the Appellant and Anna Kulaswzska  know  each
    other but the fact  of  the  matter  is  that  just  as  there  was  no
    information or evidence before Judge Oliver to show that they were in a
    durable relationship there is no such evidence  before  me.   I  really
    gave the Appellant the benefit of the doubt in August when I agreed  to
    adjourn the case so that Anna could try to find a way of coming to give
    evidence. There is no satisfactory evidence that he  is  in  a  durable
    relationship with Anna even if there  is  some  evidence  that  she  is
    working in the UK and there was no  satisfactory  explanation  for  her
    failure to turn up at the hearing on 8th October. The issue  of  Anna's
    previous sponsorship of a different man is unexplained and I  think  it
    highly unlikely that she would not have intimated her change of address
    to her employer. I take account too of the fact that the  Appellant  at
    the first hearing was apparently distressed about the  illness  of  his
    father and was adamant that he wanted to go home to Pakistan but  there
    was no mention of this at the second hearing.

11. I am not satisfied that the Appellant has established that  he  and  Ms
    Kulaswzska are in a subsisting and durable relationship such  as  would
    entitle him  to a  Residence  Card.  No  submissions  were  made  under
    Article  8 ECHR but the fact is that the Appellant has only been in the
    UK since May 2011 and came as a student with no  expectation  of  being
    allowed to develop a private life  in  the  UK  on  completion  of  his
    studies. There is no evidence of a family life.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First Tier Tribunal having been set  aside  is  replaced
with this decision.

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 1st December 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
