
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14784/2015
                                                               IA/14788/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30 September 2016                      |On 10 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               RAKESHKUMAR [P]
                                  HETAL [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms F Allen, Counsel instructed by Bespoke Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal arises from the decision of the Secretary of State, dated
    27 March 2015, to refuse the respondents' application for leave to
    remain in the UK on the basis of their private and family life. The
    respondents (hereinafter referred to as "the claimants") appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"). In a decision promulgated on 30 March
    2016, FtT Judge Veloso allowed the appeal on the basis that the
    claimants were able to satisfy the requirements of 276ADE(1)(vi) of the
    Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State now appeals that decision.

 2. The claimants are citizens of India, born on 19 August 1969 and 6
    December 1971. The first claimant is the husband of the second
    claimant. They have a son born on 2 May 1995.

 3. The claimants and their son entered the UK in 2002 on a visitor visa
    that was valid until 4 June 2003. They remained in the UK thereafter
    without lawful leave. Over the years they made several unsuccessful
    applications for leave to remain under Article 8 ECHR.

 4. On 23 March 2015 the claimants' son was granted leave to remain under
    paragraph 276ADE.

 5. The Secretary of State refused the claimants' application on the basis
    that they were unable to satisfy the requirements of either Appendix FM
    or Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and there were no
    exceptional circumstances to justify allowing their appeal outside the
    Immigration Rules.

 6. The claimants' appealed and the appeal was heard by Judge Veloso. The
    case before Judge Veloso was argued solely under paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi). This states:

         276ADE(1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of the application, the applicant


         ...


             (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the
             UK for less than 20 years (discounting any period of
             imprisonment) but there would be very significant obstacles to
             the applicant's integration into the country to which he would
             have to go if required to leave the UK."

 7. The judge recognised that the question to be determined was whether
    there were very significant obstacles to the claimant's integration
    into India and made a number of findings relevant to this issue,
    including the following:

      a) The claimants have spent most of their life in India and are
         familiar with its language, culture and way of life. This
         familiarity has been maintained through spending much of their
         time, whilst in the UK, with the second claimant's parents, who
         live close to them, and attending Temple.


      b) The claimants have not worked since arriving in the UK and have not
         acquired any skills or experience that will assist them in India.


      c) The first claimant, whilst in India, assisted his father in a
         diamond business but did not earn any money and was supported by
         his father, who died in 2004.


      d) The claimants have lost all familial ties with India.


      e) The claimants both have medical conditions. The second claimant
         has, inter alia, type II diabetes and hypertension. The first
         claimant has, inter alia, HIV and previous cerebellar
         toxoplasmosis. Medical records describe him as having "residual
         hand weakness and mild cognitive impairment". The hand weakness is
         said to make him unable to lift effectively or hold a pen to write
         with his right hand.


      f) The claimants are supported in the UK by the second claimant's
         brother in law but he would not be able to support them if they
         returned to India.


      g) Any job search and performance would be "both limiting and
         difficult" given the claimants lack of work experience and medical
         problems.

 8. Having considered the above described factors, the judge concluded that
    "on a balance of probabilities the first and second appellants have
    shown very significant obstacles to their reintegration into India".

 9. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal argue that the judge failed
    to give adequate reasons. They contend that none of the medical
    evidence referred to by the judge expressly states that the claimants
    are unfit to work. They also argue that there was a failure to take
    account of the first claimant's evidence that he would be willing to
    work in the UK and that the reason he has not worked in the UK is
    because he is not entitled to, rather than an inability to work. The
    grounds submit that if the claimants are able to work and receive
    financial assistance from their son they will be able to reintegrate
    into India.

10. Before me, Mr Norton argued that the judge had failed to deal with the
    "very significant obstacles" test correctly. The evidence did not
    support a finding that the claimants could not work in India - the
    first claimant himself stated he would wish to work in the UK if that
    was permitted by his immigration status. Mr Norton questioned the
    judge's reasoning which lead to the conclusion that the claimants would
    not receive support from the second claimant's brother in law,
    submitting that if he was able to support them in the UK he could do so
    in India.

11. Ms Allen argued that the judge had posed the correct question and in
    addressing that question had taken into account all, and not failed to
    consider any, relevant matters. It was for the judge to weigh the
    evidence and decide if the circumstances amounted to very significant
    obstacles.

Consideration

12. The judge correctly identified that the issue for her to resolve was
    whether there would be very significant obstacles to the claimants'
    integration into India.

13. Having reviewed the evidence that was before the FtT, it is clear that,
    in assessing the "very significant obstacles" issue, the judge took
    into consideration all of the material evidence that was before her did
    not take into account any immaterial evidence.


14. The judge's findings relevant to this issue concerned, inter alia, the
    claimants' ability to find and undertake work in India, the financial
    support they would receive, their family connections in India, and
    their medical conditions. The judge's findings on these points were
    grounded in, and consistent with, the evidence.

15. Moreover, the judge's findings were supported by clear reasons. In the
    grounds, the Secretary of State questions some aspects of the reasoning
    but the contentions are without merit. The Secretary of State submits,
    for example, that the medical evidence does not expressly state that
    the claimants are unfit for work. That is correct - the medical records
    do not expressly record this and indeed in oral evidence the first
    claimant stated that if his immigration status permitted him to do so
    he would work. However, the judge did not make a pronouncement on the
    claimants' medical fitness to work. Rather, she considered their lack
    of work experience (both in the UK and India) along with their medical
    difficulties and made a finding, on the balance of probabilities, about
    their ability to make a sufficient living in India to reintegrate into
    the country. Although another judge, reviewing the same evidence, could
    in my view have reasonably come to a different conclusion, that does
    not mean there was an error of law. The judge has reached a conclusion
    about the claimants' prospects of working in India that was open to her
    on the basis of the evidence.


16. Having directed herself to the correct legal framework and assessed all
    of the relevant evidence, it was for the judge to determine whether her
    findings about the challenges the claimants would face upon return to
    India amounted to "very significant obstacles."  Other judges may well
    have reached a different conclusion, placing greater weight on factors
    (such as the claimants' familiarity with Indian culture and language)
    that would indicate any obstacles would not meet the threshold of being
    "very significant".  However, the weight to give to the evidence is a
    matter for the judge hearing the appeal. I am satisfied that, based on
    the evidence that was before her, it was open to the judge, for the
    reasons she gave, to conclude that the claimants met the "very
    significant obstacles" test in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law and shall stand.

18. The appeal is dismissed.
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 8 October 2016                |

