
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14748/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 11 March 2014                              |On 24 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                FAISAL SHAHZAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr G Dewar, Advocate, instructed by M & K,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan,  born  on  10  August  1984.   He
   entered the UK as a student on  5  March  2011,  but  did  not  enrol  at
   college.  Immigration officials found him working in Bristol on  6  March
   2013.  He was served with  notice  of  his  liability  to  detention  and
   removal, and his leave to remain was considered to have expired.

2) On 8 March 2013, he applied for further leave to remain.

3) The respondent refused that application in  a  decision  dated  24  April
   2013, dealing firstly with family life in terms of  Appendix  FM  of  the
   Immigration Rules.  The respondent noted that the appellant married in an
   Islamic ceremony on 16 February 2013, which was not recognised in UK law.
    The appellant lived in Bristol while his partner lived  in  Livingstone,
   in Scotland.  He said that he saw her every 15 days.  The respondent  did
   not consider this to be a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  akin  to
   marriage.  His private life was found not to  meet  the  requirements  of
   paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.   Finally,  no  exceptional  circumstances
   were found to justify allowing him to remain.

4) In his grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  the  appellant  said
   there were compassionate and compelling grounds for him to remain outwith
   the requirements of the Immigration Rules, and that his removal would  be
   disproportionate.

5) Judge Wyman heard the appellant's appeal in the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
   Hatton  Cross  on  16  October   2013.    The   judge   noted   "numerous
   inconsistencies" in the oral evidence given by the appellant and his wife
   (a civil ceremony having taken place on 16 May 2013).  He found that  the
   relationship between them was "not  genuine  and  subsisting"  (paragraph
   60).  However, he went on to find that the appellant's wife (a UK citizen
   whose father was of Pakistani origin, and who did not speak fluent  Urdu)
   could not be expected to return to Pakistan to live with  him  (paragraph
   68) but that there were no insurmountable obstacles to  her  living  with
   him in Pakistan while he applied  for  entry  clearance  (paragraph  74).
   Alternatively, she could remain in Scotland while he applied.  The appeal
   was therefore dismissed under Appendix FM.  Turning to Article 8 (outwith
   the Rules) the judge accepted at paragraph  83  that  the  appellant  had
   "family life with his wife who lives in the UK.  They are legally husband
   and wife."  At paragraph 90 the judge said, "I do not find the  appellant
   has a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife.  This is not  to
   say that he is not legally married to her - I accept that he  is."    The
   judge concluded that it would not be a disproportionate interference  for
   the appellant not to be granted leave to remain in the UK, and  dismissed
   the appeal under the Rules and under Article 8.

6) The appellant sought permission to appeal on proposed grounds  of  appeal
   under 4 headings, running to 31 paragraphs over 7 pages.  On 21  November
   2013, the First-tier Tribunal refused permission to  appeal.   A  further
   application was made, on the same grounds, to the Upper Tribunal.  On  10
   December 2013, UT Judge McGeachy granted permission as follows:

    The grounds of appeal point to the fact that the judge ...  found  that
    the marriage was not subsisting but went on to state,  "I  accept  that
    the appellant has family life with his wife who lives in the UK.   They
    are legally husband and wife."  The grounds claim that  the  judge  was
    therefore  inconsistent  in  his  conclusions  and  that  infects   his
    reasoning ...


    While it may well be the case that the judge meant that the requirement
    in the first Razgar step was met merely because the appellant  and  his
    wife were married, that is not clear.  To that extent I  consider  that
    the grounds are arguable.


    However, the grounds ... are prolix and I direct that  10  days  before
    the hearing the  appellant's  representative  shall  serve  edited  and
    comprehensive grounds of appeal of no more than one page ...


7) Mr Dewar on 11 March 2014 produced a condensed  version  of  the  grounds
   under the same 4 headings:

      Proper consideration of the Immigration Rules

      1. It is submitted that Judge has failed to consider all the  evidence
      in the round in accordance with the principles of Tanveer Ahmed [2002]
      UKIAT 00439, contrary to what he says at paragraph 39, especially when
      considering the evidence he records at Para 53  and  Para  55  of  the
      determination.


      2. Furthermore, the Judge has failed to apply the correct standard  of
      proof on the evidence  available  instead  putting  the  Appellant  to
      strict proof particularly when, the parties are Muslims,  having  gone
      through both an Islamic and Civil Marriage.


      3. The Judge has further made inconsistent findings in relation to the
      subsistence of the marriage as  highlighted  at  paragraph  60/90,  he
      concluded that he did not find the relationship genuine and subsisting
      however on the other hand in conducting the five stage Razgar test  he
      accepted at paragraph 83 "the Appellant has family life with his  wife
      who lives in the United Kingdom. They are legally husband  and  wife."
      In these circumstances it is submitted that the Judge's  confusion  on
      this legal matter highlights a lack of understanding on  the  relevant
      law that should be considered either under the rules or Article  8  of
      the ECHR.


      Insurmountable obstacles


      4. It is submitted that the Judge has failed to  assess  factors  that
      were highlighted by the  parties  with  reference  to  the  degree  of
      difficulties [see MF (Nigeria) -v- Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2013] EWCA Civ  1129]  they  would  face  if  required  to
      relocate to Pakistan rather he  applies  the  test  of  insurmountable
      obstacles.


      5. In any case it appears at paragraph 74, the Judge appears  to  have
      misunderstood the issue of "insurmountable obstacles" as he states  "I
      therefore do not accept that there would be  insurmountable  obstacles
      with Mrs Jawaid returning to live in Pakistan with her husband, whilst
      he applies for entry clearance". The issue of insurmountable obstacles
      is not one with reference to a  short  period  of  time  in  the  home
      country; it is one of permanence as set out within the Rules.


      Findings of Fact


      6. Paragraph 55 - in relation to inconsistencies  highlighted  by  the
      Judge from paragraph 55 - 59 he fails to accord the parties  with  the
      benefit of doubt given that memory and recollection is not infallible.


      7.  Furthermore  the  Judge  has  factually  erred  through  his   own
      questioning and record of evidence from the witnesses as  to  some  of
      the findings  in  relation  to  inconsistencies.  (see  paragraph  29,
      paragraph 30 and Paragraph)


      8. Paragraph 61 - the Judge has factually erred when  he  stated  that
      the Appellant did not tell his wife about his Immigration status until
      after his arrest on 6th of  March  2013.  It  is  submitted  that  the
      Appellant had valid student leave before this date given that  it  was
      only on this date that it was curtailed. This evidence  is  consistent
      and does not highlight any omissions by the Appellant to his wife.


      9. Paragraph 63 - 65- the  Judge  concluded  the  Appellant  had  used
      deception to enter the United Kingdom however, as he obtained a Tier 4
      student visa and then failed to enrol at the college, however save for
      this there is no other evidence that the Appellant came to the  United
      Kingdom for reasons other than to study. No questions or evidence  was
      taken from the Appellant as to why he had not attended the college.


      Article 8 of the ECHR


      10. The Judge failed to ensure that the decision under the  rules  was
      consistent with the guidance of the Court of Appeal's decision in  MF,
      instead he adopts  a  separate  Article  8  assessment  from  Para  80
      onwards.  It  is  submitted  that  the  Judge   failed   to   consider
      cumulatively the following factors within the rules.


      11. That is the parties entered into a relationship at a  time  the  A
      was lawfully in the UK, it is accepted that they are  legally  married
      and able to satisfy the accommodation  and  maintenance  requirements,
      the A has no criminal convictions, has never claimed public funds  and
      has contributed to the economy through  his  employment,  the  sponsor
      would have certain language barriers (Para 40)  and  the  A's  refusal
      does not arise as a result of any criminal offending.


      12.  Furthermore,  there  was  no  consideration  of  the   principles
      established under jurisprudence of Article 8 of the ECHR, as  set  out
      in the case of Chikwamba  v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2008] UKHL which clearly set out that the public policy of
      requiring someone to return simply  to  apply  under  the  Immigration
      Rules,  when  they  are  able  to  satisfy  all  other  parts  of  the
      immigration rule will usually be a disproportionate measure.

8) Under the first  heading,  Mr  Dewar  criticised  the  determination  for
   failing to take a rounded view of the oral and documentary  evidence  and
   for failing to give the appellant the benefit of any  doubt.   The  judge
   erred as to the standard of proof, the appellant only having to make  out
   his claims to a reasonable degree of  likelihood.   That  undermined  the
   finding that the marriage was not genuine.  The appellant  and  his  wife
   went through both religious and civil ceremonies.  The determination  was
   inconsistent and logically absurd, because the  appellant  and  his  wife
   were either validly married or not.

9) Turning to insurmountable obstacles, Mr Dewar submitted  that  the  judge
   had not taken account of the true  degree  of  difficulty  faced  by  the
   appellant and his wife.  She would have to give  up  her  job,  and  they
   would lose their settled life in  the  UK  and  the  financial  stability
   presently enjoyed.  An  insurmountable  obstacle  did  not  mean  literal
   impossibility.   The  judge  took  an  overly  stringent  approach.    He
   misunderstood and misapplied the test.

10) As to the criticisms under the heading of findings  of  fact,  Mr  Dewar
   had nothing to add to the grounds.






11) Regarding Article 8, ECHR Mr Dewar submitted that  the  judge  ought  to
   have carried out the  second  part  of  the  2  stage  test  outlined  at
   paragraph 46 of MF [2013] EWCA Civ  119.   There  was  an  absence  of  a
   cumulative assessment.  That should  have  involved  consideration  of  6
   matters which together amounted to compelling circumstances for leave  to
   be granted outwith the Rules:

     i) The relationship commenced  while  the  appellant  was  in  the  UK
        lawfully.
    ii) The appellant and his partner are legally married.
   iii) Accommodation and maintenance requirements could be satisfied.
    iv) There was no criminal element in the case.
     v) There was a language barrier faced by the sponsor in Pakistan.
    vi) There was no element of reliance on public funds.

   The judge failed to address the case properly in terms of Chikwamba,  and
   should have found it disproportionate to expect the appellant to make any
   application from abroad.

12) Mr Matthews submitted  that  the  determination  was  in  some  respects
   confused, but its crux was at paragraph 60, finding that the relationship
   between the appellant and his partner was not genuine or subsisting.   If
   that conclusion was justified, everything else was beside the point.  The
   conclusion was  properly  open  to  the  judge.   What  the  judge  meant
   elsewhere in the determination, as at paragraph 83, was that the marriage
   was legally subsisting, but no more.  The  judge  properly  set  out  the
   factors for and against the appellant  and  gave  good  reasons  for  his
   conclusions, in and out  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  analysis  of
   discrepancies in the oral evidence showed that the appellant and his wife
   were  describing  two  different  occasions.   Any  confusion  about  the
   evidence given  was  in  the  grounds  (particularly  in  their  earlier,
   lengthier version) not in the determination.  The  spouses  gave  plainly
   inconsistent accounts of their marriage celebrations.  No error was shown
   in that analysis.  It was for the appellant to  prove  his  case  on  the
   balance of probability.  While  the  respondent  had  to  show  that  any
   interference with family and private life interests was  justified,  that
   was not an onus of proving the  facts.    In  the  final  proportionality
   assessment,  burden  and  standard  of   proof   are   irrelevant.    The
   determination showed some confusion over whether the case  hypothetically
   involved short term or long term separation,  but  that  was  immaterial,
   given the primary findings.  Even if the appellant and  his  wife  had  a
   genuine relationship, removal, with long term consequences, would not  be
   disproportionate.  It was misleading to  say  that  they  met  while  the
   appellant was here  lawfully.   The  circumstances  were  that  he  never
   enrolled at college and used deception from the outset.  His status could
   only properly have been regarded as precarious from the time he  met  his
   partner.  No weight should be given to him having had any  lawful  period
   of residence.  The finding at paragraph 83 that the appellant had  family
   life was inconsistent with the earlier  findings.   It  seemed  that  the
   judge thought that a legal marriage automatically led  to  a  finding  of
   family life.  That was not correct.  On the  findings  properly  reached,
   there was no need for a consideration outside the Rules, but in any event
   such a consideration should not succeed.  Such error as there was in  the
   determination did not require it to be set aside.

13) I reserved my determination.

14) The only point of  real  substance  raised  for  the  appellant  is  the
   apparent inconsistency over whether family life existed.   As  the  judge
   granting permission suspected, it becomes clear  on  examination  of  the
   determination and after submissions that the judge became confused  about
   what is required before embarking on a Razgar analysis.

15) The judge correctly considered the Rules first.

16)  The  refusal  decision  was  made  under  Appendix  FM,  including  the
   relationship requirements, which include:

    E-LTRP. 1.7: The relationship between the applicant and  their  partner
    must be genuine and subsisting.

    E-LTRP.1.8:  If the applicant and partner are married  or  in  a  civil
    partnership it must be  a  valid  marriage  or  civil  partnership,  as
    specified.

17) Those are two questions, so the judge had to  decide  not  only  whether
   there was a valid (in other words, legally subsisting) marriage but  also
   whether there was a genuine and  subsisting  relationship.   Despite  the
   valid marriage, it was open to the judge to conclude that there  was  not
   such a relationship.  He was right about the onus and standard of  proof.
   There were inadequacies  and  discrepancies  in  the  evidence  from  the
   appellant and his wife.  Their descriptions of  the  marriage  ceremonies
   and of their relationship did not  match.   There  was  no  onus  on  the
   tribunal to enquire  further  into  why  the  appellant  never  became  a
   student, a matter which spoke for itself, and which it was up to  him  to
   explain away if he could.    No error has been shown in  the  process  by
   which the judge arrived at his conclusion about  the  relationship.   The
   appellant continues to disagree, but the Upper Tribunal is  not  entitled
   to interfere.

18) Up to paragraph 60, no error is shown in the  determination.   There  is
   force in the Presenting Officer's submission that the rest is immaterial.

19) Appendix FM, EX.1:

    This paragraph applies if ... (b)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a partner who  is  in  the  UK  and  is  a
    British citizen ... and there are insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

20) On the  finding  about  relationship,  the  question  of  insurmountable
   obstacles was not decisive.  The further findings  in  the  determination
   are all only in the alternative.

21) The same applies  to  what  the  determination  says  about  Article  8.
   Gulshan (Article 8 - new rules - correct approach) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  640
   (IAC), reported since determination in this case, is a convenient  digest
   of the case law.  Only if there are arguably good  grounds  for  granting
   leave to remain outside the Rules is it necessary to consider whether the
   case presents compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under
   the Rules.  On the findings here, the case falls  well  short  of  either
   test.

22) For Article 8 purposes, there is a presumption of  family  life  between
   husband and wife, but it is not irrebuttable, as the judge seems to  have
   thought at paragraph 83.  On his findings,  properly  reached,  that  the
   relationship was not a genuine one, the judge did  not  have  to  make  a
   finding that family life existed.  In any event, on  his  findings  as  a
   whole, the proportionality balance could only have  been  struck  against
   the appellant.  Another outcome would have been irrational.

23) The determination does not err in any respect such as to require  it  to
   be set aside, and it shall stand.


                               [pic]
                                20 March 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
