
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14594/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 February 2014                           |On 26 February 2014          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                gaurav arora

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Rahman, Counsel, instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, a national of India who was  born  on  1  October  1990,
    appeals with leave against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bryant, who had dismissed his appeal against the respondent's  decision
    refusing his application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the  points-based  system.   The
    application was refused under paragraph 322(3) on the  basis  that  the
    appellant had failed  to  comply  with  a  condition  attached  to  his
    previous grant of leave to enter or remain.  It  was  the  respondent's
    case that  the  appellant's  previous  leave  had  been  subject  to  a
    condition that he was not allowed to study  at  any  institution  other
    than South London College, but that he had breached this  condition  by
    studying at another college, Lord  College,  without  the  respondent's
    consent.  It was for this reason that his application was refused under
    paragraph 322(3).

 2. Paragraph 322(3) of the Rules provides that leave should  normally  [my
    emphasis] be  refused  in  such  circumstances;  in  other  words,  the
    respondent must exercise a discretion as to  whether  or  not  in  such
    circumstances an application should be refused.  It was the appellant's
    case that the respondent had not exercised the discretion which he  had
    under  the  Rules,  and  that  accordingly  her  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.  His appeal before the Upper Tribunal  against
    Judge Bryant's decision was founded upon a submission that Judge Bryant
    had failed to appreciate that there was insufficient evidence on  which
    he could properly find that the discretion had been exercised.

 3. Before me, on behalf of the respondent, Mr Wilding conceded that he had
    to accept that there had been no evidence before Judge Bryant that  the
    respondent had in fact exercised the discretion which she had under the
    Rules, and that accordingly he could not challenge a finding  that  the
    decision had not been in accordance with the law.

 4. I agree and so find.  It follows that I must set aside  Judge  Bryant's
    determination as containing an error of law, and re-make  the  decision
    allowing the appellant's appeal to the limited extent that the decision
    was not in accordance with the law.  It was agreed on  behalf  of  both
    parties  that  following  the  decision  of  this  Tribunal   in   Ukus
    (discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT  00307,  the  discretion  not
    having been  exercised,  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  on  appeal  was
    limited to a  decision  that  the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law, and in those circumstances it was not open  to
    the Tribunal to exercise this discretion itself.

Discretion

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as containing  an  error
of law and substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is allowed to the limited extent that  this  decision
was not in accordance with the law.



Signed:                                 Dated:  15 February 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

