
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14621/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 22 December 2016                           |On 20 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             kopano wyne motasi
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



For the Respondent:    Mr B Inquai, instructed by Immigration Law LLP,
solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, allowing the claimant's application for an EEA
    residence card as an extended family member,  and  directing  that  she
    issue such a residence card.

 2. When deciding the appeal, on 4  May  2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Martins did not have the benefit of the decision of the Upper  Tribunal
    in Sala (EFMS: Right of Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT  00411  (IAC)  which  was
    promulgated on 19 August 2016.  Before that date, it had  been  thought
    that there was a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and onwards
    for  extended  family  members  challenging  decisions  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.  The position now is that the Upper Tribunal has held that
    there is no such right, and that therefore the only route to  challenge
    such a refusal is judicial review.

 3. When granting permission, again before the decision in Sala, First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chohan considered that there was an  arguable  error  of
    law by the First-tier Tribunal in  allowing  the  appeal  outright  and
    directing the issue of  a  residence  card.   The  Secretary  of  State
    contends that the Judge should have allowed the appeal  to  the  extent
    that the application remains before her for a lawful decision and  that
    the direction to issue a residence permit is ultra vires the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 4. However that argument is only reached if the Upper Tribunal's  decision
    in Sala that there is no right of appeal is wrong.   I accept that  the
    decision in Sala is not binding upon me, although it  is  binding  upon
    the First-tier Tribunal, but it is at least  highly  persuasive.   Sala
    stands unappealed and unchallenged in any court higher than  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  I am persuaded by the reasoning in Sala  and  accordingly  I
    conclude that I have no jurisdiction, that there  has  never  been  any
    jurisdiction in the Upper Tribunal to examine this application and that
    there is no valid appeal before me.

The Regulations

 5. The EEA Regulations at Regulation 26(1), define  the  circumstances  in
    which there is a right of appeal:

         "Appeal rights
         26(1) Subject to the following paragraphs  of  this  regulation,  a
         person may appeal under these Regulations against an EEA  decision.
         ..."                       [Emphasis added]

 6. The definition of 'EEA decision' is to be found at Regulation 2(1):


         "2(1) In these Regulations  ....'EEA  decision'  means  a  decision
         under these Regulations that concerns -
         (a) a person's entitlement to be admitted to the United Kingdom;
         (b) a person's entitlement to be issued with or  have  renewed,  or
         not to have revoked, a registration  certificate,  residence  card,
         derivative residence card, document certifying permanent  residence
         or permanent residence card;...
         but does not include decisions under regulations 24AA (human rights
         considerations and interim  orders  to  suspend  removal)  or  29AA
         (temporary  admission  in  order  to  submit  case   in   person);"
                                [Emphasis added]

    There is no mention in Regulation 2(1)  of  a  discretion  to  issue  a
    residence card,  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  found  was  the  case  in
    applications by extended family members.

The Upper Tribunal's reasoning in Sala

 7. The Upper Tribunal's decision is Sala  held  that  in  relation  to  an
    extended family member there is no entitlement in the Directive  or  in
    EU law or indeed in the Regulations.  It is a question of the  exercise
    of the Secretary of State's discretion.  At paragraph 44  of  Sala  the
    Upper Tribunal held that:

         "44. The fact that the right of appeal has  been  long  assumed  or
         accepted is not in itself determinative of  how  we  should  decide
         this appeal which must be based upon the proper construction of the
         EEA Regulations 2006 taking into account,  perhaps  for  the  first
         time, detailed submissions on the point.   'Longstanding  universal
         mistake'  is  not  a  canon  of  construction  of   a   legislative
         instrument; nor, in the case of domestic legislation, is there  any
         equivalent of art 31(3)(b) of the Vienna Convention on the  Law  of
         Treaties) adopted 23 May  1969,  Vienna,  Austria)  which  requires
         subsequent practice 'which establishes the agreement of the parties
         regarding  its  interpretation'  to  be  taken  into   account   in
         construing an international treaty."

 8. The Upper Tribunal rejected an argument by Mr O'Callaghan  to  describe
    the individual's position when discretion is exercised in his favour as
    amounting to an entitlement to a residence card and at paragraph 46 the
    Tribunal said this:

         "46. ...The plain fact is that the exercise of discretion sits upon
         the basis upon which he or she qualifies as an EFM and the  outcome
         of whether or not the residence card is  to  be  issued.   If  this
         latter situation can properly be described as an entitlement to the
         residence card, it would merge into one category  situations  where
         choice exists (a discretion) and those where a duty  or  obligation
         arises.  Only in the latter case can it be said that the individual
         seeking the benefit of the decision-making process has a  right  to
         that  benefit  or  outcome.   There  is  a  clear   jurisprudential
         distinction, well recognised in public law generally,  between  the
         exercise of discretion and  the  carrying  out  of  a  duty.   That
         distinction is,  in  our  judgment,  reflected  in  the  provisions
         dealing with the issue of residence cards under the EEA Regulations
         2006.  As the case law makes clear, the only right  or  entitlement
         that an  EFM  has  in  the  decision-making  process  is  that  the
         discretion whether to issue a residence card is exercised  lawfully
         and in accordance with the  Citizens  Directive  (Rahman  at  [21]-
         [25])".

    (The reference to Rahman is to SSHD v Rahman and Others  (Case  C-8311)
    [2013] Imm  AR 73 which held that the  Member  State's  obligations  to
    EFMs are limited, only requiring it to facilitate entry  and  residence
    in  accordance  with  national  legislation  founded  on  an  extensive
    examination of an individual's personal circumstances.)

 9. The Tribunal concluded, at paragraph 84 as follows:

         "84. Although we have found the  issue  raised  in  this  appeal  a
         difficult one, we see no sustainable argument to  deflect  us  from
         the natural meaning of the definition of an  EEA  decision  in  reg
         2(1) point (b) that we identified earlier.  A decision taken by the
         Secretary of State in the exercise of her discretion not  to  issue
         an EFM with a residence card under reg  17(4)  is  not  a  decision
         under  the  EEA  Regulations  2006  which  'concerns   a   person's
         entitlement to be issued with... a residence card."

Claimant's arguments

10. Mr Inquai came prepared to argue whether Sala should  be  followed.   I
    have agreed to record  his  arguments  in  my  decision,  in  case  the
    question of want of  jurisdiction  should  be  disputed  elsewhere.  Mr
    Inquai relied on [22], [41]-[49] and [84] in  the  reasoning  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Grubb in Sala.

11. Put shortly, and I hope I do his argument no injustice by so doing,  he
    argued that the Upper Tribunal  had  taken  an  unnecessary  legalistic
    approach to the wording of the EEA Regulations, and  in  particular  to
    the definition of 'EEA decision' at Regulation 2(1) which underpins the
    right of appeal at Regulation 26(1), and should, instead, have taken  a
    purposive approach which would have included extended family members.

12. For the purpose of clarity, I consider  these  submissions  unarguable.
    The decision in Sala is clear and there is  no  need  for  a  purposive
    approach in these circumstances.  I follow Sala and allow the Secretary
    of State's appeal.

Conclusions

The First-tier Tribunal made a material error  of  law.   I  set  aside  the
decision and remake it.

There is no valid appeal before the Upper Tribunal.



Signed:     Judith A J C Gleeson                          Date:  19  January
2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

