
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14372/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th October 2014                             |On 16th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  Saira Bi

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain, Counsel instructed by RKS Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Henderson made following a hearing at Bradford on 25th June 2014.





Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1st  January  1942.   She
    entered the UK as a visitor on 25th September  2011  and  purported  to
    make an in time application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  22nd
    March 2012,  which was rejected and followed by  a  series  of  further
    rejections on  the  basis  that  the  applications  were  made  on  the
    incorrect form and without a fee.

 3. The claimant then made an application for indefinite  leave  to  remain
    out of time outside the Immigration Rules which was ultimately  refused
    on 26th February 2014 by reference to paragraph 322(1), A277C, Appendix
    FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The claimant is aged 72 and in very poor health.  Her husband  died  in
    2009 and all of her children and grandchildren,  siblings,  nieces  and
    nephews are in the UK.  She has a stepson in Pakistan but no  immediate
    biological family there.

 5. The judge accepted that the evidence given of her situation in Pakistan
    was broadly consistent.  She lived alone in the family  home  prior  to
    living here and was having increasing difficulty in  managing  to  look
    after herself.  She has two  children  resident  in  the  UK  and  five
    sisters and one brother here.  The  judge  accepted  that  it  was  not
    implausible that the stepson and  his  wife  would  conclude  that  the
    claimant was not their responsibility and that they were  not  a  long-
    term solution for her care needs.

 6. The judge also accepted that the claimant wished to live  out  her  old
    age in Pakistan but now realised that she needed the care  and  support
    of her immediate family. Her health had deteriorated since her  arrival
    in 2011 but that before that date she wished to remain in Pakistan.

 7. The judge recorded the claimant's health difficulties.  She has serious
    mobility problems which affect her ability to wash, go to the bathroom,
    cook for herself, dress in the morning and get ready for bed.

 8. The judge recorded that the claimant did not qualify  for  leave  under
    the Immigration Rules.  The application was made out of time  following
    a catalogue of invalid applications and made  after  her  children  had
    persuaded her that she could not return.  She clearly had  not  severed
    all cultural and social ties with Pakistan and had not been in  the  UK
    for the relevant period so as to qualify for leave to  remain  here  on
    private life grounds.

 9. There were very strong emotional bonds between  the  claimant  and  her
    children here and further elements of dependency  going  beyond  normal
    emotional ties between adults as defined in Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA
    Civ 31.  However the claimant's removal would be in accordance with the
    law and in pursuit of a legitimate aim.

10. The judge then considered proportionality.  She said that the facts  of
    the case were not in themselves unusual but social and cultural ties to
    Pakistan were of less importance to the claimant  than  the  continuing
    emotional bonds with close family members.  It would not  be  practical
    for the claimant's son or daughter-in-law or daughter  to  relocate  to
    Pakistan in order to provide care there.

11. She concluded as follows:

         "I have taken into account that the Appellant is an overstayer  and
         she had no expectation that she should be allowed to  remain  here.
         However she is an elderly and vulnerable woman who seeks to  remain
         here not for any economic advantage but to enjoy the  remainder  of
         her life surrounded by close family who are settled  here  and  can
         support her.  The lack of close family in Pakistan is not contrived
         by her or her family to avoid her return.  All six of her surviving
         siblings  are  in  this  country  and  all  of  her  children   and
         grandchildren.  She should have made an  application  to  enter  in
         using the correct procedures from outside the country but I  accept
         that her family considered that she could soldier  on  in  Pakistan
         since as she stated this would be her preference.   I  accept  that
         there are compelling circumstances in her appeal not simply on  the
         basis of her physical needs but  because  of  the  lack  of  family
         resident  in  Pakistan  who  are  willing  to  help  her  and   the
         circumstances of family members here.  Any decision  to  force  her
         removal would not only be unjustifiably harsh for her but also  her
         immediate family who wish to make sure that she is adequately cared
         for and who have responsibilities to their  own  families  in  this
         country."

The Grounds of Application

12. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the claimant was  in  effect  seeking  leave  to  remain  as  an  adult
    dependent relative.  The entry clearance  provisions  require  that  an
    applicant be unable to obtain the required level of care in the country
    where they are  living  and  further  imposes  a  requirement  that  an
    applicant be accommodated and maintained adequately without recourse to
    public funds. The judge decided the application under Article 8 by  way
    of a "freewheeling analysis unencumbered by  the  Rules",  an  approach
    deprecated by the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640.

13. Second the judge erred in law by misdirecting herself as to the  burden
    and standard of proof in referring to implausibility  rather  than  the
    civil standard, namely the balance of probabilities.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge  Omotosho  for  the  reasons
    stated in the grounds on 1st September 2014.

Submissions

15.  Mrs  Pettersen  relied  on  her  grounds  and   submitted   that   any
    consideration of the facts of this case should have been  made  through
    the prism of the relevant entry clearance  application.   The  claimant
    was in a similar position to many others, her  circumstances  were  not
    exceptional in any way, and the appeal should have been dismissed.

16. Mr Hussain submitted that this was an experienced Immigration Judge who
    plainly understood the correct standard of  proof  which  was  set  out
    correctly in the determination.

17. With respect to the Rules he said that it was not open to the Secretary
    of State to transpose the Rules for out of country  dependent  relative
    applications to cases involving in country applications  under  Article
    8.  The judge had taken full account of the guiding case  law  relating
    to Appendix FM and reached a decision open to her.  The  Rules  were  a
    starting point for the evaluation of Article 8 and not  a  trump  card.
    The question of proportionality was entirely a matter for the judge.

18. So far as the Gulshan point was concerned he relied on the case  of  MM
    (Lebanon) & Ors, R (On the Application Of) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  985  which  has  cast  doubt  on  the
    necessity for an intermediate test.  In his submission the Secretary of
    State was simply attempting to reargue the case.

Findings and Conclusions

19. There is no basis for setting this decision aside because there  was  a
    misapplication of the standard of proof.  The correct standard,  namely
    the balance of probabilities, was properly set out in the determination
    and references to  implausibility  do  not  establish  that  the  wrong
    standard was applied.

20. The starting point for the consideration in  this  appeal  is  that  an
    Appellate Tribunal will not likely interfere with  the  findings  of  a
    First-tier Tribunal which has heard the evidence.

21. The main argument in favour of the Secretary of State is that the judge
    erred in failing to take into account  what  she  says  is  a  relevant
    Immigration Rule, namely the Rule which sets out the requirements to be
    met when making an application  for  entry  clearance  as  a  dependent
    relative.

22. First, there is no evidence at all that the Secretary of  State  relied
    on that argument at any stage in these proceedings.   The  reasons  for
    refusal letter considers the application in line with paragraph 276ADE.
     There is no reference in it to the present argument  that,  since  the
    claimant does not meet the requirements of E-ECDR.2.5, leave to  remain
    should not be granted.

23. Furthermore no reference was made to the entry clearance provisions  in
    the  Presenting  Officer's  submissions  which  are  set  out  in   the
    determination. In  particular  no  mention  at  all  was  made  of  any
    requirements to satisfy maintenance and accommodation provisions  until
    the present challenge to this determination. It cannot be an  error  of
    law for the judge to fail to deal with an argument which was not made.

24. Second it is by no means clear that, even if the judge had referred  to
    the entry clearance provisions, that the out of country  rule  was  not
    met.  On the accepted evidence the claimant  is  a  person  who  cannot
    dress herself properly, wash, cook, wash her clothing or  walk  up  and
    down stairs unaided.  She has severely restricted mobility. There is no
    challenge in the grounds to the  judge's  findings  of  fact  that  the
    claimant has no biological relatives in Pakistan who are able  to  care
    for her and that her stepson and his wife are not a long-term  solution
    for her care needs. Moreover the judge recorded  that  whilst  physical
    care could be provided by paid care and nursing, this was  a  situation
    where the claimant  was  emotionally  dependent  upon  family  in  this
    country.

25. The Secretary of State has therefore not shown that even if  the  rules
    were a relevant consideration for the judge, that  her  decision  would
    have been any different.

26. So far as Gulshan is concerned, reference was made to the relevant case
    law at paragraph 39 of the determination where the judge states that:

         "If after fully considering family or private life under the  Rules
         and finding that a claim fails, then it would be sufficient to  say
         that and it would not be necessary to have to go  on  and  consider
         the case separately from the Rules."

27. The Secretary of State has not established that the judge erred in law.



Decision

28. The judge did not err in law and her decision stands.   The  claimant's
    appeal is allowed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

