
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14647/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th August 2015                  |On 21st August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                HAKIM ACHOUI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Jacobs, Counsel, instructed by BMAP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appeal

1.   This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on  1  May  2015  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Munonyedi who allowed the Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of 13 March 2014 to remove the appellant from  the
    UK.  The Appellant in this case is the Secretary  of  State.   For  the
    purposes of this decision I refer to the parties as they  were  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

2.   In summary, the Appellant is a citizen of Algeria  born  on  29  August
    1971.  On 14 January 2013 he applied for indefinite leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom for reasons outside of the Immigration  Rules.   The
    basis of the Appellant's claim was  that  he  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in June 1997 using a French identity card and had  remained  in
    the UK living and working here in an assumed name.

3.   The Respondent, in the decision dated  13th  March  2014,  refused  the
    Appellant's application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  for  reasons
    outside of the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant had  argued  that  his
    former solicitors, McClee and Co., had been paid to make an application
    for him on 11th January 2012.  The Respondent noted that the  Appellant
    had three failed application attempts  before  the  withdrawal  of  the
    fourteen year long residence  rules  in  July  2012:  the  first  being
    refused  on  1st  March  2012.   The  respondent  accepted   that   the
    Appellant's former representatives had been closed down, but considered
    that the Appellant had over four months to  make  a  valid  application
    after the first refusal and did not do so. The  Respondent  noted  that
    the Appellant's former representatives sought to make applications  but
    payment was declined.  The Respondent did not  accept  that  discretion
    could be applied in the Appellant's case  and  stated  that  they  were
    unwilling to consider the Appellant's application under  the  withdrawn
    long residency rules

4.   The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Munonyedi  on
    27th March 2015.  The judge made clear findings that, contrary  to  the
    Respondent's position, the  Appellant  had  been  continuously  in  the
    United Kingdom since June 1997.

5.   Having made that finding, the judge accepted the  appellant's  evidence
    as to his dealings with his former solicitor and went  on  to  consider
    whether or not it was reasonable for the Respondent not to exercise her
    discretion.  The judge  considered  the  case  of  Teisha  Forrester  v
    Secretary of State [2008] EWHC 2307 (Admin).  The judge also had regard
    to the case of Thakur (PBS - common  law  fairness)  Bangladesh  [2011]
    UKUT 00151 (IAC), in relation to the common law duty of fairness.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the Appellant  had  made  what  he
    believed to be a bona fide application in January 2012, was unaware  of
    the failure of his former  representatives  to  make  that  application
    until November 2012 and  was  left  in  a  position  without  a  proper
    application before the Respondent.  It was the judge's position that if
    the application had been properly made and payment accepted in  January
    2012 that it was more likely than not that  the  Appellant  would  have
    been granted indefinite leave to remain  in  the  UK,  under  the  then
    Immigration Rules paragraph 276B.

6.   However, the judge then went on to quash the Respondent's decision  and
    purported to allow the appeal outright.

7.   The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the grounds that the judge had failed to adequately resolve
    a material conflict as it was argued that it was not sufficiently clear
    how the appeal had been disposed and, on the second  ground,  that  the
    judge had made a material misdirection of law in  purporting  to  allow
    the appeal outright when the only course open to the judge was to remit
    the matter back for a lawful decision to be reached by the Secretary of
    State for the Home Department.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes
    on the basis that it was arguable that the judge had no power to  quash
    a decision of the Secretary of State, and in  finding  that  discretion
    had not been exercised was not in a position to  exercise  it  himself.
    Judge Parkes went on to state that the findings were clear but may well
    not be adequate.

9.   The appeal then  came  before  me.   Ms  Fijiwala  for  the  respondent
    indicated that the parties had reached  agreement  that  there  was  an
    error of law in the disposal of the case by Judge  Munonyedi  and  that
    the case should be remitted to the Respondent to properly exercise  her
    discretion.

10.  Mr Jacobs for the Appellant asked that it be noted that there had  been
    no challenge by the Respondent to the findings of fact  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and asked for directions  that  these  findings  be
    preserved.  It was his view that  the  only  possible  outcome  from  a
    remittal to the Secretary of State would be a grant of indefinite leave
    to remain.   That is a matter for the Secretary of State.  Additionally
    although Mr Jacobs asked for directions that  the  Secretary  of  State
    remake her decision within 3 months, it is  not  for  the  Tribunal  to
    fetter the Secretary of State in this manner.

11.  There was no challenge before me to  the  findings  of  fact  of  Judge
    Munonyedi and these are preserved.  I do find however  that  the  judge
    erred  in  law  in  the  disposal  of  the  Appellant's  appeal.    The
    jurisprudence including the case of Ukus [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC), it is
    clear that when the decision maker has failed to exercise a  discretion
    vested in him the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is limited to a decision
    that renders  the  decision  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
    appropriate course for the Tribunal is to require the decision maker to
    complete his task by reaching a  lawful  decision  on  the  outstanding
    application.

12.  In the circumstances, I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge which did involve an error on point of  law.   I  remake
    the decision allowing the appeal to  the  extent  that  it  is  not  in
    accordance with the law and remitting the  case  to  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department for her lawful decision to be reached, to
    allow the Secretary of State to exercise her discretion.

13.  No anonymity direction was made at  the  First-tier  and  no  anonymity
    direction ought or made now.

Notice of Decision

14.  The Secretary of State's appeal succeeds to  the  limited  extent  that
    the case is remitted to the Secretary of  State  to  await  her  lawful
    decision.


Signed   Date: 19th August 2015

M. M. Hutchinson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
    TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As this is the Secretary of State's appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 19th August 2015

M. M. Hutchinson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

