

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ia 14651-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   17.01.2014|
|on    17.01.2014                              |sent out:       20.01.2014   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                                Jean Eyo NISA
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Jonathan Martin  (counsel instructed by Akin Palmer)
For the respondent: Mr Nigel Bramble


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Vivian Horvath), sitting at Taylor House on 1  November
    2013, to  (apart from the removal directions, not lawful when  made)  a
    student/article 8 appeal by a citizen of Nigeria, born 25 March 1980.

 2. On 17 April 2013 the appellant had been refused leave to  remain  as  a
    student, on the basis that the purposes for which she  wished  to  stay
    were not covered by the Immigration  Rules.  Mr  Martin  conceded  that
    there was no basis of any kind for her being allowed to stay, simply to
    take her degree in person: an enjoyable end to an academic career,  but
    not a necessary one.

 3. However, when it came to the other purpose, which was for the appellant
    to defend herself against a charge of plagiarism in her thesis, brought
    against her by her university, Mr Martin submitted  that  this  was  an
    exceptional case, on which the judge could and should have allowed  her
    appeal under article 8, even though by the  date  of  the  hearing  the
    charge had been dropped, and she had been allowed  to  proceed  to  her
    degree. His case was that  the  Home  Office  should  have  taken  into
    account in the first place, in considering the appellant's case outside
    the Rules, that she would not be able successfully to apply for further
    studies if she were in this country with nothing more than  the  s.  3C
    leave given by a pending appeal.

 4. While the requirements of the  Rules  had  of  course  to  be  lawfully
    considered as at the date of the decision  under  appeal,  and  nothing
    that happened afterwards could affect the question of  whether  or  not
    that had been done, there is no issue in  this  case  under  the  Rules
    themselves. It is equally clear that the  judge  had  to  consider  the
    appellant's position under article 8 at the date of the hearing  before
    her, which she did.

 5. The judge dealt  at  some  length  at  paragraphs  16  -  17  with  the
    appellant's evidence about exactly what further courses she  wanted  to
    do, which she did not accept, for reasons she  gave.  While  Mr  Martin
    suggested that the judge  had  failed  to  understand  the  appellant's
    position on s. 3C leave,  her  reasons  were  not  based  just  on  the
    appellant's failure to get accepted on a further course,  but  even  to
    find one. That is not something which the  appellant's  basis  of  stay
    prevented her from doing, and in my view the judge was entitled to rely
    on it.

 6. That is one point on which the judge's article 8  decision  has  to  be
    upheld, though she included it in the  part  of  it  dealing  with  the
    Rules. The other comes  at  her  paragraph  26,  where  she  gave  full
    consideration to the appellant's position as a student who has not been
    able to stay here and finish all the studies she would have  liked  to:
    there is no suggestion that the appellant  could  have  had  any  other
    claim to remain under article 8.

 7. Here the judge, though Patel & others  [2013] UKSC 72 had not come  out
    by the date of her decision, took very much the line set  out  by  Lord
    Carnwath at paragraph 57: "The opportunity for a promising  student  to
    complete his course in  this  country,  however  desirable  in  general
    terms, is not in itself a right protected under article 8."  The  judge
    cannot be faulted for this: while the appellant's situation at the date
    of the decision under appeal was certainly unfortunate for her,  having
    to defend herself on a plagiarism charge which was  later  dropped,  by
    the date of the hearing she had done that successfully.


 8. The fact that this meant the appellant had lost an opportunity to apply
    to stay for further studies (rather than a course she was  already  on,
    as in Patel & others) did not involve any interference with her private
    life, against which she was entitled to the protection  of  article  8,
    whether or not the judge was entitled to reject her evidence about  her
    study intentions.

Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



