
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14414/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 21st September 2016              |On: 30th September 2016              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 Naseeb Gul
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan date of birth 2nd August 1988.
    On the 26th January 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen allowed  his
    appeal against a decision to refuse to grant further leave as a Tier  4
    (General)  Student  Migrant.  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department now has permission to appeal against that decision.




 2. The crux of the appeal before the Tribunal who was whether the  Mr  Gul
    had fallen victim to unfairness after  his  Tier  4  Sponsor,  Bradford
    Regional College, had had its licence revoked, resulting in  him  being
    denied further leave.


 3. Judge Brunnen was informed by Mr Gul that he had made his  application,
    accompanied by his valid CAS, in May 2014. He started  his  studies  in
    June 2014.   By the end of the summer the college had been closed  down
    and in March 2015 he received notification that further leave was being
    refused.  Mr Gul asked for nothing more than a '60 day letter', that is
    a letter conferring a short period of leave to enable him to get a  new
    CAS and make a new application.  Judge Brunnen considered that to be  a
    fair and lawful resolution of the situation and allowed the  appeal  on
    that limited basis.


 4. The Respondent now appeals on the grounds that the Home Office  records
    show that Mr Gul had in fact been issued with 'a 60 day letter' back in
    March 2015 when the application had been refused.   This  had  been  in
    accordance with policy and there was no unfairness. The appeal had been
    on a 'float' list and so the Home Office Presenting  Officer  had  been
    disadvantaged by not having  the  file.  There  had  therefore  been  a
    procedural irregularity in the way that the decision had been reached.






    My Findings


 5. This appeal is hopelessly without merit for the following reasons:


              i)  The  suggestion  that  the  Home  Office   is   materially
                 disadvantaged by the procedure of  cases  being  listed  as
                 'floats' is not sustainable. The Home Office  are  informed
                 in advance what cases are going to be on the floats  lists,
                 just as they are appeals listed in the ordinary way.


             ii) The Presenting Officer on the day, Mr Richardson,  made  no
                 application for an adjournment. If he had  considered  that
                 he was in some way unable to prosecute the case effectively
                 he should have indicated that to Judge Brunnen.


            iii) There is in fact no evidence to support the assertion  that
                 Mr Richardson did not have the file. Before me Mr  Harrison
                 had to concede that the file does contain  Mr  Richardson's
                 notes of the hearing.  Whilst it is possible that these may
                 have  been  added  to  the  file  at  a  later  date,   the
                 determination itself  records  [at  paragraph  4]  that  Mr
                 Richardson submitted further documents, in addition to  the
                 already served appeal bundle. It is difficult to see  where
                 he got those documents from if he did not have the file.


             iv) The whole point of Mr Gul's case is that he did not receive
                 a '60 day letter' when he got the refusal  in  March  2015.
                 On the evidence before the Tribunal, Judge Brunnen accepted
                 that to be the case. That was the evidence before  him  and
                 he cannot be criticised for not having regard  to  evidence
                 or submissions that he was not made aware of.


 6. The Secretary of State has not demonstrated there to be  any  error  of
    law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.



      Decisions


 7. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.


 8. There is no order for anonymity.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           21st September
                                    2016

