
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14926/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke on Trent    |Decision & Reasons                |
|On 24th May 2016                          |On 26th July 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                            MR UCHENNA ONWUSAKAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Simon Harding (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Andy McVeety (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Coffey promulgated 30th July 2015, following a hearing at  Hatton
    Cross on 20th May 2015.  In the determination, the judge dismissed  the
    appeal of Uchenna Onwusakah, whereupon  the  latter  applied,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is male, a citizen of Nigeria, who was born on  12th  May
    1974.  He appeals against the decision of the Respondent  Secretary  of
    State, dated 17th April 2013, refusing his application for a  residence
    card as the spouse of a non-EEA citizen, namely, Mrs Ivana Paiskova,  a
    citizen of Bulgaria, who is exercising treaty rights in the UK.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that his marriage is  a  marriage  that  meets
    with the EEA Regulations under Regulations 2(1) and Regulation 17(1) of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had regard to the relevant history of the Appellant which  is
    set out in the refusal letter as well, and this confirms that  as  long
    ago as 10th February 2009, the Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK under the Tier 1 Highly Skilled (Post-Study) programme
    was refused.  He was issued with a refusal  notice.   He  then  claimed
    asylum in September 2009 on the basis that he  was  a  homosexual.   On
    19th January 2012, he married Ivana Paiskova in  Manchester.   On  17th
    April 2013 his application for a residence card was refused.   On  23rd
    January 2013  he  was  sentenced  to  sixteen  weeks'  imprisonment  by
    Manchester Magistrates' Court for possessing a licence with  intent  to
    deceive.  On 15th June 2013 he submitted an application for a residence
    card as a non-EEA family member of a Bulgarian or Romanian national who
    is exercising treaty rights in the UK.  For this reason, the  Appellant
    was invited for an interview  together  with  his  EEA  national  wife.
    However, the interview answers shows a large  number  of  discrepancies
    which are set out (see page 3 of 6 of refusal letter).

 5. The judge had regard to the Appellant's core submission that he was not
    involved in a marriage of convenience and that the requirements of  the
    Regulations had been met.  They now had a son together  (see  paragraph
    12).

 6. Nevertheless, the judge went on  to  hold  that  there  were  "numerous
    material differences" between the Appellant and the Sponsor's evidence"
    (see paragraph 25).  For example, the Appellant stated that the Sponsor
    suffered from cancer and had surgery to remove a cancerous  lump.   But
    the Sponsor stated that she had not suffered from cancer.  The  account
    given by the parties of their wedding  day  was  materially  different.
    The account that they gave of the frequency with  which  the  Appellant
    saw his son, David, was different (see paragraph 25).  The  judge  went
    on to say that the Appellant was not able to produce any photographs of
    his baby son at the hospital on its own despite  stating  that  he  had
    them with him at the hearing.  The Sponsor was invited to show pictures
    following the birth (the Appellant having stated that  they  must  have
    been taken on her phone) but she said that they had not been  taken  on
    the phones.  The judge held that, "I was not given any such photographs
    to consider" (paragraph 28).  Furthermore, the judge recorded how  "the
    Appellant could not recall what the  Sponsor  was  doing  the  previous
    Friday" (paragraph 30).

 7. In his conclusions, the judge went on to say that, "I accept  there  is
    plenty documentary evidence of  cohabitation"  but  deduced  from  this
    that, "I regret the Appellant is creating a facade of  cohabitation  in
    order to succeed in his application" (paragraph 34).  Furthermore,  the
    judge held that, "I find it material that the Sponsor did not visit the
    Appellant during his three month prison sentence and at  interview  did
    not know the correct length of the sentence" (paragraph 36).   For  the
    sake of completeness, the judge went on to conclude  that,  "of  course
    the Appellant states that  his  baby  son  is  evidence  of  a  genuine
    marriage" but that, "I have not seen the birth certificate but there is
    a copy with the Home  Office  and  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  the
    Appellant is not named on this as the father".  Nevertheless, the judge
    concluded that, "this alone is not proof of parentage and even  if  the
    Appellant is the father, this is not conclusive proof that the marriage
    is  genuine"  (paragraph  37).   Finally,  the  judge  ended  with  the
    observation that the Appellant had stated that he was a  homosexual  in
    his asylum claim "but there is  no  mention  of  this  in  the  current
    application" (paragraph 38).  The appeal was dismissed in the light  of
    the fact that,  "This  Appellant  has  a  history  of  seeking  to  use
    available avenues in order to secure  his  immigration  status  in  the
    United Kingdom" (paragraph 39).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  there  was   evidence   of
    cohabitation of nearly four years and there was now  a  child  and  the
    judge had failed to heed the decision in Papajorgji [2012] UKUT  00038,
    which was to the effect  that,  "A  marriage  of  convenience  in  this
    context is a marriage contracted for the sole or  decisive  purpose  of
    gaining admission to the host State".  Given the period of cohabitation
    and the birth of the child this could not now be said to  be  the  case
    here.

10. On 5th January 2016, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 24th May 2016, Mr Harding, in  careful  and
    measured submissions before me,  stated  that  the  judge  should  have
    attached more weight to the fact that there was a child of the marriage
    and that there was a lengthy period  of  cohabitation.   He  said,  the
    judge gave too much weight to discrepancies.  The latter  was  relevant
    to the assessment of a "genuine" marriage, which is undertaken when the
    Immigration Rules are in contemplation.  It is not the core issue  when
    regard is had to whether the marriage in question  is  a  "marriage  of
    convenience" because one could have a luckless  and  joyless  marriage,
    but still have a marriage which was not a marriage of convenience.

12. For his part, Mr McVeety submitted that the judge was not oblivious  to
    these matters.  A large number of questions were asked of the Appellant
    and the Sponsor and the judge concluded  that  the  discrepancies  were
    such that  this  could  not  be  anything  other  than  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  The judge had focussed  on  the  issue  of  "marriage  of
    convenience" as being the  relevant  question  for  her  to  determine.
    Moreover, the essential question was the weight that the  judge  should
    give to the facts before her.  That was something that  the  judge  had
    correctly undertaken as her task and no criticism could be made of her.



13. Finally, although there may be now a child, the Rules require  a  focus
    on how the marriage is entered into and  for  what  purposes.   It  may
    later break down or it may later flourish.  That was not the  question.
    The question was how it was entered into.  The judge,  considering  all
    the facts, and in particular the appalling  history  of  the  Appellant
    whereby he was actually determined to remain here by hook or crook, was
    something that the judge attached  considerable  weight  to.   She  was
    entitled to do so.

14. In reply, Mr Harding submitted that whereas it was right that the judge
    should decide for herself what weight to give the evidence before  her,
    the weight should be given to the correct concept in play.  The concept
    here was that of a "marriage of convenience" and not that of a "genuine
    and subsisting marriage" under the Immigration Rules.  The  Grounds  of
    Appeal had referred to the case of Papajorgji but  the  judge  made  no
    reference to this and what this case stated was  that  a  "marriage  of
    convenience"  was  one  simply  entered  into  for  the   purposes   of
    immigration.  This could not now be said given that there was child and
    a period  of  cohabitation,  whereby  the  parties  were  still  living
    together as man and wife.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCE 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are as
    follows.  Despite Mr Harding's attractive submissions and  attempts  to
    persuade me otherwise, I cannot say that  the  judge,  looking  at  the
    determination as a whole and in the round, fell into an error of law.

16. The judge did not have regard to irrelevant  considerations.   She  did
    not overlook any relevant considerations.  Although, she ends with  the
    observation that "this Appellant  has  a  history  of  seeking  to  use
    available avenues in order to secure his immigration status"  she  went
    on to say that, "I conclude that, notwithstanding  the  Sponsor  having
    given birth to a son, there is clear evidence in this  case  that  this
    marriage is a  'marriage  of  convenience'  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Regulations" (paragraph 39).

17. The judge came to this conclusion on the basis of the  very  protracted
    and extensive methods employed by  this  Appellant  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom in whichever way he could.

18. The birth of the child, consequent upon a period of cohabitation, could
    just as easily have been regarded by the  judge  as  emanating  from  a
    "marriage of convenience", as the marriage in question itself  -  which
    the judge had concluded was a marriage for the purposes of  immigration
    settlement.

19. Second, it was not just the immigration record of the  Appellant,  that
    troubled the judge.  What was strikingly obvious before the judge,  was
    the enormous discrepancies in the answers given by  the  Appellant  and
    his sponsoring partner.  These are set  out  by  the  judge  under  the
    heading "Marriage Interview Record Form", and they range  all  the  way
    from the account that the parties gave of their  wedding  day,  to  the
    frequency with which the Appellant sees his son, David, and to  whether
    the Sponsor suffered from cancer or did not suffer from cancer.

20. Significantly, at paragraph 30, the judge refers to recent events, such
    as what the Sponsor was doing the previous Friday, and  the  fact  that
    the Appellant could not recall his partner's mobile telephone number.

21. In short, the judge did ask herself the right question and did  ascribe
    the right weight to the evidence before her as she saw  fit.   She  did
    not have regard to any irrelevant  matter  all  relevant  circumstances
    taken into account.

Notice of Decision

22. There is no material error of law in the Immigration  Judge's  decision
    and the determination shall stand.

23. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd July 2016














