
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14102/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 4 May 2017                       |On 11 May 2017                          |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                               Mr waqas mazhar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by S G Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on  19  October  2016  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla which refused  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the refusal of an EEA residence card.

 2. The appellant maintains that he is entitled to a residence card  as  he
    is married to an EEA national who is working in the UK.

 3. The history of the matter is that the appellant came to the UK in 2009.
     The papers do not suggest that he has had legal status  at  any  time.
    In February 2012 he made an application as the unmarried partner  of  a
    British national.  That application was refused on 11 January 2013.  On
    24 January 2013 the appellant made an application for a residence  card
    on the basis of his relationship with an EEA  national.   On  13  March
    2013 the appellant married that EEA national.  On 28 September 2013 the
    respondent refused the application finding that the marriage was one of
    convenience.  The appellant's appeal against that decision was  refused
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shamash on 14 July 2014, the  respondent's
    that the marriage was one of convenience being upheld.

 4. The appellant  then  made  a  further  EEA  spouse  application  for  a
    residence card on 19 January 2015.  The application was refused  on  20
    March 2015.  The appeal against that decision led to a  hearing  before
    Judge Aujla on 11 October 2016.

 5. At the hearing on 11 October 2016 the appellant  did  not  attend,  his
    wife did not attend  and  there  was  no  appearance  for  him  by  his
    representatives.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Aujla  dealt  with  that
    matter as follows:

         "13.  The  Appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing  and  was  not
             represented at the hearing.  No explanation  for  his  absence
             and that of her representatives was received.  I was satisfied
             from the Tribunal file that the notice of hearing was properly
             and  timeously  served  on  both   the   appellant   and   his
             representatives.  The notice was sent on 01 October  2016.   I
             waited  until  11.30am  in  case  the  Appellant  and/or   his
             representatives were late.  None of  them  having  arrived,  I
             resolved to proceed with the hearing in  the  absence  of  the
             Appellant  and  her  representatives  under  Rule  28  of  the
             Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and
             Asylum Chamber)  Rules  2014.   I  concluded  the  hearing  at
             11.35am.

         14.  However, at 12.20, whilst I was hearing another case, my clerk
             gave  me  the  faxed  letter  of  07  October  2016  from  the
             Appellant's solicitors which they had faxed to Taylor House on
             07 October 2016 at 1447.  The letter included with it a letter
             from the Appellant's doctor stating that he could  not  attend
             because he had a stiff back and pain in his letter  (sic)  and
             asked to postpone the hearing.  As I had already concluded the
             hearing, I did not  consider  it  appropriate  to  reopen  the
             matter and therefore did not revisit this appeal.

         15.  Incidentally, even if I had reopened the matter, I  would  not
             have adjourned the hearing.  I would not have  considered  the
             letter from the doctor to be sufficient, given its wording, to
             justify an adjournment.   The  letter  did  not  indicate  the
             Appellant was  hospitalised,  bedridden,  unable  to  walk  or
             unable to travel to court by public or private  transport.   I
             therefore would have refused an adjournment."

 6. The documents that were placed before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Aujla
    on 11 October 2016 were a letter dated 7 October 2016 from SG Law and a
    letter dated 6 October 2016 from Dr Chatterjee, a GP.

 7. The letter from SG Law states:

         "We have been informed that the appellant was involved  in  a  road
         traffic accident on 30  July  2016  and  he  needed  an  MRI  scan.
         Because of that accident he had twists and he also reported that he
         tripped downstairs at home recently and therefore unable  (sic)  to
         attend the court.  His doctor, Mr Arup Chatterjee has requested the
         Tribunal  to  postpone  the  hearing  until  01  November  2016  by
         considering the patient's present condition.

         We believe that without his presence,  it  will  be  hard  for  the
         Tribunal to decide the genuinely (sic) of their marriage as this is
         the key issue of this case.

         In this circumstance, we  would  like  to  request  the  Honourable
         Tribunal to adjourn the hearing date and relist it."

 8. The letter from Dr Chatterjee is dated 6 October 2016 and states:

         "I have seen and examined the above named. He gives a history of  a
         road traffic accident on 30 July for which he needed an  MRI  scan.
         He has had twists and falls subsequently; he also reports  tripping
         downstairs at home. He reports that his back is stiff  and  he  has
         pains down left leg. I would be grateful  if  his  engagements  and
         interviews etc. are postponed till after 01 November 2016."

 9. The appellant challenges  the  decision  on  declining  to  reopen  the
    proceedings and the  findings  on  the  substance  of  the  adjournment
    request.  The grounds of appeal state as follows:

         "2.  At [14] of the determination  the  FTJ  refers  to  the  facts
             received by the Tribunal  from  the  appellant  requesting  an
             adjournment, which also included  a  letter  from  the  doctor
             stating that the hearing should be postponed as the  appellant
             had a stiff back and pain.  In circumstances where  the  facts
             had been sent to the  Tribunal  on  7  October  2016  and  the
             hearing took place on 11 October 2016, the  appellant  submits
             that the FTJ ought to have granted the adjournment.

         3.   As the FTJ had  heard  the  appeal,  he  should  have  recused
             himself and granted an adjournment.  His consideration of  the
             adjournment application (which was made  before  the  hearing)
             was tainted by the fact that  he  had  already  concluded  the
             appeal.  Moreover,  his  reasons  for  rejecting  the  medical
             evidence is inadequate.  A person for example does not have to
             be bedridden.  The medical evidence was clear as  to  why  the
             appellant could not attend the appeal hearing and  bearing  in
             mind the civil standard applies, the FTJ erred in refusing  to
             adjourn.

         4.   It was imperative for the  appellant  to  be  given  a  proper
             opportunity to attend and give oral  evidence.   Incidentally,
             had the adjournment application been dealt  with  sooner,  the
             appellant would have had an opportunity to make  arrangements,
             for example for a representatives (sic) or  to  obtain  better
             evidence if the reason  for  refusal  of  an  adjournment  was
             solely because the medical evidence was not clear enough.

         5.   Moreover, the FTJ at [39] states that the appellant "chose not
             to attend the hearing".  That contradicts the medical evidence
             and adjournment application which suggests that he  could  not
             attend the hearing."

10. The difficulty for the appellant in this challenge is that, even if, at
    [14], the First-tier Tribunal  judge  took  an  incorrect  approach  to
    considering  the  adjournment  request  by  declining  to  "reopen  the
    matter", he went on  to  set  out,  in  the  alternative,  whether  the
    materials provided were capable of leading to an  adjournment  and  his
    reasons for finding that they did not were entirely sound.  He does not
    require the appellant to provide evidence that he is "bedridden" as the
    grounds suggest. He was manifestly entitled to find that  the  material
    did not support the claim that  the  appellant  cannot  travel  to  the
    hearing centre. They do not do so. The view of the First-tier  Tribunal
    is bolstered by the wording of the GP's  letter  which  merely  reports
    what the appellant has said rather than providing objective support  as
    to ongoing difficulties following an accident. The GP's letter does not
    suggest that the appellant was examined or that the GP has  any  first-
    hand knowledge of the appellant.  The grounds  also  fail  to  indicate
    why, given that there had been no response to the adjournment  request,
    even if the appellant  could  not  attend,  his  spouse  or  the  legal
    representatives did not attend on his behalf.

11. For these reasons I did not find the challenge to the refusal to reopen
    the appeal or to adjourn the hearing amounted to a  material  error  of
    law.

12. In assessment of the merits of the appeal, the First-tier Tribunal made
    the following finding at [39]:

         "39. Whilst I have  considered  the  documentary  evidence  in  the
         Appellant's bundle, I find that none of  those  documents  goes  to
         show  that  the  Respondent's  conclusions  were   erroneous.    No
         additional evidence has been placed before me which  addressed  the
         concerns expressed by Immigration Judge Shamash  in  her  judgment.
         The appellant has not provided any further evidence and  chose  not
         to attend the hearing.  In  the  circumstances,  I  find  that  the
         findings and conclusions of both Immigration Judge Shamash  in  her
         determination as well as the Respondent's findings and  conclusions
         in the current decision  under  appeal  stand.   I  find  that  the
         Respondent has discharged the evidential burden to  establish  that
         the marriage between the Appellant and the sponsor was  a  marriage
         of convenience.  I therefore uphold the Respondent  (sic)  findings
         and conclusions."

13. The appellant's second ground challenges this finding:

         "At [39] the  FTJ  materially  errs  in  stating  that  no  further
         evidence has been submitted.  The appellant had submitted  evidence
         by way of notice of appeal, additional appellant of (sic) 125 pages
         and supplementary appeal bundle of 41 pages (sent to  the  Tribunal
         on  6/10/2016  by  royal  mail  signed  for   delivery)   to   show
         cohabitation and that the relationship  was  subsisting  since  the
         previous application and appeal.  The appellant's witness statement
         submitted with the notice of appeal clearly deals with the concerns
         raised in the refusal letter following the interview.   It  appears
         that the FTJ may have overlooked this and has not made findings  in
         respect of the crucial documentary  evidence  submitted.   In  this
         respect the appellant points to MK (duty to give reasons)  Pakistan
         [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC) (28 October 2013) which states the  following
         of relevance in the headnote:

             (1)  It is axiomatic that a  determination  discloses  clearly
                  the reasons for a Tribunal's decision.

             (2)  If a Tribunal finds  oral  evidence  to  be  implausible,
                  incredible or unreliable or a  document  to  be  worth  no
                  weight whatsoever, it  is  necessary  to  say  so  in  the
                  determination and for such findings  to  be  supported  by
                  reasons.  A bare statement that a witness was not believed
                  or that a document was afforded no weight is  unlikely  to
                  satisfy the requirement to give reasons.



         7.   At [40] the FTJ erred in concluding that the Respondent has
         discharged the evidential burden to establish, on the balance of
         probabilities, the marriage between the appellant and the sponsors
         was a marriage of convenience.  As such the FTJ wrongly applied the
         legal test in Papajorgji as approved in Agho [2015] EWCA Civ 1198
         "... that the legal burden is on the Secretary of State to show
         that any marriage thus proved is a marriage of convenience; and
         that the burden is not discharged merely by showing "reasonable
         suspicion" (paragraph 13, Agho)."

14. The list of documents that the judge considered is set out at [16]  and
    includes the appellant's 125 page bundle. The judge can be presumed  to
    have seen the appeal statements of the appellant and his spouse as they
    were included in the respondent's bundle which is also referred  to  at
    [16]. It  may  be  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  have  the
    appellants' 41 page bundle before  him  but  where  that  consisted  of
    material of essentially the same probative value as  that  in  the  125
    page bundle, that did not appear to me to be a material issue.  In  any
    event, it is  clear  that  the  grounds  at  [6]  are  not  correct  in
    suggesting that the judge did not consider any of the new material.

15. It is my conclusion, however, that there is nothing in [39] or anywhere
    else in the  decision  explaining  to  the  appellant  why  the  appeal
    statements and further evidence  of  the  couple  living  at  the  same
    address,  post-dating  the  hearing  before  Judge  Shamash,  was   not
    sufficient to distinguish her findings and displace  the  view  of  the
    respondent that the marriage was one of convenience. The  new  material
    included a new tenancy agreement in joint names,  bank  statements  and
    payslips for the appellant and sponsor which showed them living at  the
    same address and medical documents for the wife showing  that  she  had
    become pregnant in 2014 but undergone a termination. It is not that the
    new material had to lead to the appeal being allowed but the  appellant
    was entitled to adequate reasons as to why it was not  sufficient.  The
    only statement on the evidence  is  that  it  had  not  "addressed  the
    concerns expressed by Immigration Judge Shamash in her judgment."   For
    this reason it is my view that the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge must be found to have been materially in error as  they  fail  to
    give adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's evidence.

16. For these reasons, therefore, I find  that  a  material  error  of  law
    arises and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.

17. It follows from the nature of the reasons for my decision on  error  of
    law that there are no findings of fact here to be preserved and that it
    is therefore appropriate for the appeal to remade de novo in the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside.

The decision will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

The decision will be  heard  at  Taylor  House  and  not  before  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Aujla.


Signed   [pic]                               Date: 10 May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

