

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA149722015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                      |Decision Promulgated       |
|On: 26 April 2017                          |On: 5 May 2017             |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between
                            MS Sylvia NGOSI Ezeh
                       (anonymity directionS not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:          Ms Radford of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Presenting Officer

                                                  DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  5  November  1975.  She
      appealed against the decision of the respondent dated  27  March  2015
      for leave to remain in the United Kingdom pursuant to Article 8 of the
      European Convention on Human Rights.


   2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cassel in a decision  dated  25  April  2016
      dismissed the appellant's appeal. Permission to appeal  was  initially
      refused by First--tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on 11 January  2017  but
      was subsequently granted by upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on 7  March
      2017 stating that it is arguable that the Judge did not make a finding
      in respect of the child's best interests which is arguably material in
      an assessment of reasonableness and proportionality.


      First-tier Tribunal's findings


   3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  the  following  findings  in  the
      determination  which  I  summarise.  There  is  no  dispute  that  the
      appellant's  son,  Yuki  is  under  the  age  of  18  and  has   lived
      continuously in the United Kingdom for at least seven years. The issue
      is whether it would be reasonable to expect her to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom. It is common ground that the appeal of  the  appellant  under
      the Immigration Rules will succeed if it  is  unreasonable  to  expect
      Yuki to leave the country and will fail if it is not unreasonable.


   4. The Judge said  aside  any  misdemeanours  of  the  appellant  in  the
      consideration of reasonableness. Pausing there, the appellant was  not
      found to be a credible witness which includes her immigration  history
      and her veracity. There is evidence of an extensive family network  in
      Nigeria. Yuki has a grandmother, uncles, aunts and cousins. He  is  in
      contact with his grandmother by telephone roughly as regularly  as  he
      is with his father in the United  Kingdom.  He  has  no  other  family
      members here.


   5. Although the Judge accepts that Yuki has never  been  to  Nigeria,  he
      does speak English which is the predominant language in Nigeria and it
      is  clear  from  correspondence  and  documentation  provided  by  the
      appellant that she has not lost contact with the Nigerian community in
      England and it  is  reasonable  therefore  to  assume  that  Yuki  has
      acquired some knowledge of the culture through  his  mother's  contact
      with Nigerian culture. He has done well in his education  in  England.
      The United States Embassy at page 4 makes it clear in an article, that
      there is a functional education system in Nigeria to which Yuki  would
      have access. There are  no  serious  health  issues  for  him  and  no
      evidence  that  change  of  his  accommodation   can   be   considered
      exceptional circumstances.


   6. There is no single factor which is  determinative  but  balancing  and
      taking full account of all the various  factors  referred  to  in  the
      decision,  the  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant   has
      established on the balance of  probabilities  that  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect them to leave the United Kingdom  together  as  a
      family unit of mother and son. Therefore, the appellant's appeal fails
      under the Immigration Rules.


      Grounds of appeal


   7. The amended application for permission to appeal states the  following
      which I summarise. The reasoning of the First--tier Tribunal Judge  on
      the issue of the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  child  is  in
      paragraphs 36 to 44 of her decision but there is no reference  to  the
      child's best interests in those paragraphs.


   8. The first-tier Tribunal Judge failed to actually decide what the  best
      interests of the child were in this case. It was not an issue that the
      child would remain with his  mother.  The  issue  to  be  decided  was
      whether it was in the best interests of the child  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom or return to Nigeria with his mother. Without  deciding
      this issue, the Judge could not possibly have  taken  account  of  the
      child's best interest as a primary consideration either  in  assessing
      the reasonableness of the proportionality of requiring  the  child  to
      leave the United Kingdom


   9. In light of the case of EV Philippines [2014] E WCA  7874,  the  Judge
      was meant to ask and answer the material question which is - is it  in
      the best interests of the child to remain in this country.


  10. Therefore, the consideration of the best interests of  the  child  and
      the reasonableness of requiring the child to leave the United  Kingdom
      is flawed. The Judge failed to consider the case law  including  Azmi-
      Moyed and others [2013] UKUT and it was required  that  the  Judge  to
      find whether it would be reasonable for a child who has lived  in  the
      United Kingdom for seven years to leave the country.


  11. The Judge failed to apply the applicable law to the facts of her case.
      The Judge failed to take material matters into account and  failed  to
      resolve factual disputes.


      Rule 24 response by the respondent


  12. The respondent in her rule 24 response stated that the  Judge  of  the
      First--tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately. At paragraph 8 of
      the decision, the Judge records the central issues as  stated  by  the
      appellant's representative, namely the appellant's child. At paragraph
      36 the Judge acknowledges that the question to be asked is whether  it
      would be reasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom.  It  is
      submitted that the Judge made sufficient findings on the evidence that
      was provided. It is not a material  error  of  law  to  refer  to  the
      substance of case law without naming it.


      The hearing


  13. At the hearing, I heard submissions as to whether there is an error of
      law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision. Mr Radford on  behalf
      of the appellant submitted that the Judge  did  not  assess  the  best
      interests of the child. At paragraph 34 of the  decision  there  is  a
      statement as to the best interests  of  the  child  but  in  no  other
      paragraphs of the decision does it appear. When the Judge states  that
      it is in the best interests of the appellant to live with his  mother,
      the Judge did not specify whether it was in the United Kingdom  or  in
      Nigeria. The Judge merely concentrated on why removal to Nigeria would
      not be too bad for the appellant.  The Judge failed  to  consider  the
      test of reasonableness and no assessment of the difficulties  for  the
      child in respect of his education  in  Nigeria.  The  Judge  does  not
      resolve the difficulties in the decision other than to  say  that  the
      appellant has family in Nigeria but gave no reasons. I was referred to
      the report of Amnesty International.


  14. The Judge did not follow the guidance at MA Pakistan at paragraph  116
      in respect of the  child  seven-year  residence.  The  Judge  did  not
      identify what the best interests of the child requires. The Judge  did
      not consider the background information on Nigeria,  where  it  states
      that there is violence in Nigeria when considering the  reasonableness
      of the child returning to that country. I  have  also  been  asked  to
      consider that Nigeria has 1 � million people displaced due to violence
      in that country.  The  Judge  did  not  take  into  account  that  the
      appellant would be a single mother without any support in  Nigeria  or
      whether she can receive support from her family.


  15. Mr Singh on behalf of  the  respondent  submitted  that  the  decision
      should be read by starting with paragraph 34 where  the  consideration
      of the best interests of the child begins. At paragraph 35  the  Judge
      refers to the case of Azmi Moyed where the best interests of the child
      lie in going with his mother to Nigeria. The Judge was  clearly  aware
      of the seven-year residence principle and gave proper consideration to
      this in his assessment of the child's best interests. At paragraph  37
      of the decision the Judge made  sure  that  the  appellant's  lack  of
      credibility did not affect his evaluation of the best interests of the
      child.


  16. The Judge found that there is extensive family life in Nigeria and  at
      paragraph 39 found that Nigeria is an English-speaking country and the
      appellant's mother is very familiar with Nigerian culture. He referred
      to the case of MA Pakistan paragraph 117B (vi) and considered all  the
      factors in evaluating the appellant's child  is  best  interests.  The
      Judge found that there was a functioning education system  in  Nigeria
      and there were no health issues in this  case.  Therefore,  there  was
      nothing exceptional for the Judge to take into account. He referred to
      the case of ZH Tanzania made adequate findings that the appellant  had
      family network in Nigeria.


  17. In reply Mr Radford said that the Judge made no findings of any family
      support that the appellant may receive on his return to  Nigeria.  The
      appellant's father is in the United Kingdom and  there  was  no  clear
      conclusion where the appellant's best interests lie.


      Findings on whether there is an error of law


  18. Having carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I
      find that there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  first-tier
      Tribunal's decision. On reading of the entirety of the decision it  is
      evident that the Judge had in mind the correct test to be  applied  in
      respect of the appellant's child best interests. At paragraph  25  the
      Judge records in her decision that "the issue for the Tribunal is what
      is in the child's best interests". At paragraph 34  the  Judge  states
      that the starting point when considering the best interests of a young
      child would be that it was in the best interests of a  child  to  live
      with and be brought up with his or her parents. This  is  an  entirely
      satisfactory direction the Judge gave to herself. The Judge found that
      the appellant's best interests is to be with his mother and live  with
      her wherever his mother lives and given that the  child's  mother  was
      going to be removed to Nigeria, it is obvious  that  the  Judge  found
      that the child's best interests lie  in  living  with  his  mother  in
      Nigeria. Therefore, I do not find any merit in the argument  that  the
      Judge having said that it is in the best interests of the appellant to
      live with his mother, the Judge did not specify whether it was in  the
      United Kingdom or in Nigeria.


  19. The Judge considered the case of the Azmi-Moyed and others [2013] UKUT
      00197 and referred me to paragraph 13 of the  decision,  which  states
      "as a starting point it is in the best interests  of  children  to  be
      with both their parents and if both parents are being removed from the
      United Kingdom  then  the  starting  point  suggested  so  should  the
      dependent children who form part of the  household  unless  there  are
      reasons to the contrary". Therefore, the Judge  did  decide  that  the
      best interests of the child is to live with his mother in  Nigeria  as
      her dependent child and there is no material error in this  conclusion
      which the Judge reached on the evidence.


  20. In this regard, the Judge found that the appellant and her child  have
      and extensive family network  in  Nigeria.  It  is  implicit  in  that
      finding that the child will  have  family  support  in  Nigeria  until
      appellant and her child settle down in  that  country.  There  was  no
      evidence upon which the Judge could have concluded that the  appellant
      and her child would not get family support on their return.


  21. The evidence, before the Judge was that the appellant He is in contact
      with his grandmother by telephone roughly as regularly as he  is  with
      his father in the United Kingdom. On  this  evidence,  the  Judge  was
      entitled to find that the child is close to his grandmother  and  will
      have her support on return  and  therefore  the  child's  welfare  was
      adequately considered.


  22. The Judge accepted that the appellant has never been  to  Nigeria  but
      she correctly pointed out that the child does speak English  which  is
      the predominant language in Nigeria. The Judge also found that  it  is
      clear from  the  correspondence  and  documentation  provided  by  the
      appellant that the appellant has not lost contact  with  the  Nigerian
      community in the United Kingdom and found that it would be  reasonable
      to assume that the  appellant  had  acquired  some  knowledge  of  the
      culture through his mother's contact with the Nigerian culture in this
      country. This finding demonstrates that the Judge considered that  the
      child who will be returning with his mother will, with the help of his
      mother, adjust to Nigerian culture. There is  no  perversity  in  this
      finding.


  23. The Judge further noted that there is a duty on the Secretary of State
      regarding the welfare of children under section 55  of  the  Boarders,
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. The duty imposed by  section  55
      of the Borders Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  requires  the
      decision-maker to be properly informed of  the  position  of  a  child
      affected by the  respondent's  decision.  The  Judge  must  conduct  a
      careful examination of all relevant  information  and  factors.  Being
      adequately  informed  and  conducting  a   scrupulous   analysis   are
      elementary prerequisites to the inter-related tasks of identifying the
      child's best interests and then balancing  them  with  other  material
      considerations. The question whether the duties imposed by section  55
      have been duly performed in any  given  case  will  invariably  be  an
      intensely fact sensitive and contextual one to be done on the evidence
      before the Tribunal. The Judge stated at paragraph 37 of the  decision
      that it is trite law that the issue of reasonableness is an  intensely
      fact finding exercise.


  24. The Judge considered the child's education and noted that there is  an
      education system in Nigeria which  the  appellant's  child  will  have
      access to. The Judge found that given that the  child  has  done  very
      well in school in this country, there should be no reason why he would
      not do well in a school in Nigeria. Even if it is  acknowledged,  that
      the education system might be better in the United Kingdom, this  does
      not mean that it would be unreasonable for the child to  adjust  to  a
      system of education in Nigeria.


  25. The Judge also considered the observations in Zoumbas  [2013]  UK  C70
      that the best interests of the child must be a  primary  consideration
      but  considered  that  it  does  not  have  the  status  of  paramount
      consideration. The Judge also considered the case  of  EV  Philippines
      and others v SSHD [2014] EWCA civ 874 that the balancing exercise that
      is central and the consideration for the need to maintain  immigration
      control.


  26.  The  best  interests  of  the  child  must  be  based  on  a  careful
      consideration of the likely circumstances of  the  appellant  and  her
      child if returned as a unit to Nigeria. The Judge  took  into  account
      all the factors relevant to the appellant's well-being if returned  to
      Nigeria. There was an objective evaluation made  on  the  question  of
      whether the appellant would have family support to help to settle  the
      appellant and her child into the country. The  Judge  found  that  the
      appellant had a network of family  in  Nigeria  and  this  equates  to
      support and protection on her return.


  27. Having found that the appellant does not have any  health  issues  and
      will be returning as a normal child to continue with his life in  that
      country found that it not be unreasonable to expect the appellant  and
      her child to leave the United Kingdom together as  a  family  unit  of
      mother and son. I find that this is a properly  made  finding  on  the
      evidence and that the Judge has made  a  careful  examination  of  all
      relevant information  and  factors  in  this  appeal  and  come  to  a
      sustainable conclusion.


  28. It has been argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not actually
      decide on exactly what the best interests of the child were and if the
      Judge had considered them, it would have  inevitably  found  that  the
      child's best interests lie in continue to live in  this  country.  The
      Judge has clearly  made  findings  that  the  best  interests  of  the
      appellant's child and his welfare is to live with his mother  wherever
      she lives and in this case, it is in Nigeria.


  29. What really is being argued, is that it is a given that a child  would
      have a better quality of life in this country and that must inevitably
      mean that the child's best interests lie in remaining in this  country
      and that any other conclusion is perverse. I  do  not  understand  the
      jurisprudence on children to say that given the better quality of life
      and education in this country, that  a  child's  best  interests  will
      always and inevitably lie in remaining in  this  country.  Section  55
      refers to the "welfare" of children and the Judge considered that  the
      welfare of the child is adequately addressed by him returning  to  his
      country  of  nationality  with  his  mother.  Therefore,   the   Judge
      identified the child's best interests and  balanced  them  with  other
      material considerations as  was  required  such  as  the  respondent's
      interests in a fair and orderly immigration control.


  30. In the case of MEA Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705, it  was  stated  that
      the fact that there is a qualified child is a  relevant  consideration
      and one that might be said to point to it being  in  his  interest  to
      remain in the United  Kingdom,  but  it  is  equally  clear  that  the
      assessment of reasonableness must take account of the conduct  of  the
      claimant. The Judge considered the appellant's immigration history and
      found it to be wanting although the Judge clearly did  not  hold  this
      against the evaluation  of  the  appellant's  best  interests  but  is
      clearly of relevance.


  31. The Judge considered the case of Azmi-Moyed  and  others  [2013]  UKUT
      00197 which states that seven years from the age of four is likely  to
      be more significant to a child then  the  first  seven  years  of  the
      child's life. The Judge found  that  the  appellant's  son  was  young
      enough to adapt to life and education in Nigeria. I do not  find  this
      is a perverse finding because the  child  with  his  mother  would  be
      returned to Nigeria together. The child is not a British  citizen  and
      therefore requiring him to leave with his mother to a country  of  his
      nationality  where  the  rest  of  his  family  lives,  is  more  than
      reasonable in all the circumstances. No material error of law has been
      demonstrated in the decision.


  32. I find that there is no material error of law in the  decision  and  a
      differently constituted Tribunal would not come to any other  decision
      considering the facts. The appellant and her  child  are  not  British
      citizen and therefore it is reasonable for  them  to  be  returned  to
      their country of nationality. The appellant's immigration  status  has
      always been precarious in the United Kingdom although  I  accept  that
      cannot be held against her child but  it  is  a  matter  which  merits
      consideration.


      Decision


      Appeal dismissed


      Signed by


      Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
      Mrs                              S                               Chana
        This 2nd day of May 2017


