
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/14685/2014
                                                               IA/14683/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 24th March 2015                           |On 19th May 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                       JAE HYUK LEE (FIRST APPELLANT)
                       HYE MI KANG (SECOND APPELLANT)
                        (anonymity directioN NOT MADE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D Magne of Magne & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Symes  issued  on  17th  November  2014,
    allowing the appeals of the Appellants  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent made on 10th March 2014 to refuse further  leave  to  remain
    and to remove them from the United Kingdom  under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The First Appellant  had
    sought leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  and  the
    appeal of the Second Appellant  is  entirely  dependent  on  the  First
    Appellant.

 2. It is submitted in the grounds seeking permission that the Judge  erred
    in concluding that the Appellant's business is a credible one,   having
    taken  into  account  post-decision  evidence  and  finding  that  this
    evidence was admissible with reference to paragraph 245DD(h)-(i) of the
    Immigration Rules.  Reliance is place by the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department  on  the  decision  SSHD  v  Ahmed  and  Another  (PBS:
    admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 00365.

 3. On 23rd  January  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholson  granted
    permission to appeal.  He said at paragraphs 4 and 5:

         "4.  In Ahmed and Another it was held that where a provision of the
             Rules provides that points will not be awarded if the decision
             maker is not  satisfied  as  to  another  (non-points-scoring)
             aspect of the Rule,  the  non-points-scoring  aspect  and  the
             requirement for points are inextricably linked;  as  a  result
             the prohibition on new evidence  and  Section  85A(4)  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  applies  to  the
             non-points-scoring aspect of the Rule: the prohibition  is  in
             relation to new evidence that goes to the scoring of points.

           5. At paragraph 7 of Ahmed it was said 'paragraph 245DD(k) of the
             Statement of Changes in the  Immigration  Rules,  HC  395  (as
             amended) is the following:

                  'If the Secretary of  State  is  not  satisfied  with  the
                  genuineness of the application in  relation  to  a  points
                  scoring requirement in Appendix A those points will not be
                  awarded.'

             That clearly links the assessment of the  genuineness  of  the
             scheme to the acquisition of points and rules out, in a ground
             not related to the acquisition  of  points  under  the  Points
             Based System.  On the contrary, the wording of the Rule  links
             the two matters inextricably'."

 4. In his response to the grant of permission to appeal Mr Magne said that
    the ratio of Ahmed cannot be applied  to  Paragraph  245DD(h)   because
    that would be to subvert the intention of Parliament  when  introducing
    Section 85A of the 2002 Act. Because the Points-based  system  had  not
    been implemented at the time of the introduction of s.85A the scope  of
    it has to be derived from assurances given by Ministers at the time  of
    the passage of the Bill introducing it. He relied on  the  decision  in
    Alvi v SSHD [2012] UKSC33. He submitted that that in an application for
    leave to remain as an entrepreneur the question of whether  a  business
    is genuine or viable is  a  discretionary  one  that  goes  beyond  the
    requirement in the Immigration Rules to provide specified documents. He
    said that refusal to consider the post-decision documents flies in  the
    face of the intention of s. 85A.

 5. Mr Magne relied on a large and comprehensive bundle of documents  which
    includes the following:-.

         i.   Extracts from the UK Borders Bill - Hansard 20007

         ii   Extract from Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Bill Standing
         Committee E - Hansard - October 2005

         iii  Ahmed & anr (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 000365

         iv   Alvi v SSHD [2012] UKSC33

         iv   Extracts from Bennion on Statutory Interpreatation

         v.   A, R  [2001] UKHL 25

 6. Mr Magne also provided a skeleton argument in which, relying  on  Alvi,
    it is submitted that the Secretary  of  State  having  implemented  the
    Rules in accordance with the  assurances  given  at  the  time  of  the
    passage of the statute has now sought to backtrack on these  assurances
    through the incorporation of subjective assessments into the  award  of
    points and this would be contrary to the dicta  of  Executive  estoppel
    set out in A,R .

 7. Mr Kandola simply relied at the hearing before me on  the  decision  in
    Ahmed pointing out that in Ahmed the Tribunal noted that  the  decision
    before them was of the  sort  specified  in  Section  82(2)(d)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

 8. The issue before me is whether there is a material error of law in  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal. Judge Symes set out the facts  of  the
    case and the requirements of paragraph 245DD of the Immigration  Rules.
    He noted that the Presenting Officer had agreed that the only issue was
    the credibility of the Appellant's business, and  that  the    relevant
    provisions at 245DD(h) and (i) set out the requirements  regarding  the
    business and  what the Secretary of  State  is  allowed  to  take  into
    account, including "the evidence the applicant has submitted".

 9. At paragraph 22 he found that he could rely on  the documents  relative
    to the Appellant's business that had been lodged post-decision  because
    s. 85(A)4 admits exceptions to  the  general  post-application  bar  on
    fresh evidence where it is 'adduced in connection with the Secretary of
    State's reliance on a discretion under  the  Immigration  Rules,  or  a
    compliance with a requirement of points under the points-based  system.
    He said that Rule 245DD(h) - (i) 'does not involve the  acquisition  of
    points' but rather a global assessment of the credibility of a business
    and thus s.85(A) 4  is in play.

10. Judge Symes  made no reference to Ahmed.  Clearly  he  failed  to  take
    account of it.  As a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal he was  bound  by
    that decision unless he could  distinguish  it.   Since  he  failed  to
    mention it at all it cannot be said that he distinguished it  and  gave
    sound reasons for doing so. There is therefore a material error of  law
    in his decision and I set it aside.

11. As I have said Mr Magne made comprehensive submissions as  to  why  the
    decision made by Judge Symes was correct. He urged me to  overturn  the
    decision in Ahmed. I have given very careful consideration to  all  the
    submissions made and to the very helpful documentation provided.

12. In Ahmed the Tribunal said,

         "The Secretary of State applied  for  and  obtained  permission  to
         appeal on the basis that the Judge had behaved in a  way  that  was
         not by statute open to her. The decision in the present case is  of
         the sort specified in s 82(2)(d). The relevant law is contained  in
         s 85A(3) and (4), expressed as an exception to a general rule  that
         all relevant evidence may be considered:

             "(3) Exception 2 applies to an appeal under section 82(1) if -



                  (a)  the appeal is against an immigration  decision  of  a
                      kind specified in section 82(2)(a) or (d),

                  (b)  the immigration decision concerned an application  of
                      a kind identified in Immigration Rules  as  requiring
                      to be considered under a 'Points Based System', and

                  (c)   the  appeal  relies  wholly  or  partly  on  grounds
                      specified in section 84(1)(a), (e) or (f).

             (4)  Where Exception  2  applies  the  Tribunal  may  consider
                  evidence adduced by the appellant only if it -

                  (a)  was submitted in support  of,  and  at  the  time  of
                      making, the  application  to  which  the  immigration
                      decision related,

                  (b)  relates to the appeal in  so  far  as  it  relies  on
                      grounds other  than  those  specified  in  subsection
                      (3)(c),

                  (c)  is adduced to prove that a  document  is  genuine  or
                      valid, or

                  (d)  is  adduced  in  connection  with  the  Secretary  of
                      State's reliance on a discretion  under   immigration
                      Rules,  or   compliance   with   a   requirement   of
                      immigration  rules,  to  refuse  an  application   on
                      grounds not related to the  acquisition  of  'points'
                      under the 'Points Based System'.""

         - and at paragraph 5

         "The purpose of that provision is quite clear. It is that  where  a
         Points Based application is made and refused, the assessment by the
         Judge is to be of the material that was before  the  decision-maker
         rather than a new consideration of new material. In other words the
         appeal if it is successful is on the basis that the  decision-maker
         with the material before him should have made a different decision,
         not on the basis that a different way of presenting the application
         would have produced a different decision."

13. The Tribunal continued,

         "As is apparent from her judgement, the  judge  took  into  account
         material other than that which was before the decision-maker. In  a
         spirited defence of her procedure Mr Asme has  submitted  that  the
         way in which the letter  was  divided  into  Non-Points  Based  and
         Points Based matters demonstrates that  in  assessing  whether  the
         business plans were genuine the  decision-maker  was  refusing  the
         application on grounds which were not related to the acquisition of
         points under the Points Based System. If that  is  right,  Mr  Asme
         submits, then the judge was at liberty to look at further evidence.
         We are satisfied however that that is  a  submission  which  cannot
         succeed. There are two connected reasons for that.

         The first is that in paragraph 245DD(k) of the Statement of Changes
         in the Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended) is the following:

             "If  the  Secretary  of  State  is  not  satisfied  with   the
             genuineness of the application in relation to a points scoring
             requirement in Appendix A those points will not be awarded."

         That clearly links the assessment of the genuineness of the  scheme
         to the acquisition of points and rules out, in our  judgement,  the
         submission that the assessment of the genuineness of the scheme was
         a ground not related to the acquisition of points under the  Points
         Based System. On the contrary, the wording of the  Rule  links  the
         two matters inextricably.

         Secondly, as we pointed out  to  Mr  Asme  in  the  course  of  his
         submissions, if he were able to show that the judge was entitled to
         look at the genuineness of the  scheme  for  the  purposes  of  the
         appeal before her, she would nevertheless not be able  to  reach  a
         decision that because of her view  about  the  genuineness  of  the
         scheme, points should have been awarded. That is because that would
         itself link the genuineness of the scheme  to  the  acquisition  of
         points, and she is prohibited from hearing evidence which  does  go
         to the acquisition of points."

14. Mr Magne put it to me that s 85A(4)(d) is ambiguous and I agree that it
    arguably is but it seems to me that the decision in Ahmed dispels   any
    ambiguity and is correct for the reasons given by the Upper Tribunal. I
    place particular weight on the point in the above  paragraph  beginning
    'Secondly'.  I would add to that  my  own  observations.  Mr  Symes  at
    paragraph 22 of his decision asserts that Rule 245DD (h)  -  (i)  'does
    not involve the acquisition of points' but  S.  85a  4)(d)   refers  to
    'reliance on a discretion under the  immigration  rules  or  compliance
    with a  requirement of the immigration rules to refuse  an  application
    on grounds not related to the acquisition of points in the Points-based
    system.  That is a different thing.  It  is  the  relationship  to  the
    acquisition of points that is relevant not the bare  fact  of  the  non
    points-scoring element.   Further, paragraph 245DD (h) of the Rules  is
    said to apply where an applicant 'is being assessed under  Table  5  of
    Appendix A' and it is Appendix A that sets out how points  are  earned.
    Again this supports the finding in Ahmed  that  the  non-points-scoring
    aspect  and  the  requirements  for  the  acquisition  of  points   are
    inextricably linked.

15. I therefore dismiss the submissions made on behalf of the Appellant.

DECISION

The Appellants' appeals against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  of
10th March 2014 to refuse further leave to remain are dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date: 8th May 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
