

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14105/2014
     IA/14106/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                      |              Decision and Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                              |
|On 9th November 2015                     |              On 12th November 2015      |
|                                         |                                         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                           TALWINDER KUMAR TUGNAIT
                                 SAROJ BALA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bukhari of Bukhari Chambers solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pears dismissed the appeals  of  Mr  Tugnait
      and Ms Bala, his wife, against  decision  to  remove  them  under  s10
      Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 dated 13th March 2014. The  appellants
      had applied for leave to remain outside  the  Rules  on  human  rights
      grounds. That application was considered by the respondent and refused
      for reasons set out in a  decision  dated  12th  November  2013,  such
      decision  not  being  an  appealable  decision  as  defined   by   s82
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  thus  not  having  a
      right of appeal.


   2. The respondent considered the application by the appellants and  their
      two children (HS born 21st  June  2001  in  India  and  PT  born  19th
      December 2006 in the UK) in accordance with Appendix FM and  paragraph
      276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The two children are not  parties  to
      the appeal.

   3. Although permission to appeal the findings of the judge was sought  on
      the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in law in his
      consideration  of  Appendix  FM,  paragraph  276ADE  and  s55  Borders
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, permission  to  appeal  was  not
      granted on those grounds. Permission to appeal was granted  solely  on
      the grounds that it was arguable that  the  judge  had  erred  in  his
      consideration (or lack of consideration) of  Article  8  'outside  the
      Rules'.

   4. The grounds had not challenged the findings  of  fact  made  by  Judge
      Pears but had been based upon the assessment of  those  facts  in  the
      context of the relevant case law and legislation.

   5. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pears,  having  heard  evidence  from  both
      appellant's through an interpreter, made the following findings:

    . The respondent had failed, in the reasons given for refusing to  grant
      leave to remain, to consider whether there were  matters  outside  the
      Rules to be considered and had failed to consider s55.
    . On 10th March 2009 the first appellant was convicted of possession  of
      a false or improperly obtained ID document and sentenced to  9  months
      imprisonment.
    . The first  appellant  failed  to  refer  to  that  conviction  in  his
      application for leave to remain in the UK.
    . The appellants and the two  children  are  a  family  unit  which,  if
      removed, will be removed together and could together go  and  live  in
      India.
    . Neither appellant speaks English to a level that does not  require  an
      interpreter.
    . The first appellant was served with Form IS151A on  9th  October  2008
      notifying him of his liability to removal.
    . The first appellant made an asylum claim on 5th December 2008, a claim
      he subsequently withdrew and which was not relied upon as a ground  of
      appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.
    . The appellants made their application for  leave  to  remain  in  July
      2012.
    . Despite the first appellant's evidence that he and his family "have  a
      strong profound and the quality of private life in the  UK.  ...worked
      in the UK for a significant  length  of  time...integration  including
      social,  educational  and  economical  number  of   friends   in   the
      UK....strong community and cultural  connections  in  the  UK..."  the
      judge noted that no  supporting  evidence  to  that  effect  had  been
      produced to suggest any particular integration with UK Society or even
      Indian Society in the UK. Their evidence was not accepted,  they  have
      attempted to reduce their ties with India ([35], [64], [65],  [66]  of
      the decision).
    . The appellants exaggerated their claimed loss of ties and  connections
      with India or that he would be unable to obtain a job.
    . Both appellants have family in India ([65] of the decision)
    . The appellants and their daughter arrived in the UK in 2006, not  2002
      as claimed.
    . The first appellant gave contradictory evidence as to whether  he  had
      contact with his parents or not.
    . The appellants do not meet the Suitability requirements of the Rules.
    . The first appellant has known that his immigration status  in  the  UK
      has been precarious  and  their  family  and  private  life  has  been
      precarious since at least 9th October 2008.
    . The presence of the first appellant is not  conducive  to  the  public
      good.
    . There are no educational or health issues  relating  to  the  children
      that indicate any characteristics that require protection.
    . It would not be unreasonable for the children to leave the UK.
    . The appellants have not shown  "arguably  good  grounds  for  granting
      leave to remain outside the  immigration  rules  or  shown  there  are
      compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised" ([72]).


   6. Judge Pears set out extensive extracts  from  relevant  case  law.  He
      specifically reminded himself that if there were matters that were not
      sufficiently considered under the Immigration Rules then consideration
      should be given in accordance with the  approach  set  out  in  Razgar
      [2004] UKHL 27. He also  specifically  referred  himself  to  Part  5A
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


   7. The essence of the submissions by  Mr  Bukhari  were  that  the  judge
      failed to have adequate or  any  regard  to  the  best  interests,  in
      particular, of the older child and that the conclusion by the judge in
      [71] (".... The First Appellant's conviction,  his  imprisonment...and
      the inability of either Appellant to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
      immigration rules outweighs  the  welfare  interest  of  the  children
      remaining here") reflected a failure to consider the best interest  of
      the children and then consider that finding  in  the  context  of  the
      circumstances as a whole. He relied heavily upon paragraph  33  of  EV
      (Philippines) and others [2014] EWCA  Civ  874  and  Azimi-Moayed  and
      other (decisions affecting children: onward appeals [2013  UKUT  00197
      (IAC). He submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  gave  an
      impression that the child's welfare had been set against the  father's
      deception and  that  the  child  had  been  'punished'  for  the  non-
      disclosure of the conviction by the  father.  He  submitted  that  the
      references in [64] and [65] of the First-tier Tribunal decision  (lack
      of integration and  evidence  attempting  to  reduce  ties  to  India)
      related solely to the appellants and not to the children.

   8. The most that can be said about this family is that the  eldest  child
      has been in the UK in excess of seven years since the age  of  4.  The
      evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not   indicate   any
      engagement  with  society  in  the  UK  by  the  children  other  than
      attendance at school. There  was  no  evidence  about  activities  the
      children were engaged in separate to their family other than that  the
      older child enjoyed swimming. The  parents  produced  no  evidence  of
      cultural or social activities outside their family or within the wider
      UK context. The judge plainly had regard to all the evidence that  was
      put to him in reaching his decision -  see  [35],  [37],  [44],  [49],
      [63],  [64], [66], [67], [70]. Length  of  residence  of  a  child  is
      simply insufficient to found a  successful  claim  to  residence  when
      considered in the context of the circumstances as a whole  which  are,
      in this case, adverse to remaining. Although the judge did not make  a
      specific finding as to the best  interests  of  the  children,  it  is
      simply not possible to conclude that the decision of the  judge  would
      have been any different even if he had made a finding  that  the  best
      interests of the older child were in remaining in the UK. Even if  the
      judge had gone through the specific criteria referred to in [35] of EV
      (Philippines) it is plain from the findings of the judge that he  took
      the view that the children had retained  ties  and  links  with  India
      through their  parents  and  that  they  would  not  have  significant
      difficulties adapting to life in India. As [36]  of  EV  (Philippines)
      makes plain, the essential question is how emphatic an answer falls to
      be given to the question 'is it in the best interests of the child  to
      remain'. Weight has to be given to the need  to  maintain  immigration
      control, applicants have  no  right  to  remain  and  the  immigration
      history of the parents may be  relevant.  That  the  older  child  has
      lengthy residence is simply insufficient to outweigh the other factors

   9. The First-tier Tribunal judge plainly had overall regard  to  all  the
      evidence before him. It is inconceivable that any  other  judge  could
      have reached a conclusion that  the  evidence  before  him  identified
      matters that required consideration outside the Immigration Rules. The
      judge in any event considered whether there was engagement of  Article
      8 in family life terms and  concluded,  correctly,  that  because  the
      family would be leaving the UK as a  family  unit  and  travelling  to
      India where they have family and other connections, there would be  no
      interference with family life. The judge considered  the  requirements
      of s117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; he  found
      that it was not unreasonable  on  the  evidence  before  him  for  the
      children to leave the UK.

  10. There is no error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      decision.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



                                    Date 10th November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
