
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/14495/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London           |          Decision and Reasons      |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 3 July 2015                         |          On 29 July 2015           |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                              MR RAAKESH SHARMA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Mohammad, Counsel.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Majid)  allowing   the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on 7 March 2014 to  refuse
    the respondent's application for a residence card  as  confirmation  of
    his right to reside in  the  UK  as  an  unmarried  partner  under  the
    Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006   ("the
    Regulations").

Introduction

 3. The EEA sponsor is Ms Dovile Stumbraite, a citizen of Lithuania born on
    24 March 1982. The respondent is a citizen of  India  born  on  24  May
    1983. He claims that he has lived with the sponsor since 2011 and  they
    are in a durable relationship.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality  but  decided  that  the  evidence  of   cohabitation   was
    inadequate.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 24 October 2014. He was  represented  by  Mr
    Mohammad. The First-tier Tribunal found that the respondent  was  in  a
    genuine and vibrant marriage with the EEA sponsor and that the marriage
    should be recognised under the Regulations. The respondent also merited
    the benefit of the "Articles of the ECHR".

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    its approach to the Regulations because the respondent  had  failed  to
    substantiate that he  was  in  a  durable  relationship  with  the  EEA
    sponsor. The findings were wholly inadequate. The judge failed to  have
    regard to section 117B of the 2002  Act  and  failed  to  identify  any
    compelling or exceptional circumstances.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Frankish
    on 12 January 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the article 8
    assessment comprised an error in fact and law  and  the  finding  of  a
    genuine marriage was summarised in just four sentences with no analysis
    of the appellant's objections.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Mr Kandola submitted that it is now clear that  the  judge  misdirected
    himself in law by  referring  to  a  marriage  rather  than  a  durable
    relationship. This was not just a matter of form - the judge refers  to
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules  at  paragraph  15  and  then
    makes repeated references to a marriage. There is no reference  to  the
    evidential requirements for a durable relationship. There is a  blatant
    and glaring error of law. A fresh hearing is required.

10. Mr Mohammad conceded that the judge erred in writing  the  decision  on
    the basis that the respondent and EEA  sponsor  were  married  but  the
    respondent meets all of the requirements for a durable relationship  in
    any event. It was a failure of form rather than  substance.  The  judge
    examined the facts and tested  the  evidence.  He  misdirected  himself
    factually but was entitled to find that the relationship was sound  and
    genuine.  The  evidence  supported  the  relationship.  The  supporting
    evidence was tested and founded a genuine relationship.  Otherwise,  Mr
    Mohammad was amenable to the  suggestion  that  the  matter  should  be
    remitted for a fresh hearing.

11. I find that the judge has made a material error of fact  in  concluding
    that the parties have been married since 2011. That  error  means  that
    the  judge  could  not  have  addressed  his  mind  correctly  to   the
    requirements of the Regulations and amounts to a material error of law.
    The brief reference in paragraph 16 of the decision to the articles  of
    the ECHR is wholly inadequate to form a basis for allowing  the  appeal
    under the Human Rights Act 1998. In any event, the decision as a  whole
    is infected by the material error of fact.

12. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under the Regulations and Article 8 involved the  making  of  an
    error of law and its decision cannot stand.

Decision

13. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

14. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.





Signed   David Archer                        Date 28 July 2015


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

