

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14684/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision made at Field House                  |Decision promulgated         |
|On 27th November 2013                         |On 9th December 2013         |

                                     By

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

                                   Between

                               B KALIYAMURTHY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.    On 21st October 2013 I granted the application  for  permission  to
      appeal on the grounds that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge was arguably  in  error  as  regards  failing  to  consider  the
      decision  of  the  respondent  under  s47   Immigration   Asylum   and
      Nationality Act 2006 and made the following directions:


           1. Any response which the respondent to this  appeal  wishes  to
              make under rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
              Rules 2008 must be sent or delivered to the Upper Tribunal so
              that  it  is  received  no  later  than  14  days  after  the
              respondent was sent notice that permission to appeal had been
              granted. At the same time, a copy of  the  response  must  be
              sent to the appellant.


            2.     Unless either party objects in writing within 21 days  of
              the date of the sending out of these directions, the Tribunal
              will determine that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  erred  in
              law in failing to determine the  appellant's  appeal  against
              the decision to remove him from the UK in accordance with s47
              and will allow the appeal to the extent that  it  is  not  in
              accordance with the law.

   2.   The only response to those directions has been from the respondent's
      representatives stating they do not oppose the appeal, limited  as  it
      is to s47, and agreeing to  the  matter  proceeding  administratively.
      Therefore I shall proceed as indicated.


   3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge made  an  error  of  law  such  as  to
      require that the decision made be set aside and remade. I  remake  the
      decision allowing the  appeal  against  the  decision  to  remove  the
      appellant in accordance with s47 as being not in accordance  with  the
      law.


   Conclusion

   The First-tier Tribunal judge  made  an  error  of  law  as  regards  the
   decision to remove the appellant in accordance with s47  and  I  set  the
   decision aside.


   I remake that element of the decision  such  that  the  decision  of  the
   respondent was not in accordance with the law. The decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal judge stands as regard the refusal to grant leave to remain
   under the Immigration Rules.




                                Upper Tribunal Judge Coker


                               Date 27th November 2013
