
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14452/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2016                   |On 09 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                  ZIYA [G]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Amunwa, Counsel, instructed by Kilic & Kilic
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S M Daldry who, in a decision promulgated on 3 May 2016,
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The appellant had  appealed  against
    the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to extend  the  appellant's
    leave to remain on the basis of his family life.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey who was born on 4 March 1986.   He
    entered the United Kingdom illegally on 22 September 2009.  He made  an
    application for asylum which was refused on  31  March  2010.   He  was
    granted discretionary leave from 12 December  2011  until  12  December
    2014 on the basis of family life with  his  spouse  [MA].   He  made  a
    further application for an extension of his  leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of his family life on 11 December 2014.

 3. The respondent refused the  appellant's  application.   The  respondent
    considered that it was undesirable to permit the appellant to remain in
    the United Kingdom in light of the appellant's character  and  conduct.
    The appellant was convicted of two offences. The first conviction on  1
    July 2014 was for driving whilst disqualified and the second conviction
    of 15 August 2015 for assault occasioning actual bodily  harm  (on  the
    appellant's  spouse).   The  appellant  had  failed  to  declare  those
    convictions  on  his  application  form.    Further,   the   respondent
    considered that the appellant had failed  to  provide  any  documentary
    evidence to show that he was still enjoying  a  family  life  with  his
    spouse.  The Secretary of State was not satisfied that the  grounds  on
    which the appellant was previously granted  discretionary  leave  still
    persisted.

 4. The Secretary of State considered the appellant's  claim  that  removal
    would breach the appellant's right to respect for  private  and  family
    life under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.   The
    Secretary of State considered Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules
    and considered that failure to declare the unspent convictions  on  his
    application form when required to do so meant that  the  appellant  did
    not meet the suitability requirements of FLTR 1.6.

 5. The Secretary of State also considered that there  would  not  be  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into Turkey.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal, finding  that
    it would be proportionate to  remove  the  appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge accepted that the appellant does have private  life
    in the United Kingdom but was unable to make a finding that  he  has  a
    family life in the absence of more detailed evidence  relating  to  his
    relationship with his daughter.

 7. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  On 16 September 2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Saffer granted the  appellant  permission  to  appeal.   The  grant  of
    permission sets out that it is arguable that the  judge  may  not  have
    given  adequate  consideration  to  the  impact  on   the   appellant's
    relationship with his 2-year old British daughter.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The grounds of appeal set out that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
    erred in dismissing the appellant's appeal by failing to give  adequate
    consideration to the impact on the appellant's daughter of his  removal
    and to carry out a factual assessment as to proportionality. It is also
    asserted in the grounds that the judge failed to consider Section  117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ('the  2002  Act')
    and that the judge has failed to take into consideration the fact  that
    the appellant is a self-sufficient businessman involved in a profitable
    business with a �1,500,000 turnover.

 9. Mr  Amunwa  submitted  that  there  are  four  main  points  concerning
    proportionality. He submitted that the judge erred by failing to make a
    finding with regard to the appellant's daughter's  best  interests.  He
    submitted that the judge found that  there  was  no  credible  evidence
    before him of family life and that he was therefore not in  a  position
    to make a  sustainable  finding  on  the  appellant's  daughter's  best
    interests.  He referred to the case of JO and Others (Section 55  duty)
    Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC), in particular paragraphs  11  and  12.
    He submitted that in this case the judge was not properly informed  and
    could not therefore carry out a careful  examination  of  the  relevant
    information and facts.  He also submitted that  there  was  independent
    corroborative  evidence  of  the  appellant's  relationship  with   his
    daughter.  He referred to the probation report and an email at pages 49
    and 51 of the appellant's bundle which indicate that the appellant sees
    his daughter on a weekly basis.  He referred to paragraphs 6 and  8  of
    the appellant's witness  statement  as  evidence  of  the  relationship
    between the appellant and his daughter.

10.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  erred  by  taking  into  account  the
    appellant's convictions when determining  the  best  interests  of  the
    child.  He referred to paragraph 20 of the First-tier Tribunal decision
    where the judge set out:

         "In the absence of such evidence and noting that I have  found  the
         appellant to be less than truthful with regard  to  other  evidence
         concerning the non-disclosure of his convictions,  I  do  not  find
         that it would be harmful to [E]'s interests if the  appellant  were
         to be removed."

11. He submitted  that  whilst  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and
    previous convictions may be relevant to  the  proportionality  exercise
    they were not relevant to an assessment of the best  interests  of  the
    child.  The child could not be blamed for matters that  she  cannot  be
    held to be responsible for.  He referred to ZH (Tanzania)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2011] 2WLR 148 at paragraph 44.

12. It was also asserted that the judge made contradictory findings in  the
    determination. Reference was made to paragraph 22 where the judge found
    that family life could continue to be enjoyed from Turkey  whereas  the
    judge found that there was no family life in paragraphs 20 and  24  and
    that the appellant enjoys a private life with regard to the  visits  to
    his daughter.  It is submitted that these findings are so contradictory
    as to be unsustainable.

13. Mr Amunwa submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  Section
    117B(6).  He asserted that this applies because  [E]  is  a  qualifying
    child and the question then is of whether or not it  is  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom. He  submitted  that  this
    had not been addressed at all in the decision and there are no findings
    on this point.  In answer to a question from me,  Mr  Amunwa  indicated
    that there is no copy of the daughter's birth certificate in the bundle
    and that he did not have any direct confirmation that  the  appellant's
    daughter was a British citizen.  However,  he  submitted  that  it  was
    arguable, even if the birth certificate was  not  in  the  bundle  that
    117B(6) was engaged.  He submitted that there was  no  finding  by  the
    judge as to whether or not the appellant's daughter could go to  Turkey
    to continue family life there. He also submitted that it not  clear  if
    the judge accepted that there was a family life between  the  appellant
    and his daughter.  He submitted that it was  not  inevitable  that  the
    judge would have arrived at the same conclusions if Section 117B(6) had
    been applied.

14. Mr Tarlow relied on  the  Rule  24  response.  He  submitted  that  the
    appellant was legally represented at the hearing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal. He referred to paragraph 15 of the decision where  the  judge
    did make a finding of fact.  He submitted that it is not for the  judge
    to embark on a fishing expedition.  The determination shows  repeatedly
    that there was a dearth of evidence with  regard  to  the  relationship
    between the appellant and his daughter.  He referred to paragraph 19 of
    the decision where the judge sets out that  there  was  an  absence  of
    supporting evidence with regard to the closeness of  the  relationship.
    In this paragraph the judge refers  to  the  fact  that  there  was  no
    supporting evidence from the appellant's former wife  and  no  evidence
    from the appellant save for the statement that he visited his  daughter
    weekly and that he cared for his daughter.

15. Mr Tarlow referred to paragraph 20 of the decision and  submitted  that
    the judge found that in the absence of the evidence as to the nature of
    the appellant's relationship with [E] he had no  evidence  of  how  she
    would be harmed or her interests would be harmed if the appellant  were
    to be removed.  Mr Tarlow referred to paragraph 24 and  submitted  that
    it was open to the judge in the absence of more  detailed  evidence  to
    find that there is no family life.  He submitted that if  the  evidence
    is sparse it is not the fault of the judge.

16. In reply Mr Amunwa submitted that the judge was required to be properly
    informed in order to make an assessment of the best  interests  of  the
    child.   He submitted that there was a duty on the  decision-maker  and
    that in this case the judge  was  the  first  instance  decision  maker
    because the Secretary of State had not considered the best interests of
    the child.  He submitted that the judge ought  to  have  adjourned  the
    matter to have obtained further information.

Discussion

17. The judge in this case gave careful consideration to the evidence  that
    was before her.  From paragraph 19 of the decision the judge set out:

         "19. ... I heard evidence from him to say that he regularly saw his
             daughter [E]  on  a  weekly  basis  and  that  there  were  no
             difficulties in this  regard.   However,  in  the  absence  of
             supporting evidence with  regard  to  the  closeness  of  that
             relationship or specifically the  nature  of  the  appellant's
             visits to his daughter, I am unable to  find  that  he  has  a
             family life with his daughter.  In  particular,  I  note  that
             there was no supporting evidence from his former wife  in  the
             form  of  a  statement  or  otherwise  to  suggest  that   the
             relationship was valued or important in his  daughter's  life.
             He produced no evidence of his own save for the statement that
             he visited his  daughter  weekly  at  his  ex-wife's  home  in
             Hackney and that he cared for his daughter.  However,  in  the
             circumstances, I would have expected to see far  more  details
             of cogent evidence about his relationship  with  his  daughter
             had it been as significant as he claimed. When it was  put  to
             him in cross-examination that he  had  failed  to  supply  any
             supporting evidence in this regard he simply said that he  did
             not think it  was  necessary  because  he  did  not  need  it.
             Furthermore he went on to say in oral evidence that he was not
             basing his application on anything to  do  with  his  wife  or
             family.  He specifically said in oral evidence that the  basis
             of his application to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  whilst
             being partly based on the fact of  having  a  child  was  also
             because he had a business here.

         20.  I considered S55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
             Act 2009 and the best interests of the child.  I find that [E]
             is very young (two years old as at the date  of  hearing)  and
             resides with her mother.  There was no corroborative  evidence
             offered as to the frequency of the appellant's visits  nor  of
             the nature of his relationship with [E].  In  the  absence  of
             such evidence and noting that I have found the appellant to be
             les than truthful with regard to other evidence concerning the
             non-disclosure of his convictions, I do not find that it would
             be harmful to [E]'s interests if  the  appellant  were  to  be
             removed.  There  was  no  case  made  out  to   detail   [E]'s
             circumstances in detail and no argument presented  as  to  how
             her interests would be harmed if  the  appellant  were  to  be
             removed.

         21.  The appellant is clearly a successful businessman  and  likely
             to be able to travel to and from the United Kingdom to see his
             daughter regularly as well as to facilitate her travel to  see
             him and her extended family in Turkey. I heard no argument nor
             was presented with any evidence as to why  he  should  not  be
             able to do this nor why he could not stay in contact with  her
             by telephone and correspondence.   He  said  his  relationship
             with his former wife was good and that they had no need  of  a
             court order to regularise his contact with [E]. That being the
             case it can be supposed that a good deal of  cooperation  with
             the appellant's former wife would  further  assist  his  being
             able to maintain an ongoing  relationship  with  his  daughter
             from Turkey."

         ...

         24.  I accept that this appellant does have some  private  life  in
             the United Kingdom although I am unable to make a finding that
             he has a family life in the absence of more detailed  evidence
             relating to his relationship with his daughter. I find that if
             his appeal is refused and he is removed then  there  would  be
             some interference with his private  life  but  this  would  be
             temporary and short lived. I find  that  the  appellant  could
             continue his business operations in Turkey should he so  wish.
             He gave evidence to say that he had family in Turkey and  that
             his father had a business there that that  he  had  previously
             worked in with his father in the business. ..."

18. It is clear that the judge did make a finding that the relationship the
    appellant had with his daughter did not amount to family  life  in  the
    absence of any detailed evidence.  Any mistaken reference to continuing
    family life is not material.

19. Whilst I accept Mr Tarlow's submission that it is for the appellant  to
    present his case and to provide  sufficient  evidence  to  support  his
    claim, in this case the judge was required to  consider  and  determine
    the best interests of the appellant's daughter.    I  accept  that  the
    burden lies on the appellant to prove his case and that there was  very
    little evidence provided in this case. I also note that  the  appellant
    was legally represented. However, I have  concerns  that  his  daughter
    [E]'s  interests  have  not  been  fully  considered.   They  were  not
    considered by the Secretary of State. There can be no criticism of  the
    Secretary of State for failing  to  consider  Section  55  because  the
    appellant made no mention of his daughter or his relationship with  his
    daughter in his application.  That application was made on 11  December
    2014 when his daughter must have been  almost  3  months  old.   It  is
    surprising that the appellant failed to include his  daughter  in  that
    application. No reasons have been given for that omission. I also  note
    in the letter dated 11 December 2014 from his  solicitors  accompanying
    the application there is no reference in that  to  the  appellant  even
    having a child let alone  having  an  ongoing  relationship  with  that
    child. I note also that the application was made on the  basis  of  his
    relationship with his wife from whom he is now divorced.  He failed  to
    mention that he had been convicted of  assault  on  his  wife  in  that
    application.



20. The judge in this case clearly had good reason to doubt the appellant's
    credibility.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  take  into   account   the
    credibility of the appellant when assessing the assertion made  by  him
    that he was in a subsisting relationship with his daughter.  The  judge
    was not holding the appellant's  previous  convictions  or  failure  to
    declare them against [E] when considering her best interests,  she  was
    simply assessing the credibility  of  the  appellant's  evidence.   The
    judge did not doubt that the appellant did in fact visit  his  daughter
    (albeit the frequency was not specifically accepted),  she  simply  was
    unable to determine whether or not that the relationship was valued  or
    important in his daughter's life. As set out by the judge there was  no
    other evidence available that she could have taken into consideration.

21. Although I do not accept Mr Amunwa's submission that  the  letter  from
    the probation office is independent corroborative evidence (because  it
    is based on  information  given  by  the  appellant  to  the  probation
    service, or at least appears to  be  based  on  that  evidence)  it  is
    nevertheless an indication that the appellant is  referring  to  seeing
    his daughter to the probation service.

22. The judge was obviously aware of the requirements of s55.  She  made  a
    specific finding that that it would not be harmful to  [E]'s  interests
    if the appellant were to be removed. The judge took into  consideration
    that [E] is very young (two years old as at the date  of  hearing)  and
    resides with her mother and that there was  no  corroborative  evidence
    offered as to the frequency of the appellant's visits nor of the nature
    of his relationship with [E].

23. In  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held:

         "12.     Although, judges of either Immigration and Asylum  Chamber
         must be alert to ensure that these duties are met and in some cases
         may need to explore whether the duty requires  further  information
         to be obtained or inquiry to be made, the judge primarily  acts  on
         the evidence in the case. Where that evidence gives no  hint  of  a
         suggestion that the welfare of  the  child  is  threatened  by  the
         immigration decision in question, or that the best interests of the
         child are undermined by such action, there is simply no  basis  for
         any further  judicial  exploration  or  reasoned  decision  on  the
         question..."

24. In the instant case it could be argued that the very  fact  that  there
    was such a  lack  of  evidence  to  support  a  suggestion  that  [E]'s
    interests would be undermined by removal of the appellant leads to  the
    conclusion there was no basis for any further judicial  exploration.  I
    do not consider that this is the correct conclusion in this case. [E]'s
    best interests were considered for the first time by the judge. A judge
    must be  properly  informed  in  order  to  determine  a  child's  best
    interests.

25. In JO and Others (section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC)  the
    Upper Tribunal held:

         "11.     I consider that, properly analysed, there are two  guiding
         principles, each rooted in duty. The first  is  that  the  decision
         maker must be properly informed. The second is that, thus equipped,
         the decision maker  must  conduct  a  careful  examination  of  all
         relevant information and factors. These principles  have  a  simple
         logical attraction,  since  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  a
         decision maker could properly have regard to the need to  safeguard
         and  promote  the  welfare  of  the  child  or  children  concerned
         otherwise. Furthermore, they reflect long recognised  standards  of
         public law. Being adequately informed and conducting  a  scrupulous
         analysis are elementary prerequisites to the inter-related tasks of
         identifying the child's best interests and then balancing them with
         other material  considerations.  This  balancing  exercise  is  the
         central  feature  of  cases  of  the  present   type.   It   cannot
         realistically or sensibly be undertaken unless and until the scales
         are properly prepared."

26. In the circumstances of this case the requirement to  assess  the  best
    interests of [E] as a primary  consideration  required  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to undertake a properly informed  assessment  to  ensure
    the duty to safeguard and promote her welfare was complied with. If the
    appellant is  removed  the  relationship  with  his  daughter  will  be
    interfered with. Although I sympathise with the difficulties  faced  by
    the judge when presented with a paucity of evidence,  it  was  not  the
    case that the judge rejected the evidence  that  the  appellant  had  a
    relationship with his daughter and that he visited her. The  judge  has
    essentially reached a conclusion from the wrong end of the spectrum. By
    finding  that  there  was  no  evidence  from  which  to  evaluate  the
    importance and value of the relationship  and  no  arguments  presented
    that [E]'s interests would be harmed if the appellant were removed, the
    judge has made a finding that her interests would not be harmed. It  is
    difficult to discern what the judge  considered  [E]'s  best  interests
    were. On the facts of this case, having accepted that the appellant did
    have a relationship with his daughter, the judge failed to undertake  a
    fully informed assessment of [E]'s best interests.

27. I therefore find that the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  contains  an
    error of law. I consider that this is a material error  of  law  as  if
    further information been provided the judge might  have  arrived  at  a
    different conclusion as to her best interests. I do  not  suggest  that
    any positive finding would be determinative of the  appeal.  A  child's
    best interests are a primary consideration but are to be weighed in the
    balance  against  other  factors  when  undertaking  a  proportionality
    assessment.

28. The judge erred by failing to have regard to the mandatory requirements
    in section 117B of the 2002 Act.  Although  it  would  not  assist  the
    appellant with regard to 117B(1)-(5), section  117B(6)  is  potentially
    relevant. The judge  had  not  made  a  finding  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with  his  daughter  was  not  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship. The judge found that there was insufficient  evidence  to
    evaluate  that  relationship.  If  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with [E] (who the judge accepted was a  British
    Citizen - a qualifying child) section 117B(6) must  be  considered.  It
    was an error for the judge not to have considered  section  117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Act.

Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and I set aside that decision pursuant to section 12(2)(a)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

30. Owing to the extent of the fact finding required I remit this matter to
    the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  on  the  next  available  date.
    Although  the  appellant's  appeal  was  heard  at  Taylor  House   the
    appellant's representative requested that if the appeal could be  heard
    sooner at a hearing centre outside of London  the  appellant  would  be
    content for the matter to be listed elsewhere.

31. The matter is to be remitted for a de novo hearing before any  Tribunal
    Judge other than Judge S M Daldry on the next available date.

32. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 8 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

