
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/14625/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 October 2016                           |On 19 December 2016           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                         GABRIEL OKHUMEKHOKHO OKHIAL
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Aborisade, Solicitor, OA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by Mr Gabriel Okhumekhokho Okhiai  who  appeals  with
    leave against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre.   The
    date of the promulgation is not given in the papers but it was heard at
    Hatton Cross on 7 April 2016.

2.   The issue is whether the appellant's marriage to Mrs Margaret  Rosemary
    Scanu was a  genuine  marriage  or  a  marriage  of  convenience.   The
    Secretary of State in the decision letter of 10  March  2015  concluded
    that the appellant had entered  into  a  marriage  of  convenience  and
    refused the appellant's application for indefinite leave to remain.

3.   The appellant and Mrs Scanu had attended  for  marriage  interviews  in
    Liverpool conducted on 5 February 2015.  It was on the basis  of  those
    interviews that the Secretary  of  State  concluded  that  this  was  a
    marriage of convenience. The details of these  interviews  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and evidence was led before him from  the
    appellant and Mrs Scanu who both confirmed  that  this  was  a  genuine
    relationship.

4.   However, the Immigration Judge at paragraph 44 of the  decision  letter
    concluded that when both the answers in the marriage interviews and the
    oral evidence are considered as a whole, that although the parties  may
    have been living at the same address the appellant had not  established
    that there was a genuine and subsisting marriage. The relationship  was
    one of convenience. The appellant had not established that he meets the
    requirements of paragraph 287(a)(ii) and (iii).

5.   Before us Mr Aborisade relied on the grounds of  appeal  and  submitted
    that there was an error of law.  He referred us to the case of Goudey v
    Secretary of State [2012] UKUT 41 at paragraph 10  and  submitted  that
    the Immigration Judge was imposing his own  view  of  how  the  parties
    could reasonably be expected to conduct their relationship  as  opposed
    to evaluating the consistent and supported evidence that was before him
    as to how they actually did.

6.   In evidence the appellant had been unable to say how many children  his
    wife's daughters had, and misnamed two of the children of  one  of  the
    daughters. The First-tier Tribunal judge  accepted  that  it  was  more
    likely that the appellant's wife visited her own children in  order  to
    care for her grandchildren. However he found that  the  inconsistencies
    in the oral evidence and the appellant's lack of  knowledge  about  his
    wife's children and grandchildren were so great that the appellant  had
    not established that this was a genuine  and  subsisting  marriage.  He
    also gave weight to the fact that none of the wife's children  attended
    the hearing nor supported by providing letters of support.  He attached
    further weight  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant's  brother  was  in
    attendance at the hearing but did not give evidence.

7.   In our opinion there is little substance in Mr  Aborsade's  submission.
    What the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  doing  was  looking  at  the
    surrounding evidence to try and establish whether or not  the  marriage
    was a genuine and subsisting one or, as the respondent alleged,  was  a
    marriage of convenience.

8.   In looking at the surrounding evidence he was entitled to  have  regard
    to the way in which the evidence was given and any inconsistencies.  It
    was submitted to the Immigration judge that the appellant was not  well
    educated and that would account for some of the  discrepancies  in  the
    marriage interview. The Immigration Judge accepted that  and  commented
    that he had difficulty in understanding some of his evidence. He  noted
    however that the appellant was not able at the  oral  hearing  to  give
    very straightforward answers about  his  wife's  family,  children  and
    grandchildren which he would have expected him to do  if  the  marriage
    was genuine.

9.   In the grounds of appeal reference  is  made  to  the  failure  by  the
    Immigration Judge to act as  an  unbiased  umpire.  From  paragraph  30
    onwards he had "descended into the arena".  In  oral  submissions  some
    reference was made to this but  the  allegation  that  the  Immigration
    Judge was biased was correctly, in our view,  withdrawn.  There  is  no
    evidence from any of the papers or any surrounding material put  before
    us that the judge acted in anything other than in accordance  with  his
    judicial oath.

10.  The grounds on with permission  is  granted  also  include  submissions
    that paragraph 39 was contradictory.  There is no contradiction. It  is
    submitted that the appellant's wife should have been  questioned  about
    the circumstances of the appellant before the judge could form  a  view
    of whether the marriage  subsisted.  There  is  no  substance  in  that
    ground.

11.  It was also submitted (at (h) of the grounds of appeal) that the  judge
    did  not  state  any  reasons  for  concluding  that   there   are   no
    insurmountable obstacles to  the  appellant  and  his  wife  conducting
    married life in Nigeria. The only reference to insurmountable obstacles
    is to a submission made by Mr Aborisade at paragraph  41  that  such  a
    consideration was irrelevant, a submission with which the judge agreed.



12.  At (i) of the grounds of appeal it is submitted that the fact that  the
    appellant came to the UK as a student and had a number of  applications
    which were refused did not mean that he had  not  been  here  lawfully.
    However as a fact the appellant did not  have  a  ten  year  continuous
    lawful residence in the UK.

13.  At (j) it is said that the  judge  relied  on  inconsistencies  in  the
    marriage interview without cross-examination.  He was  entitled  to  do
    that.  It is further  submitted  that  the  judge  relied  on  untested
    evidence and inadequate  oral  evidence.   However  the  appellant  was
    represented at the hearing and it was open  to  his  representative  to
    contest any evidence in issue.

14.  The appellant submits  that  it  is  contradictory  to  find  that  the
    parties were living  together  but  that  it  was  nevertheless  not  a
    subsisting marriage relationship. That is not what the judge finds.  At
    paragraph 44 Judge Plumptre comments that the parties  many  have  been
    living at the same address but  have  not  established  that  there  is
    current genuine and subsisting relationship. That was a conclusion that
    he was entitled to reach. He did not say they were living together.

15.  Accordingly we do not consider that there is any error of  law  and  we
    shall refuse this appeal.

16.  There is one final matter and that is that permission  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on 14 September 2016 on the  basis  of
    the grounds  of  appeal.   We  find  it  difficult  to  understand  why
    permission was granted in this case since there were self-evidently  no
    arguable points of law. We note  too  that  there  was  no  attempt  to
    analyse any of the individual grounds of appeal. Had that been done  it
    would have been apparent that some of them were factually inaccurate.

No anonymity direction is made.





                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                                       Date:



