
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/14556/2014
     IA/14557/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30 April 2015                         |On 22 May 2015                      |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Valdineia Menenzes
                           Mauro Monteiro De Souza
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Jones, Bhogal Partners


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall hereafter refer to the appellant as the respondent and  to  the
    respondents as the appellants (as they appeared respectively before the
    First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellants, Valdineia Menenzes (date of birth  3  March  1977)  and
    Mauro Monteiro De Souza (date of birth 2 March 1982), are  citizens  of
    Brazil.  They applied for EEA residence cards as confirmation of  their
    right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  as  the  parents  of  two  EEA
    national children, GM (born - June 1997) and AM (born -  August  2001).
    The applications were refused by the respondent on 3 March 2014 and the
    appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge S Aziz) which, in
    a determination promulgated on 2 December 2014, allowed the  appeal  on
    the basis that  the  appellants  satisfied  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2007,  Regulation  15A.   The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. Regulation 15A provides as follows:


  Derivative right of residence

  15A. (1) A person ("P") who is not an exempt person and who satisfies  the
  criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5)  of  this  regulation  is
  entitled to a derivative right to reside in the United Kingdom for as long
  as P satisfies the relevant criteria.

  (2) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

  (a) P is the primary carer of an EEA national ("the relevant EEA
national"); and

  (b) the relevant EEA national-

  (i) is under the age of 18;

  (ii) is residing in the United Kingdom as a self-sufficient person; and

  (iii) would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom if P were required
to leave.

  (3) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

  (a) P is the child of an EEA national ("the EEA national parent");

  (b) P resided in the United Kingdom at a time when the EEA national parent
  was residing in the United Kingdom as a worker; and

  (c) P is in education in the United Kingdom and was in education there at
  a time when the EEA national parent was in the United Kingdom.

  (4) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

  (a) P is the primary carer of a person meeting the criteria in paragraph
  (3) ("the relevant person"); and

  (b) the relevant person would be unable to continue to be educated in the
  United Kingdom if P were required to leave.

  (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

  (a) P is the primary carer of a British citizen ("the relevant British
citizen");

  (b) the relevant British citizen is residing in the United Kingdom; and

  (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in the UK or in
  another EEA State if P were required to leave.

  (5) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

  (a) P is under the age of 18;

  (b) P's primary carer is entitled to a derivative right to reside in the
  United Kingdom by virtue of paragraph (2) or (4);

  (c) P does not have leave to enter, or remain in, the United Kingdom; and

  (d) requiring P to leave the United Kingdom would prevent P's primary
  carer from residing in the United Kingdom.

  (6) For the purpose of this regulation-

  (a) "education" excludes nursery education;

  (b) "worker" does not include a jobseeker or a person who falls to be
  regarded as a worker by virtue of regulation 6(2); and

  (c) "an exempt person" is a person-

  (i) who has a right to reside in the United Kingdom as a result of any
  other provision of these Regulations;

  (ii) who has a right of abode in the United Kingdom by virtue of section 2
of the 1971 Act;

  (iii) to whom section 8 of the 1971 Act, or any order made under
  subsection (2) of that provision, applies; or

  (iv) who has indefinite leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom.

  (7) P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person if

  (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person; and

  (b) P-

  (i) is the person who has primary responsibility for that person's care;
or

  (ii) shares equally the responsibility for that person's care with one
  other person who is not an exempt person.

  (7A) Where P is to be regarded as a primary carer  of  another  person  by
  virtue of paragraph (7)(b)(ii) the  criteria  in  paragraphs  (2)(b)(iii),
  (4)(b) and (4A)(c) shall be considered on the basis that both  P  and  the
  person with whom care responsibility is shared would be required to  leave
  the United Kingdom.

  (7B)  Paragraph  (7A)  does  not  apply  if  the  person  with  whom  care
  responsibility is shared acquired a derivative  right  to  reside  in  the
  United Kingdom as a result of this regulation prior to  P  assuming  equal
  care responsibility.

  (8) P will not be regarded as having responsibility for  a  person's  care
  for the purpose of  paragraph  (7)  on  the  sole  basis  of  a  financial
  contribution towards that person's care.

  (9) A person who otherwise satisfies the criteria in paragraph  (2),  (3),
  (4), (4A) or (5) will not be entitled to a derivative right to  reside  in
  the United Kingdom where the Secretary of State or an immigration  officer
  has made a decision under regulation 19(3)(b), 20(1), 20A(1) or 23A.





 4. The judge made a series of findings of fact at [77].  He found that the
    first and second appellants were in a genuine, subsisting  and  durable
    relationship.  The first appellant had been  previously  married  to  a
    German national (from whom she divorced in 2001) and the  EEA  national
    children (GM and AM) are the children of that relationship.   Both  the
    first and second appellant had worked unlawfully in the United Kingdom.
     Although the judge  noted  that  the  biological  father  of  the  EEA
    national children is now living in the United Kingdom he accepted  that
    there would "be difficultly in the EEA national  children's  biological
    father being able to look after them since he is working."   The  judge
    did record, however, at [78] et seq that he did not accept as  credible
    the evidence of the appellants that the biological father has little to
    do with the children.  The judge acknowledged that it would not  be  in
    the best interests of the children to be removed to Brazil whilst  both
    their biological parents  and  their  stepfather  were  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Likewise, it would not be in their best interests for them to
    be  removed  to  Germany.   The  judge  found  that  the  children  had
    comprehensive sickness insurance cover [85], he "took  no  issue"  with
    the evidence regarding the fact that "both the appellants were  working
    in the  United  Kingdom,  wholly  financially  providing  for  the  EEA
    national children" [87].  He concluded at [88]:

         Finally, it must be established that [the children] would be unable
         to remain here if their primary carers were required to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.  In light of my above findings at paragraph 77 I am
         persuaded that this requirement can be met.

 5. The Secretary of State asserts in the grounds of appeal that the  judge
    erred in law.  In particular, the respondent  submits  that  Regulation
    15A(2)(ii) and (iii) had not been satisfied by these  appellants.   The
    children were not self-sufficient  and,  insofar  as  they  relied  for
    financial support on their parent and step-parent, any income earned by
    those individuals had been obtained unlawfully and whilst they did  not
    have leave in their own right to remain in the  United  Kingdom.   Such
    funds should be excluded from  the  self-sufficiency  assessment  (Seye
    (Chen children: employment) [2013] UKUT 00178 (IAC)).  No  funds  other
    than income derived from unlawful working by  their  parents  had  been
    disclosed which might satisfy the self-sufficiency requirement.

 6. The Secretary of State also asserts that  there  was  not  evidence  on
    which the judge could base his finding  that  there  was  comprehensive
    sickness  insurance  for  both  appellants.  Finally,  the   respondent
    considers that the decision of the judge was inconsistent.  In essence,
    he had found that the biological father of the  children  who  was  now
    living in the United Kingdom could not look after them  because  he  is
    working.  However, as the grounds note [8] "the  appellants  themselves
    are in the same position and the children being aged 13 and 17  do  not
    require constant supervision and would anyway be at school for a  large
    part of the day."  The grounds also note that it was not clear that the
    biological father had ever been  consulted  about  the  possibility  of
    looking after the children.  He had travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom
    from Brazil in order to  be  closer  to  the  children  and  it  "seems
    unlikely he would just turn his back on them now."

 7. Mr Jones submitted that any error on the part  of  the  judge  was  not
    material since the appellants could satisfy the criteria of  Regulation
    15A(4).  The children would be unable to continue to be educated in the
    United Kingdom if the appellants were required  to  leave.   Regulation
    15A(4)  requires,  in  turn,  that  the  appellants   also   meet   the
    requirements  of  subparagraph  (3).   Ms  Brocklesby-Weller,  for  the
    respondent, submitted that there was  no  evidence  to  show  that  the
    biological German father could not meet the requirements of  Regulation
    15A(3)(b).

 8. I find that the judge did err in law.  In  particular,  the  judge  has
    failed to explain why the children's biological German father would  be
    unable to look after the children when his ability to do so appears  to
    be no more circumscribed than that of  the  appellants  themselves.   I
    agree with the judge that the  appellants  appear  to  have  sought  to
    minimise the role played by the biological father in the lives  of  the
    children.  It was extraordinary that no attempt has been  made  by  the
    appellants or their advisors  to  obtain  evidence  of  the  biological
    father's views on his future involvement with the children.   Secondly,
    the judge has ignored the ratio of Seye and appears  to  have  accepted
    that unlawful work in the United Kingdom could be accepted in the self-
    sufficiency analysis.

 9. I also find that it is not possible,  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    available to the Upper Tribunal, to conclude that any error on the part
    of the judge was not material to the outcome of the appeal  because  of
    the operation of Regulation 15A(4).  I am satisfied, however,  for  the
    reasons which I have stated above that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside.  Because there are a number of evidential
    matters which need to be clarified, I have decided to remit the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 2  December  2014  is
set aside.  The appeals shall be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not
Judge S Aziz) for that  Tribunal  to  remake  the  decision.   None  of  the
findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity directions are made.






Signed                              Date 15 May 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

























