
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/14019/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 September 2015                  |On 12 May 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Bagral


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                  Appellant
                                     and

                      Karim Mohammed Ahmed Abbas Morsi
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Nizami, of Counsel, instructed by Good  Advice
UK


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (hereafter  "the
      Secretary of State" appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal C Ferguson  promulgated  on  2  March
      2015 allowing the  appeal  of  Mr  Morsi  (hereafter  "the  claimant")
      against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State   refusing   his
      application for Indefinite Leave to Remain ("ILR") and a  decision  to
      remove him pursuant to  section  47  of  the  Immigration  Asylum  and
      Nationality Act 2006.
2.    The claimant is an  Egyptian  national  born  on  1  August  1990.  He
      entered the UK on 31 December 2001  (aged  11)  with  entry  clearance
      conferring leave to enter as  a  visitor  with  a  view  to  obtaining
      medical treatment. On 2 January 2002 the  claimant  was  listed  as  a
      dependent on his  parents'  asylum  claim  which  was  refused  on  28
      February 2002 and appeal rights were exhausted on  8  July  2004.  The
      claimant's parents returned to Egypt in 2005 and the claimant remained
      in the UK with his sister and brother.  The  claimant's  sister  is  a
      British citizen and his brother is the spouse of an EEA national.  The
      claimant was financially supported by  his  siblings.  The  claimant's
      father subsequently died in 2010  and  contact  with  his  mother  was
      limited.

3.    On 6 March 2009 the claimant submitted an application for ILR  on  the
      basis of the Secretary of State's seven year  child  concession.  That
      application was refused on 3 March 2014. In refusing  the  application
      the  Secretary  of  State  referred  to  the  claimant's  failure   to
      substantiate his continuous residence in the UK since  2001  and  thus
      could not benefit  from  the  concession.  The  application  was  also
      refused with reference to paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules.
      The Respondent further  considered  that  there  were  no  exceptional
      grounds to warrant a grant of leave outside of the Rules.

4.    The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (IAC).

5.    The Judge heard evidence  from  the  claimant  and  his  siblings.  He
    accepted the credibility of that evidence and he was satisfied that the
    claimant had lived in the UK continuously since entry [21].  The  Judge
    found that the claimant did not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules and proceeded  to  consider  Article  8
    ECHR. The Judge found that the claimant shared a close  bond  with  his
    siblings and noted that he had spent his formative years  of  childhood
    living in the UK and had attended school.  The  Judge  also  noted  the
    claimant had not lived in Egypt since he was 11  years  old  and  would
    find it difficult to reintegrate into life there [27]. The  Judge  thus
    answered the first four questions posed in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 in the
    affirmative and the issue thus was confined to that of  proportionality
    [27-29].

6.    The Judge had regard to the public interest considerations set out  in
    s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (hereafter
    "the 2002 Act") and noted the claimant spoke English, but  he  did  not
    know whether he would be financially independent. He  took  account  of
    the fact that the claimant had developed a private life whilst  he  had
    been in the UK unlawfully, but noted that for most  of  that  time  the
    claimant was a minor [30]. The Judge found that the claimant  had  been
    living in the UK for more than 13 years and had developed strong family
    ties with his siblings who were lawfully resident in the UK. The  Judge
    took into account the claimant had attended school in the UK for  three
    years and had developed many friendships. He had not  seen  his  mother
    since 2005 and had little contact with her and had no other  social  or
    family ties to Egypt. The Judge made reference to the  claimant's  good
    character and took account of the delay in processing the  application,
    noting that at the date of application, he was 18 but was now  24.  The
    Judge accordingly found that the interference with family  and  private
    life was not proportionate and allowed the appeal under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR [33-34].

7.    The Secretary of State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.  In  the
    grounds of appeal it was contended that the Judge  failed  to  identify
    why the claimant's circumstances would lead to an  unjustifiably  harsh
    outcome and why any dependence between the claimant  and  his  siblings
    was above the normal emotional ties. The Judge failed to  given  little
    weight to  private  life  developed  when  the  claimant's  status  was
    precarious and considered the issue of delay as  determinative  of  the
    claim.

8.    Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  27
    April 2015,  the  Judge  granting  permission  observing  that  it  was
    arguable that the Judge failed to give sufficient weight to  the  terms
    of s.117B of the 2002 Act and did not follow the  Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT
    00640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 Admin approach.

Consideration and Conclusions

9.    At the hearing, on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Tufan  in
    amplifying the grounds introduced a point that was not  argued  in  the
    grounds and upon which permission to appeal had not been granted. There
    was no application to vary the grounds of appeal. In essence,  he  took
    issue with the Judge's factual findings at [21] which he submitted were
    not sufficiently reasoned. As this is a fundamentally different  ground
    of appeal for which permission to  appeal  has  not  been  granted  the
    Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider it.  Nevertheless,  I  see  no
    error in the Judge's consideration  of  the  evidence  which  he  found
    credible for the reasons that he gave at [21]; conclusions  which  were
    open to him and that have not been shown to be irrational or perverse.

10.   It also equally clear when reading paragraph [27] in conjunction  with
    [31] that the Judge's rationale in concluding that the claimant  "would
    find it difficult to reintegrate into life  there"  was  based  on  his
    findings of the claimant's close connections  to  the  UK  compared  to
    having "no social or family ties in Egypt" other than his mother who he
    had not seen 2005 and with whom he had little contact. The  point  made
    in the grounds that the claimant "may be  downplaying  the  level"   of
    contact which could be resumed on return and "there is no evidence that
    his mother would be unwilling to support him upon return" simply  seeks
    to reargue the case on its merits rather than identifying an  error  of
    law. Similarly, reference in the grounds  to  the  Judge's  failure  to
    address whether there would  be  "very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration" does not disclose an error as the Judge was  not  required
    to consider this test in her consideration of Article 8 outside of  the
    Rules.

11.   The Secretary of State's grounds in support  of  the  application  for
    permission to appeal plead inter alia, with particular reference to the
    cases of Gulshan, Nagre and Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA  Civ  31,  that
    the Judge failed to identify any dependency between  the  claimant  and
    his siblings "above normal  emotional  ties"  and  failed  to  identify
    compelling circumstances or exceptional circumstances that warranted  a
    grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules.

12.   Before  the  issue  of  proportionality  is  reached  the  Judge  must
    consider the question of whether in fact family and  private  life  has
    been established. In this regard the grounds of  appeal  challenge  the
    Judge's decision on the basis that he did not identify  any  dependency
    between the claimant and his siblings "above normal emotional ties".  I
    am satisfied that this is without  merit.  Whilst  the  Judge  made  no
    finding on whether there was family life between the claimant  and  his
    siblings, it is clear that he had the relationships in mind  as  it  is
    implicit in the Judge's finding that there was an interference with the
    rights engaged that she was satisfied the claimant had  an  established
    family and private life [27]. The evidence  which  the  Judge  accepted
    clearly rationally supported  a  finding  of  family  life  within  the
    meaning of Article 8. The Judge accepted the claimant's  evidence  that
    he had lived  with  his  brother  and/or  sister  since  2005  and  was
    practically raised by them and, provided  financial  support  [16].  He
    referred to the close family bond between  the  claimant  and  siblings
    with whom the claimant had "developed strong family ties"  [27  &  31].
    That evidence was sufficient  to  support  a  finding  of  family  life
    between the claimant and his siblings which  is  not  vitiated  by  the
    absence to refer to the phraseology in the  grounds  of  "above  normal
    emotional ties". I am reinforced in this conclusion by reference to the
    guidance in the case  of  Ghising  (family  life-adults-Gurkha  policy)
    [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) as approved by the Court of Appeal (as  to  its
    analysis of family life) by the Court of Appeal in R  (Gurung)  v  SSHD
    [2013] 1 WLR 2456. Application of these  authorities  to  the  evidence
    does not in my view indicate error by the Judge in his analysis.

  13. The grounds of appeal challenge the  Judge's  decision  on  the  basis
    that he did not give weight to those factors set out in s. 117B of  the
    2002 Act. I am satisfied that this is also  without  merit.  The  Judge
    clearly states at  [30] that she has  considered  the  provisions  and,
    indeed, earlier in his decision set them out in full  [10].  Whilst  he
    does not identify the specific considerations set out in s.117B(5),  he
    clearly had them in mind and clearly factored them  in  when  he  noted
    that the claimant's private life had "been developed at a time when  he
    was not in the country lawfully...". The Judge noted that the  claimant
    spoke  English  reflecting  the  provisions  of  s.117B(2),  but   that
    acknowledgement does not necessarily indicate that the  Judge  attached
    undue weight to this factor and treated it as a determinative factor in
    the claimant's favour. Further, whilst the Judge's use of  language  in
    stating  that,  "I  do  not  know  whether  he  would  be   financially
    independent" does not properly give effect to the wording in  s.117B(3)
    which is expressed in the present tense, I am not satisfied  that  this
    is a material error that would affect the outcome of  the  decision  as
    the accepted evidence before  the  Judge  was  that  the  claimant  was
    financially supported by his siblings.

14.   It is not an arguable error of law for a  Judge  to  give  too  little
    weight or too much weight to a factor, unless irrationality is alleged.
    I am satisfied that the Judge in  his  proportionality  assessment  has
    taken into account all the factors relevant to the public interest.


15.   In this case the public interest also required the Judge to factor  in
    the  Secretary  of  State's  delay   in   processing   the   claimant's
    application. The delay was  a  period  just  shy  of  five  years.  The
    submission in  the  grounds  that  the   Judge  treated  the  delay  as
    determinative of the question of proportionality is without merit. In a
    balanced approach to the issue the Judge took account of the delay only
    to the extent "that he [the claimant] is bound to have developed a more
    established private life in the UK during that time" [33]. There is  no
    identifiable error in that approach.


16.   Mr Tufan suggested that having found that the claimant  did  not  meet
    the Rules no separate assessment was required under  Article  8.  I  am
    satisfied that this is not a completely fair reflection of the law.  It
    is now generally accepted that the new Immigration Rules do not provide
    in advance for  every  nuance  in  the  application  of  Article  8  in
    individual cases. At para 30 of Nagre, Sales J said:



         "30.     ... if, after the process of applying the  new  rules  and
         finding that the claim for leave to remain under  them  fails,  the
         relevant official or tribunal judge considers it is clear that  the
         consideration under the Rules has fully addressed any  family  life
         or private life  issues  arising  under  Article  8,  it  would  be
         sufficient simply to say that; they would not have  to  go  on,  in
         addition, to consider the case separately from the Rules. If  there
         is no arguable case that there may be  good  grounds  for  granting
         leave to remain outside the Rules by reference to Article 8,  there
         would be no point in introducing  full  separate  consideration  of
         Article 8 again after having reached a decision on  application  of
         the Rules."


17.   This was also endorsed by the Court of  Appeal  in  Singh  and  Khalid
    where Underhill LJ said (at para 64):

         "64.      ...  there  is  no  need  to  conduct  a  full   separate
         examination  of  article  8  outside  the  Rules  where,   in   the
         circumstances of a  particular  case,  all  the  issues  have  been
         addressed in the consideration under the Rules."


18.   However more recently the Court of Appeal in SS Congo [2015] EWCA  Civ
    387 stated in paragraph 33:

         "In our judgment, even though a test  of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of  LTR
         outside the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of "very compelling reasons"  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of public interest factors as finds expression in the
         Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in  Appendix  FM.
         It also reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has
         been tested and has survived scrutiny in  this  court:  see,  e.g.,
         Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ. "

19.   The Judge in a focused and balanced  decision  analysed  the  evidence
    and concluded that these  amounted  to  compelling  circumstances  that
    warranted a grant of leave outside the Rules. That was the correct test
    to apply and he was entitled to reach this conclusion having taken into
    account all of the relevant evidence.


20.   I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's  decision  when  read  as  a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

Notice of Decision

21.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no errors of law  and
stands.

22.   The claimant's appeal remains allowed.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Bagral                Dated


