
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/14614/2014
      IA/14615/2014
                                                               IA/14616/2014
                                                               IA/14617/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 30 January 2015                            |On 30 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               VIOLA VILA (1)
                               GEZIM KARAJ (2)
                               BRIAN KARAJ (3)
                              ARMELA KARAJ (4)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.   The respondents to this appeal are citizens of Albania, born  on  20
      August 1982, 26 February 1976, 21  June  2005  and  30  December  2007
      respectively. The appellant is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
      Department, who has appealed with the  permission  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pears,
      allowing the respondents' appeals against decisions of  the  Secretary
      of State, dated 11 March 2014,  to  remove  them  to  Albania,  having
      refused their applications for leave  on  human  rights  grounds.  The
      Secretary of State  found  the  appellants  could  not  succeed  under
      Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules,  HC395,  and
      there were no exceptional circumstances for the purposes of article  8
      of the Human Rights Convention.


   2.   It is more convenient to refer to the parties as  they  were  before
      the First-tier Tribunal. I shall therefore refer to Mrs Vila  and  her
      family from now on as "the appellants" and the Secretary of  State  as
      "the respondent".


   3.   I was not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.


   4.   The first and  second  appellants  claim  to  have  entered  the  UK
      clandestinely in 2002 and to have remained  here  without  leave  ever
      since. The third and fourth appellants, who are now aged 9 and 7, were
      born in the UK. The appellants brought themselves to the attention  of
      the authorities by submitting  their  applications  for  leave  for  a
      purpose not covered by the rules in July 2013.


   5.   At the appeal hearing before  Judge  Pears,  the  first  and  second
      appellants acknowledged that they did not meet the requirements of the
      Immigration Rules. However,  the  appeals  of  the  third  and  fourth
      appellants were pursued on the grounds that the decisions made by  the
      respondent were not in accordance with the law. Further, the  Tribunal
      was asked to rule on whether the rules  were  met  or,  alternatively,
      removing the third and fourth appellants would breach article 8 of the
      Human Rights Convention.


   6.   Judge Pears found the decision in respect of the third appellant  in
      particular was not in accordance with the law. In paragraph 13 of  his
      decision he noted the explanatory memorandum to changes in  the  rules
      that brought in Appendix FM in paragraph 276ADE. He noted a passage at
      paragraph 7.5 and 7.6 in that document which stated that the key  test
      for non-British children remaining on a permanent basis was the length
      of their residence in the UK, which the  rules  set  at  seven  years,
      subject to countervailing factors. The Judge noted  that  the  refusal
      letter did not identify any countervailing factors  and  therefore  it
      was difficult to identify which factors were taken into account  which
      prevailed over the third appellant's residence  for  more  than  seven
      years.


   7.   In paragraphs 14 and 15 Judge Pears considered whether the  decision
      letters showed the respondent had complied with her duty under section
      55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  to  safeguard
      and promote the welfare of children and he concluded she had not. This
      was a further reason the decisions were not  in  accordance  with  the
      law.


   8.   Next, in paragraphs 16 to 20, Judge Pears analysed the  respondent's
      application of paragraph 276ADE and he concluded that wrong version of
      the rules had been applied to him.


   9.   I pause to note here that Judge Pears could have allowed  the  third
      appellant's appeal under the correct version of the rules on the basis
      of the undisputed facts.


  10. Judge Pears noted that he could have allowed the appeals to the extent
      that the decisions were not in accordance with the  law.  However,  he
      was urged by counsel for the appellants, to go further and to consider
      the claims on their merits. In paragraph 21 he recorded that this  was
      not opposed by the respondent's counsel. He noted the  respondent  had
      served a one-stop notice, the application had been made over two years
      ago and the appellants, particularly the children, needed a resolution
      of the case on its merits rather  than  wait  for  the  outcome  of  a
      remittal.


  11. Having directed himself extensively by reference to domestic case  law
      and, in particular, ZH (Tanzania) [2011]  UKSC  4,  he  concluded  the
      removal of the appellants would be a disproportionate step.


  12. The grounds seeking permission to appeal argue one  point  only.  They
      argue the First-tier Tribunal misdirected itself in law by going on to
      make a ruling on the substantive merits of the article 8 claim and  it
      should have allowed the appeal to the limited extent  of  finding  the
      decision was not in accordance with the law. The Judge had  failed  to
      have proper regard to the position of  the  respondent.  Reliance  was
      placed on paragraph 46 of Sedley LJ's judgment in Mirza & Ors  v  SSHD
      [2011] EWCA Civ 159. I note the grounds do not engage with the  actual
      decision on the merits.


  13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Andrew.


  14. The appellants did not attend the hearing. The reason for  that  might
      well be that the respondent has decided to  grant  them  leave  for  a
      period of 30 months. Mr Walker helpfully  showed  me  a  copy  of  the
      respondent's letter to that effect, dated 25 November 2014. Of course,
      this is the respondent's appeal so there is no statutory  abandonment.
      The respondent may be deemed to have given notice of the withdrawal of
      her case for the purposes of rule  17(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 but I do not give  consent  to  withdrawal
      and I have decided to determine the appeal.

  15. As I indicated to Mr Walker, I do not  think  the  citation  of  Mirza
      assists the respondent's  case.  Mirza  dealt  with  the  question  of
      whether it was lawful for the respondent, in refusing  an  application
      for leave to remain, to delay making a removal  decision  which  would
      enable the person to bring an  appeal,  without  having  to  overstay.
      Having dealt with that issue, Sedley LJ remarked at  the  end  of  his
      judgment that it was not appropriate to go on to consider a breach  of
      article 8 having found illegality in the decision-making  process.  He
      said,

         "...  But  there  is  no  need  to  travel  into  article  8   once
         unlawfulness is established, and  there  are  obvious  difficulties
         about presuming a removal which, if the law is observed, may  never
         happen. ..."


  16. That is quite different from the present case in which the  appellants
      are appealing against decisions to remove them. Removal decisions  are
      not being anticipated: they have happened.


  17. Furthermore, as noted by the Judge, the respondent's counsel  did  not
      oppose Judge Pears's decision to proceed to determine  the  article  8
      claim on its merits, even though he did not need to do so.


  18. There was no error of law in the way the Judge proceeded. His analysis
      of the changes to the rule in paragraph 18 of his decision is correct.
      The third appellant's appeal should have been allowed under the rules.


  19. The First-tier Tribunal's decision  does  not  disclose  any  material
      error of law and shall stand.  The respondent's appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

     The First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error on  a  point  of
    law and its decision allowing the appeals on article  8  grounds  shall
    stand.


    No anonymity direction has been made.


                               Signed                 Date 30 January 2015






                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal
