
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/14181/2015
                                                               IA/14194/2015
                                                               IA/14200/2015
                                                               IA/14208/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 27 February 2017                  |On 28 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                 FESTUS [O]
                                OLUBUKOLA [O]
                           AND DEPENDENT CHILDREN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:           Mrs [O] (in person)
For the respondent:          Mr P. Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellants appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse  a
    human rights claim. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hanbury  ("the  judge")
    dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 26 July 2016.

2.    Mrs [O] ("the appellant") attended the hearing with her husband.  They
    were unable to afford legal representation for  the  hearing.  Mrs  [O]
    spoke  on  their  behalf.  Nevertheless,  their  legal  representatives
    submitted an  updated  bundle  of  documents.  The  documents  included
    evidence to show that there had been significant developments in  their
    family circumstances since the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.  Mr  [O]
    became unwell and was eventually sectioned under the Mental Health  Act
    1983 for a period of three months from October to December 2016.  As  a
    result of his erratic and aggressive behaviour, arising from his mental
    health problems, social service intervened to assist  the  family.  Mrs
    [O] and the children are now living in separate  accommodation  because
    it was deemed to be in the best interests of the children.  Mr  [O]  is
    said to be receiving a considerable amount of support. Social  services
    consider that it is important for the  children  to  continue  to  have
    contact with their father and are enabling supervised visits.   At  the
    same time, further assessments are ongoing in order  to  ascertain  the
    extent of the difficulties faced by the appellants'  daughter,  who  is
    said to show traits of autism. No clear conclusion has yet been reached
    as to whether she does in fact have the condition.

3.    None of this is strictly relevant to the issue of whether  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law,  but  it
    forms the background to the current situation should an error of law be
    found.

4.    Although the appellant explained that social services were seeking  to
    help them to find a solicitor with a legal aid contract, I decided that
    it would be better to explore the error of law  issues  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal before deciding whether it was necessary  to  adjourn
    the hearing on the ground that the appellant wanted an opportunity seek
    alternative  legal  representation.   The   appellants   were   legally
    represented when the application for permission to appeal was made. The
    grounds were drafted by counsel.

Decision and reasons

5.    After some discussion of the grounds  of  appeal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision, Mr Singh accepted that  the  judge  might  not  have
    given sufficient consideration  to  the  speech  and  language  therapy
    report. While the report  is  mentioned  at  [38]  the  judge  made  no
    findings as to what weight, if any, he placed on the evidence. Nor  was
    the content of the report considered, in particular, the fact that  the
    child was said to show possible traits of autism. The  report  was  not
    taken into account in assessing whether the children would have  access
    to suitable education  in  Nigeria.  While  the  judge  considered  the
    position of the children at [42] and mentioned that the respondent  had
    taken account of their welfare as a "primary consideration",  in  fact,
    no clear findings were made as  to  what  the  best  interests  of  the
    children were. In the absence of any clear findings as to what the best
    interests of the children were, there is nothing to show that the judge
    gave  appropriate  weight  to  their  best  interests  as   a   primary
    consideration.

6.    The second ground that  I  considered  to  have  some  merit  was  the
    judge's failure to consider the  evidence  put  forward  regarding  the
    stigma  that  Mr  [O]  might  face  in  Nigeria  as  a  result  of  the
    disabilities that he now suffers following a stroke. While it was  open
    to the judge conclude that Mr [O]'s condition  was  not  such  that  it
    reached the high threshold required to breach Article 3 of the European
    Convention, the additional discrimination he might face, over and above
    his already challenging medical condition, was  material  to  a  proper
    assessment of the proportionality of removal. While this  point,  taken
    alone,  was  unlikely  to  be  determinative,  it  is   of   sufficient
    importance, taken with the failure to make clear findings  relating  to
    the best  interests  of  the  children,  to  undermine  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's overall assessment of the proportionality of removal.

7.    The  other  grounds  of  appeal  outline  various  disagreements  with
    aspects of the decision, but do not disclose any  errors  of  law  that
    were likely to make any material difference to the overall  outcome  of
    the appeal.  Although many of the judge's findings were  entirely  open
    to him to make on the evidence, for  the  reasons  given  above,  I  am
    satisfied that it is the matters that he failed to take  into  account,
    or to make clear findings on,  which  disclose  errors  of  law.  Those
    matters relating  to  the  best  interests  of  the  children  and  the
    treatment that Mr [O] might face on return to Nigeria were sufficiently
    material to set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision.

8.    Because I was satisfied that there was an error of law in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision it was not necessary  to  adjourn  the  hearing.
    Given the recent developments in  the  family  circumstances  Mr  Singh
    agreed that it was appropriate to remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing so that the current situation can be given
    appropriate consideration. Given the circumstances it is important that
    the  appellants  are  represented  by  a  competent  solicitor  who  is
    experienced in immigration law  if  at  all  possible.  The  appellants
    should continue to make efforts, if necessary, with the  assistance  of
    social services, to find suitable representation as soon as possible.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 28 January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


