

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/14944/2015

                                              IA/14950/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |Determination issued              |
|on 4 May 2016                            |on 10 May 2016                    |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                  A B HADJI
                                   S HADJI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs S Saddiq, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Darvishzadeh, of Ethnic Minorities Law Centre

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but  for  continuity  and  ease  of
    reference the rest of this decision refers to them as they were in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are mother and daughter, born on 25 April  1983  and  18
    March 2012, both citizens of Algeria.  Anonymity orders have  not  been
    requested or made.

 3. The other members of the family are the first appellant's husband,  who
    is the father of the second appellant and of a  younger  child  of  the
    marriage.  The appellant's husband, originally also from  Algeria,  has
    become a UK citizen.  The younger child is also a UK citizen.

 4. The appellants came to the UK as visitors and then sought to remain  on
    the basis of family and private life.  Those applications were  refused
    on 2 April 2015.

 5. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   Their  case  came
    before Judge David Clapham SSC  on  25  August  2015.   The  appellants
    sought an adjournment, to bring further  evidence  to  show  that  they
    could meet the financial requirements of the Rules.   The  respondent's
    representative opposed  that,  on  the  view  that  in  any  event  the
    appropriate course would be for the appellants to return to Algeria  to
    seek entry clearance.

 6. I suspect that there was some confusion of approach at  that  stage  on
    both sides.  It might have been difficult for the  appellants  to  show
    that their appeals could be allowed in terms of the Immigration  Rules,
    if  the  appropriate  evidence  had  not  been  presented  with   their
    applications.  At the same time, I think the respondent  was  incorrect
    in submitting that even if financial requirements were met, there could
    be no Chikwamba based issue.

 7. The judge went on to deal with this case as  if  it  did  turn  on  the
    Chikwamba question: whether there was any good reason  to  require  the
    appellants to return to Algeria to make fresh  applications  for  entry
    clearance which would (more than likely) succeed.

 8. The judge found no such reason, and so allowed  the  appeals  on  human
    rights grounds.

 9. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:

                 1. Failing to give reasons  or  any  adequate  reasons  for
                    findings on material  matters  ...  the  judge  has  not
                    adequately explained why the  facts  of  this  case  are
                    sufficient  to  outweigh  the  policy  reasons  why  the
                    Secretary of State does not allow those in the UK  as  a
                    visitor to "switch" into a different category.

                 2. Making a material misdirection of law  in  any  material
                    matter ... the judge ...  misinterprets  the  "Zambrano"
                    principle at paragraphs 27 and  29  and  arrived  at  an
                    absurd position of assessing whether or not it would  be
                    reasonable for the 2 appellants to leave the UK to  make
                    an entry clearance application, leaving the sponsor  and
                    the British child in the UK.  Whilst it is accepted that
                    a British child cannot be forced to leave  the  UK,  and
                    cannot be expected to leave permanently,  that  is  very
                    far from requiring an assessment of whether it would  be
                    reasonable to expect that the British child  accompanies
                    his mother and sibling, on a temporary basis, while  she
                    applies for  entry  clearance,  particularly  given  the
                    child's young age.

10. The first ground of appeal is, plainly  enough,  directed  against  the
    appeal having been allowed on a Chikwamba basis.

11. The second ground of appeal I  find  difficult  to  follow.   I  cannot
    discern that it adds anything to the first.   I  see  no  reference  to
    Zambrano in the decision.

12. I observed to the Presenting Officer that the grounds did not appear to
    take any issue with the judge having approached the case on  the  basis
    that the appellants would succeed on the merits under  the  rules,  but
    for the requirement to apply from  outside  the  United  Kingdom.   Mrs
    Saddiq responded the appellants had failed to establish that  such  was
    the case.  She sought to argue that the appellants had not  shown  that
    they could meet the financial requirements of the Rules  and  that  the
    appeal should  not  have  succeeded  outwith  the  Rules,  whether  the
    appellants were in the country or not.

13. I declined to permit the grounds to be amended  to  that  effect.   The
    application came far too late.  The appellants  had  not  been  put  on
    notice of any such case.  The grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    effectively accepted that the question was simply whether  or  not  the
    appellants should be expected to make their applications  from  outside
    the UK.

14. Mrs Saddiq submitted that the appeal should not have been allowed on  a
    Chikwamba basis, because it was  not  disproportionate  to  expect  the
    appellants to comply with that requirement.

15. I indicated that  having  kept  the  grounds  to  the  terms  on  which
    permission was granted, I did not find them to disclose  any  error  of
    law.

16. There was a respectable argument to be made  that  there  is  no  grave
    inconvenience to any family members in  expecting  applications  to  be
    made from abroad in accordance with the  rules.   That  requirement  by
    itself can be complied with in various ways - by 2, 3, or 4 members  of
    the family travelling  to  Algeria.   There  does  not  have  to  be  a
    separation, and if there  is  one,  it  is  not  long  term.   However,
    confining the case to that one issue, it was capable of being  resolved
    either way.  The judge thought that there was no good reason to require
    fresh applications to  be  made  from  abroad.   That  was  within  his
    reasonable scope, taking account of all the circumstances before him.

17. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


            [pic]


            5 May 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




