
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/14428/2013
     IA/14427/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17 March 2014                                |On 12 May 2014             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Muhammad Usman Khan
                                Tahreema Khan
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwynch, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr T Hussain, instructed by Morgan Mark Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondents, who were born respectively on 28  March  1981  and  16
    October 1988, are citizens of Pakistan.  I shall hereafter refer to the
    respondents as "the appellants" and to the Secretary of  State  as  the
    respondent (as they were before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellants have made applications for leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom as  Tier  1  (General)  Migrants.   On  22  April  2013,  their
    applications were refused.  They appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Buckwell) which, in a determination promulgated on  20  November
    2013, allowed the appeal both on human rights (Article 8 ECHR)  grounds
    and under the Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of  State  appealed  to
    the Upper Tribunal and was granted permission on 6 December 2013.   The
    appellants had been refused leave to remain on the basis that they  had
    failed to submit  certain  documents  to  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    compliance with the Immigration Rules.  Whilst the  judge  relied  upon
    Khatel [2013] UKUT 44 (IAC) he recorded at [24] that:

         in relation to Immigration Rule grounds, I am  satisfied  that  the
         documents stated to have been submitted by the first appellant were
         submitted and it is clear they  should  have  been  considered  and
         taken into account by the respondent before a  decision  was  made.
         That did not happen.  What is additionally relevant here is that Mr
         Van Heck [Home  Office  Presenting  Officer],  in  his  submission,
         accepted that the documents provided appeared to be compliant  with
         the requirements.

 3. It is clear that the Tribunal should now follow  the  judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Raju [2013] EWCA Civ 754.  The guidance  as  to  the
    application of the principles of Raju were given by the Upper  Tribunal
    in Nasim & Others (Raju: reasons not to follow?) [2013] UKUT 610 (IAC).
     Whilst the concept of a "continuing application"  was  disapproved  by
    the Court of Appeal in Raju the Upper Tribunal observed that:

    (4)  As  held  in Khatel  and  others  (s85A;  effect  of  continuing
    application) [2013] UKUT 44 (IAC), section  85A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 precludes a tribunal, in a points-based
    appeal, from considering evidence as to  compliance  with  points-based
    Rules, where that evidence was not before the Secretary of State when
    she took her decision; but the section does not prevent a tribunal from
    considering evidence that was before the Secretary of  State  when  she
    took the decision, whether or not that evidence reached her only after
    the date of application for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  34F  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. It is clear from the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  (and  it
    was accepted by Mr Diwynch,  for  the  Secretary  of  State)  that  the
    circumstances in the present appeals  fall  firmly  into  the  category
    identified at headnote  (4)  of  Nasim  which  we  have  quoted  above.
    Accordingly, Mr Diwynch did not seek to persuade us that the First-tier
    Tribunal had erred by allowing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules.
    We find that he was right to do so.

Decision

 5. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date 10 April 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
